* 1910601
* CNS Core: Small: REYAZ: Reliability-Aware Job Scheduling for HPC Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Devesh Tiwari, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,938.00

High-performance computing (HPC) enables breakthroughs in different science
domains that lead to an improvement in national economics, health, welfare, and
defense. Unfortunately, the ability of HPC systems to deliver productive science
is now beginning to be significantly hampered by hardware-related errors and
failures. Consequently, computational applications of national importance will
need to spend a large fraction of execution time in resilience mechanisms to
make forward progress in the presence of failures. Despite that, a huge amount
of resources and time will be wasted on future HPC systems due to the high
frequency of failure interruptions during application execution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges, this project,
called REYAZ, explores new territory in HPC job scheduling: maximizing the
amount of useful work done on reliability-constrained HPC systems by jointly
exploiting dynamic reliability state of the system components and resilience
characteristics of applications. REYAZ will enable two novel capabilities: (1) a
reliability-aware job scheduling approach that optimizes useful work done per
unit time on unreliable large-scale computing systems while individual
applications are guaranteed "fair" performance. (2) a family of techniques to
reduce the input/output (I/O) overhead - a side-effect of widely used resilience
mechanisms such as checkpoint-restart - while retaining the performance
improvements obtained via reliability-aware scheduling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Maximizing the useful work per unit time on future
reliability-constrained HPC systems will directly translate into more productive
science - leading to faster advancements of different science fields and
societal impact. Capabilities developed in this project will also help reduce
the wastage of energy on large-scale systems resulting in economic benefits for
the society. This project will integrate the research tasks and outcomes into
educational activities to train the next generation of engineers who will face
the challenges of operating unreliable large-scale systems. Undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups will be engaged and trained in the field
of large-scale fault-tolerant parallel computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project website (https://github.com/GoodwillComputingLab/REYAZ) will host all
the documentation of research findings and software artifacts developed as a
part of the project, including system software, runtime systems, analytical
tools, modeling methodologies, experimental data, and traces. The project
website will be maintained actively for at least five years beyond the project
end date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.