* 1910655
* CNS Core:Small: Attaining Multi-Terabit/sec Wireless Data Rates
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Suresh Singh, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 515,370.00

Over the past two decades, even though considerable progress has been made in
providing ubiquitous wireless connectivity, the actual data rates available
today fall far short of what is required by next generation applications.
Examples of such applications include immersive virtual reality (VR) that can
enable remote surgery, instant and on-demand upgrades to the intelligence of
self-driving vehicles to enhance safety, and real-time backup to the cloud of
digital video data which has numerous commercial applications. All of these
applications require extremely high wireless data rates that cannot be delivered
by any of the present-day wireless technologies. This project explores the
problem of utilizing the terahertz spectrum to provide these data rates.
Unfortunately, this part of the radio spectrum suffers many impairments such as
blockage and molecular absorption. This project will develop new methods to
overcome these challenges by developing novel communication architectures and
algorithms. The benefits to society are many including enabling true remote
health care, enhancing safety of autonomous vehicles, and providing very high
bandwidth wireless connections that can form the basis for a whole class of new
applications in future generation wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to study how Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) techniques can
be utilized at terahertz frequencies. Given the specific idiosyncrasies of
terahertz propagation, the proposal will use measurements and modeling to
address challenges arising from poor signal propagation. In addition, the
proposal will develop novel optical and hybrid MIMO technologies for terahertz.
The specific objectives for the research are: perform measurements to model
Massive MIMO systems for terahertz; analyze MIMO performance given various types
of channel impairments such as obstructed antennas and sub-optimal spacing;
study optical-MIMO and hybrid MIMO for terahertz; using Matlab simulations and
models demonstrate multi-terabit/sec communications. The eventual outcomes of
this work will include terahertz models for MIMO, optical-MIMO and hybrid MIMO
including a database of channel measurements. The project will also produce
Matlab software to study different communication
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.