* 1910850
* SHF: Small: Program Analysis for Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jan Vitek, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,671.00

Data Science is a discipline that combines computing with statistics with the
aim of turning raw data into insights. Data analysis is typically performed by
composing a series of discrete tools and libraries into a data-analysis
pipeline. Faced with the increased velocity that these tools afford to
researchers, one of the open questions we are facing is: can we trust the
claimed results? As new studies are produced at an increasingly high rate, and
the number of data-science practitioners keeps growing, it is unclear if the
community has the resources to validate even a fraction of the research in
print. The novelty of this project is to take some of the early steps towards
the goal of trustworthy data analysis. The project's impact is to increase trust
in the results of data analysis performed with technologies such as R and Spark.
The project will also impact the broader community of R and Spark developers, by
offering analysis tools that can be used widely within the community. The human
impact of this project is in recruitment and retention of minority students to
opportunities in data-analysis research, and in helping them prepare for careers
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first contribution of this project is to
curate a corpus of data-analysis pipelines. This corpus will give researchers a
window into the activities performed by practitioners. This, in and of itself,
will be a valuable addition to the general understanding of data analytics. The
second contribution of this project will be a set of dynamic- and static-
analysis tools that will be used to find faults in data-analysis pipelines.
Dynamic analysis will be used to gather behavioral data about the programs and
libraries as well as catch latent bugs. Static-analysis techniques will be used
to find coding idioms that are potentially buggy. One of the technical
challenges that will be solved is how to analyze incomplete code. This challenge
comes from the fact that the languages used to write data-analysis code are
often dynamic and can load new code at any time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.