* 1910715
* CIF: Small: Strategic Communication: Concepts, Methods, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Emrah Akyol, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 235,000.00

We are surrounded by networks of smart agents that exchange information with
each other through communication channels, as in the case of Internet of Things
and autonomous systems. This project considers problems related to communication
between these smart and strategic agents referred to as 'strategic
communication', when the agents have misaligned or conflicting objectives.
Extensions of known strategic communication models to realistic communication
settings that involve channel noise and data compression remains an open
challenge. The goal of this project is to develop mathematical models of
strategic communication for such realistic scenarios. An immediate application
of this research pertains to trustworthy and transparent machine learning (ML).
ML is increasingly being used in systems that make decisions which affect
people, including setting prices for items, scoring credit and job applications,
filtering news and social media updates, recommending routes and places, and
controlling smart homes and autonomous cars. As ML algorithms make these
decisions, it is natural to ask for their transparency, which, on the other
hand, makes them vulnerable to manipulation and algorithmic bias. Designing
efficient and transparent ML algorithms that are robust to manipulation and bias
is a difficult challenge. This project will address this challenge by explicitly
taking such possibilities into account in the ML algorithm development through
robust strategic communication models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
address fundamental questions regarding strategic communication. This emerging
research field requires revisiting key results in classical information theory
and poses significant challenges, in terms of both analysis and optimization,
requiring approaches and tools from multiple disciplines. The outcomes of the
research are expected to constitute an essential step in understanding the
interplay of game theory and economics with information theory, communications,
and compression. Specific goals of this project are categorized into four
groups. The first set of goals investigates optimal strategies in non-coded
communication settings, with a particular focus on non-Gaussian sources and
channels using tools from optimization in function spaces. The second set of
goals concerns the transparency issues in ML. Building on the strategic
communication models in non-coded scenarios, the project includes two research
directions in this area: the quantification of the cost of transparency in
various ML algorithms and the design of manipulation-aware ML algorithms. The
third set of goals analyzes the role of compression in strategic communication
scenarios, including the characterization and computation of fundamental limits,
and the development of practical strategic data compression methods. The final
set of goals explores networked strategic communication
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.