* 1910380
* SHF: Small: Design Methodology for Efficient and Reliable Medium-Power Point-of-Load Converters via In-Field Built-in Self-Calibration
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Sule Ozev, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,185.00

The past decade has experienced exponential demand for medium-power electronics
to support a variety of applications including: automotive power management
circuits for battery drain mitigation in electric vehicles, unmanned vehicles,
satellite point-of-load converters, base-station electronics (e.g. Google's
Project Loon, Facebook's Aquila Drone), and power management within solar (PV)
arrays. The growing industrial need for these power electronics, primarily
point-of-load (POL) power converters, has brought about a requirement for
developing reliable solutions that maintain target specifications, including
energy efficiency, over the lifetime of the application. These power converters
are deployed in systems that have long-term field applications, and their
performance must be able to withstand: temperature extremes, including high
heat; aging effects, including threshold voltage and bias shifts; large
fluctuations in output load (e.g. electric vehicles that draw large currents
when accelerating); as well as radiation effects for space applications. The
main objective of this project is to innovate POL hardware and design
methodologies that ensure these medium-power converters maintain state-of-the-
art performance over their lifetime, a significant improvement over existing POL
hardware. Introducing these design methodologies in classrooms to both
undergraduate and graduate students will prepare them for future careers in
power management design. Disseminating the results of this research via
conferences, workshops, and publications will build more synergy between
industry and academia, and bring new awareness of power converter technologies
and built-in self-test and calibration techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
objective of this project will be achieved by focusing on: 1) the proposed
system design methodology and the associated reconfigurable controller and
driver hardware for adaptable power converters, and 2) built-in-self-test and
in-field calibration (BISTC) to monitor the converter parameters over the input
range, and over time to ensure reliable operation and predict failure. The
techniques so developed are to be integrated within the hardware because
substantial gains on reliability and efficiency are only possible when power
converter hardware and BISTC are jointly designed. This project will enable
efficient, stable, and hence reliable converters for medium-power applications.
Furthermore, the proposed built-in monitoring mechanisms will allow the design
industry to easily collect aging information and fill this knowledge gap, as
aging progression and patterns for power converters are largely unknown. This
data can be used to further optimize the next generation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.