* 1910364
* Polarization Observations: A Pioneering Probe of Grain Growth and Magnetic Fields in Circumstellar Disks
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Leslie Looney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2024
* USD 390,952.00

Planets form in the rotating disk of gas and dust that surround very young stars
before nuclear fusion begins in their cores. One of the big mysteries is how
that dust grows from small interstellar dust grains to larger and larger
objects: from dust to protoplanets. At the moment, there is no clear evidence of
dust growth in the disk due to the difficulties in separating dust grain growth
from other effects. However, recent discoveries have shown that the dust grains
emit polarized light. The polarization of light is sensitive to the dust grain
size, so there is a new window into dust properties. The team is observing disks
in polarized light to make a comparison of dust grains properties with disk
evolution. With this study, they expect to find evidence of the first steps
towards planets. In addition, their outreach plans will bring these polarization
observations to a larger community, mainly through a STEM workshop, a local
girls' astronomy summer camp, and public lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will answer four critical questions: 1) Is dust continuum disk
polarization across the (sub)millimeter bands dominated by magnetically aligned
grains, radiationally aligned grains, mechanically aligned grains or dust
scattering, 2) If magnetically aligned dust grains are not dominant at any
wavelength, can we use molecular line polarization to measure the disk magnetic
field?; 3) What are the intrinsic disk properties, especially the dust grain
size, revealed by the polarization emission?; and 4) How do the disk properties
measured by dust polarization observations vary with time? They will create a
model toolkit which includes disk polarization from multiple mechanisms under
general conditions. The results of this research will be important for
understanding observations made with the NSF's Atacama Large Millimeter
Array.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.