* 1910401
* Effects of Stretch and Intercellular Force Transmission on Tensional Homeostasis in Multicellular Clusters
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Dimitrije Stamenovic, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 11/30/2023
* USD 529,042.00

The ability of living cells to maintain their internal mechanical stress in
response to external disturbances is essential for normal physiological
functions of cells and tissues and for a protection against various diseases.
This is known as tensional homeostasis. Breakdown of tensional homeostasis is
the hallmark of most advanced solid cancers (carcinomas), as well as of
stiffening of the arteries (atherosclerosis) and clot formation (thrombosis).
While physical interactions between cells appear to be fundamental to tensional
homeostasis, important questions remain. First, it is not known how the
transmission of forces between cells impacts tensional homeostasis. Second,
there is little understanding of how cells respond to external changes in their
mechanical environment (e.g., mechanical stretch) after having initially
achieved a steady state. In order to address these questions, this project will
advance and apply a biomechanical imaging computational platform. The
fundamental questions that can be answered using this technique will improve
basic understanding of how cells respond to their mechanical environment. The
biomechanical imaging methods and software will be distributed to any interested
researcher in order to broadly disseminate this technique within the cellular
mechanobiology and tissue engineering communities. In addition, graduate
students and undergraduate students will be trained in a highly
multidisciplinary environment and will mentor high school students for a six-
week research experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biomechanical imaging
computational platform maps intracellular stress distribution through
simultaneous measurements of (1) traction forces that are transmitted by cells
to the substrate and (2) intracellular displacements generated by externally
applied stretch. In this project, the researchers will first improve the ability
of the biomechanical imaging technique by using mitochondria as fiduciary
markers in order to obtain more accurate maps of intracellular stress. The
improved technique will then be used to address two fundamental questions.
First, the impact of external stretch on tensional homeostasis of multicellular
clusters will be investigated. This will be done using bovine aortic endothelial
cells and primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Second, the system
will be used to unravel the relevance of intercellular stress transmission on
tensional homeostasis. This will include the investigation of the role of cell-
cell adherens junctions and the impact of substrate stiffness on both cell-cell
vs cell-matrix force transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.