* 1910676
* CNS Core: Small: Network Architecture and Routing Protocols for Payment Channel Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Mohammad Alizadeh, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Blockchain technology is attracting considerable interest for its potential to
enable new decentralized, secure applications such as payment systems. However,
current blockchain systems suffer from severe scalability limitations. For
example, blockchain-based digital currencies have orders of magnitude worse
transaction throughput and confirmation latency than the established payment
systems we use in our daily lives. This project proposes to tackle this
fundamental scalability challenge by investigating so-called "payment channel
networks". A payment channel network enables participants to transfer funds
securely through a set of intermediaries, without recording every transaction on
a public ledger (the blockchain). This project starts with the observation that
payment channel networks have similarities to data communication networks (and
also important differences), but their designs are primitive by comparison. The
goal this research is to develop network protocols for payment channel networks
--- protocols that are tailor-made for these networks while being deeply rooted
in decades of research on data networks. If successful, this project would
enable principled, efficient, and cost-effective approaches to building
decentralized payment systems and improving the scalability of many blockchain
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central challenge for a payment channel network
is how to route payments across the network efficiently. Routing payments is
non-trivial since it requires finding paths with sufficient funds and keeping
payment channel funds balanced. Payment channels used more frequently in one
direction eventually run out of funds in that direction blocking further
transactions through them. Inefficient routing limits network throughput and
increases transaction costs, as it forces routers to deposit a large amount of
funds into their payment channels up front, or pay high transaction fees to
repeatedly rebalance payment channels on the blockchain. This research seeks to
develop a new payment channel network that achieves high transaction throughput
at low cost. To this end, the researchers plan to (1) develop a packet-switched
payment channel network architecture, (2) invent imbalance-aware routing and
rate control algorithms with theoretical guarantees, and (3) investigate privacy
and incentive-compatibility of payment channel network
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.