* 1910964
* SHF: Small: Minimizing System Level Testing of Processor SOCs
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Adit Singh, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,939.00

Integrated circuits (ICs), and more complex Systems-on-Chip (SOCs), are at the
heart of all modern computing and communication systems, ranging from cell
phones to cloud computing systems. In these complex electronic parts, billions
of individual circuit components are incorporated on less than a square inch of
silicon. Unfortunately, such microscopic components are subject to manufacturing
defects and variations that can significantly impact the performance and
dependability of the IC. This project aims at significantly improving the post
manufacturing testing of ICs to reliably detect and screen out defective and
marginal parts before they are assembled into larger end-use devices and
systems. The goal is to reduce manufacturing costs and increase the reliability
of electronic systems. More broadly, the project is expected to strengthen the
educational and research programs at Auburn University, and enhance the pool of
engineering talent available to the growing electronics, automotive and
aerospace industries in Alabama, and the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, electrical post manufacturing tests
for ICs are developed to check for the different possible failure scenarios on a
target list of likely manufacturing faults. The tests exercise the IC to rule
out the existence of nearly all the targeted failures within just a few seconds.
Unfortunately, it has been increasingly observed that such targeted tests fail
to catch many malfunctioning parts that end up in assembled systems.
Consequently, industry has been forced to introduce a new type of test that
extensively exercises newly manufactured ICs in actual functional operation for
sufficiently long, usually at least ten to fifteen minutes, to check for fully
correct functioning. These new System Level Tests (SLTs) significantly increase
test cost. This project is investigating an innovative adaptive approach for
minimizing costs by avoiding SLT for a significant fraction of the manufactured
ICs. This is achieved by accurately predicting the likelihood of each IC failing
SLT based on available traditional test results, using innovative prediction
methods, including machine learning. It is expected that for more than half the
manufactured parts, this probability will be small enough for the IC to skip SLT
without materially degrading overall system reliability, thereby resulting in
significant test cost savings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.