* 1910873
* AF: Small: RUI: Towards Resolving the Dynamic Optimality Conjecture.
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mayank Goswami, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 399,988.00

Searching is a fundamental problem in computer science, and faster search
algorithms have been the focus of many researchers for decades. Being a basic
primitive in all databases, fast searching in the age of big data has numerous
applications in almost any field of data science. A binary search tree (BST) was
one of the first and simplest data structures developed for searching, in which
the keys in the database are stored in a binary tree, which allows an easy
search algorithm to locate keys. In the real world, a sequence of searches come
in an online fashion (the next search is revealed only after the current search
is conducted), which led researchers to ask whether dynamically adjusting a BST
may help access future (unknown) searches faster. While it may seem
counterintuitive, for a wide variety of special search sequences, there exist
online data structures that perform these searches almost as fast as the best
offline algorithm -- one that knew all the searches in advance. Two such data
structures are Splay Trees, developed by Sleator and Tarjan [1985] , and Greedy
developed by Lucas [1988] and Munro [2000]. The dynamic optimality conjecture
states that one of these online algorithms, in fact, accesses all sequences
almost as fast as the optimal offline algorithm. This conjecture, widely
regarded as one of fundamental problems in data structures, remains unresolved
after 35 years. In this project the PI proposes three avenues to attack this
conjecture. This project aims at producing the next generation of researchers
and promoting under-represented groups in science and technology. Because of the
simplicity of the conjecture, many undergraduate students will be able to
understand it, appreciate the field of data structures, and thereby be motivated
to pursue a career in computer science. The PI already has minority
undergraduate and graduate students involved in this project. CUNY Queens
College is a Hispanic-serving institution. The PI is committed to engaging more
undergraduate students and women in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic
optimality conjecture is perhaps one of the most elusive unsolved problems in
data structures. It postulates the existence of an online binary search tree
(BST) which is O(1) competitive with the optimal offline self-balancing BST
(called OPT). It is one of the simplest cases of instance optimality, and has
been particularly elusive in that highly restricted consequences of the
conjecture had remained open for three decades. The traversal conjecture and the
weighted dynamic finger property are two recently settled conjectures (the
former being resolved by the PI and his co-authors). After overcoming these
last-remaining barriers, one needs a new set of barriers that will get us closer
to proving or disproving dynamic optimality for the two main candidates, Splay
trees and Greedy. The PI maps out a plan to attack this
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.