* 1910613
* III: Small: Peer-to-peer Database (P2PDB): A decentralized, scalable data sharing and management platform
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Daniel Abadi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project involves designing and implementing a new system, called Peer-to-
peer Database (P2PDB), that will serve as a decentralized platform for data
publishing, sharing, and querying of data. P2PDB enables an unlimited number of
independent participants to publish and access the contents of datasets stored
across the participants. The system will provide decentralized publishing and
querying functionality over structured data in an analogous fashion to how the
"world wide web" enables decentralized publishing and accessing of unstructured
data. However, P2PDB differs from both the traditional world wide web (and also
other attempts at building peer-to-peer structured database systems) in the way
that it provides incentives for performing tasks that are critical to the well-
being of the system as a whole, including contribution, integration, storing,
and processing of data, and enforcing good behavior by the participants. This
project includes involvement in the research track at "Technica," the largest
all-female hackathon in the US hosted every year at the University of Maryland,
and computer science curricular development at the local high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes working on several challenging
research problems that result from an architectural assumption that any entity
may participate in the storage and processing of data in P2PDB. First, the
system must be robust in the face of malicious nodes that join the system and
intentionally corrupt data or return incorrect results upon receiving a query.
This requires research effort in the areas of query verification, secure data
processing, and decentralized dispute moderation. Another important research
problem that emerges from the planned architecture of P2PDB is query
optimization and execution over a federated architecture in which queries must
be performed across many different entities, each with different service level
guarantees and costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.