* 1910138
* CNS Core: Small: Economic Optimization of Serverless and VM Cloud Services
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Vishal Misra, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 465,995.00

Cloud computing platforms are responsible for the ever-increasing computation in
the United States and the world. Its uses extend throughout private industry,
government, and academia. These cloud platforms are offered to users via a
plethora of computing paradigms and pricing models. While traditionally, users
would pay for the reservation of a computational resource, a recently evolving
paradigm, known as Function-as-a-Service (FaaS) or as Serverless Computing (SC),
has emerged, where users pay instead only for the time their compute jobs are
executing. This has had significant implications on how these systems are
priced, which in turn affects how they are utilized. This research will use a
combination of mathematical modeling, simulation, and prototyping to formally
understand the impact that serverless computing has on cloud computing use, both
from an economic and engineering perspective. The research applies a game
theoretic formulation in which players are rational agents who are trying to
maximize their own individual welfare. The results will show how cloud computing
markets are expected to evolve to accommodate the serverless computing option.
More generally, the results of the research will provide a well-grounded
foundation for improved understanding as to how pricing strategies for these
differing paradigms impact the use and profitability of both Cloud computing
providers and consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will expand the
nation's understanding of the emerging computational systems that are widely
utilized, and will continue to have increasing demand. From both an economic and
engineering perspective, the research will enable a more effective use of such
systems, which in turn will increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the
nation's computational infrastructure. The theoretical style of the research is
ideal for effective conveyance of the fundamental issues of the topic, making it
an important and topical addition to course curriculum. The PIs are committed to
broadening participation in this exciting field of research. In particular, they
have and will continue to reach out to female students and under-represented
minority groups. The project will actively encourage undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.