* 1910451
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Multi-Scale and Multi-Messenger Modeling of Jets in Active Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Dimitrios Giannios, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2022
* USD 174,617.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Galaxies are vast collections of hundreds of
billions of stars. In a minority of the galaxies their observed light is
dominated by a single source: the supermassive black hole located at their very
center. In these galaxies, the black hole feeds on material which turns into
very hot ionized gas or plasma. Surprisingly, part of this material is ejected
away from the black hole forming narrow beams of plasma that move at near the
speed of light. These beams, when directed at Earth, make some of the brightest
and extreme sources ever observed in the Universe. The proposing team plans to
perform the largest numerical simulations to study how matter falls from the
vast scale of the galaxy into the tiny scale of the black hole and follow how
the narrow fast beams of plasma form and shine as they propagate through the
galaxy. The results from the numerical simulations will be publicly accessible
through a user-friendly, interactive website. The user (scientist, teacher or
high-school student) will be able to generate images of these beams in real-time
and will thus be exposed to an exciting field of modern high-energy
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
detection by the IceCube Neutrino Observatory of a very high energy neutrino
event coincident with multi-wavelength flaring of blazar TXS 0506+056 strongly
suggests that blazars do not only produce high-energy photons but also ultra-
high-energy cosmic rays and neutrinos. This exciting multi-messenger discovery
motivates a detailed study of relativistic jet physics, to interpret this and
upcoming multi-messenger observations of active galactic nuclei (AGN). The team
proposes to perform multi-scale jet simulations that connect accretion physics,
fluid dynamics, particle acceleration, and radiative transfer, to study the
multi-wavelength polarized radiation signatures and neutrinos from AGN jets. The
team plans to perform the largest to date general relativistic
magnetohydrodynamic simulations of AGN accretion and jets, extending from the
black hole to the blazar emission zone. They will use first-principle kinetic
plasma simulations to calculate particle acceleration in jet dissipation zones
and build comprehensive multi-messenger polarized radiative transfer that
includes all the relevant physics. In this way, the team can bridge the gap
between first-principle modeling and multi-messenger observations, and advance
the understanding of AGN jet physics responsible for multi-messenger emission.
The team will disseminate the results to the public through an immersive
website, train high-school students, and organize a summer school in compact
objects for graduate students, where participants will work on theoretical
and/or numerical problems at the forefront of the research
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses/advances the goals of the
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.