* 1910197
* SHF: Small: Using Error-Bounded Lossy Compression to Improve High-Performance Computing Systems and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Jon Calhoun, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2022
* USD 326,080.00

Performance of scientific simulations that are executed on large-scale computers
is highly dependent on the volume of data transferred and the available
bandwidth to transfer the data during the simulation. Higher performance
decreases the time necessary for obtaining results from a scientific simulation
and enables faster scientific advancement. This project seeks to understand the
trade-offs of performance and accuracy when using lossy compression to reduce
the volume of data transferred during scientific simulations. Lossy data
compression significantly reduces the volume of scientific data by trading a
loss in accuracy of the decompressed data for larger reductions in the
compressed data size. The goal of this project is to investigate how lossy
compression impacts the fidelity of the results of scientific simulations, which
is critical for understanding how lossy compression can be effectively applied
in practice. This project fosters the use and importance of large-scale
computing resources for undergraduate STEM students and includes research
experiences for undergraduates who are actively engaged in research tasks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers important trade-offs in using lossy
compression for scientific simulations such as: energy efficiency, sensitivity
of compression and decompression time and compression ratio to the selection of
compression parameters, and impact on statistical measures. This project
analyzes the effects of lossy compression on real-world scientific data from a
diverse set of domains such as fluid dynamics, astrophysics, and genomics.
Understanding these trade-offs guides the integration of lossy data compression
into computational kernels and applications. This project is jointly funded by
CCF/SHF core program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.