* 1910088
* SHF: Small: Premonition: A Methodology for Predictive Monitoring with Probabilistic Guarantees
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jyotirmoy Deshmukh, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,997.00

Autonomous systems such as unmanned aerial vehicles, medical devices and self-
driving cars are challenging to design because of the inherent software
complexity, as well as uncertainty in their operating environment.
Unfortunately, many of these autonomous systems are also safety-critical; there
are real tragic implications on human life and property when these systems
malfunction. Monitoring the safety of such autonomous cyber-physical system
while they are operating has long been viewed as scalable solution to ensure
safety of these systems. Such safety properties can often be written using
logical formalisms such as Signal Temporal Logic (STL). The project develops a
modular framework called Premonition for monitoring temporal-logic properties of
autonomous cyber-physical systems. The following abilities of Premonition
framework highlight its novelty: (1) Predictive monitoring to forecast the
failure of a safety property before a violation actually occurs; (2) Resource-
awareness for monitoring that is performed with low memory and sensing overhead;
and finally, 3) Probabilistic guarantees for providing quantifiable bounds on
the accuracy of the predictions made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Premonition
framework is highly interdisciplinary: it combines statistical methods for
predicting future values of time-series data with techniques from formal
methods. The key site for innovation is in new techniques for obtaining
probabilistic guarantees on whether a safety property will be violated by the
system in the future. Such guarantees are obtained for different kinds of system
models. For data-driven system models, Premonition weaves prior work on
forecasting for stochastic processes with monitoring algorithms for STL. For
dynamical system models, the framework introduces new algorithms to monitor STL
properties on over-approximations of future reachable states of the system. For
system models with explicit uncertainty models, the framework focuses on
resource-aware predictive monitoring. For systems with unobservable states, it
provides new algorithms for latent- xstate predictive monitoring, i.e.
algorithms that give probabilistic guarantees on whether the hidden system
states violate a given property in the future, by monitoring the observable
states of the system. Probabilistic guarantees are useful for designing
enforcement and warning mechanisms to provide safety assurance for systems. This
project's impacts are in making dynamic safety-assurance cases for autonomous
systems such as automated insulin-delivery systems, unmanned aerial vehicles and
self-driving cars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.