* 1910748
* SHF: Small: A Unified Approach for Scheduling Computer Vision Dataflow Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jason Bakos, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,416.00

Advances in computer vision and machine learning are enabling continuous
development of new capabilities in autonomous systems and knowledge extraction
from images and video. These advances are possible in large part to increased
computational capability brought about by a new class of processor designed for
visual and neural processing. This includes Google's Visual Core and Tensor
Processor Unit, Qualcomm's Hexagon DSP, Nvidia's Programmable Vision Accelerator
and Tensor Core, and Intel's Crest processors. In these processors, the program
code exerts far greater control of the underlying processing and memory
resources than in general purpose and graphical processors. This serves to
greatly reduce the uncertainties that would otherwise restrict accurate
performance prediction and open the door for new approaches for automatic and
portable performance optimization. Despite the growing market for embedded
vision processors, their associated compiler tools are nascent, relying on hand-
tuning program code using trial-and-error methods. This project will build upon
existing technologies to build a "universal" front-end for a broad class of
vision processors. As part of this project the researchers will also develop an
database of OpenVX 1.2 kernels (https://www.khronos.org/openvx/) and an OpenVX
benchmark suite. It is expected that developing both the tools and benchmarks in
the open source will facilitate community involvement. The artifacts developed
in this project will serve as a pedagogical infrastructure for a new course in
Internet-of-Things and machine learning at the edge of the computer
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a new program
compilation flow, in which a program written in the platform-independent OpenVX
representation is converted into a low-level representation and explicitly
scheduled onto the underlying hardware resources. The conversion is governed by
a mathematical model of the hardware behavior trained from mining performance
data generated from executing and instrumenting a series of benchmarks. The
compiler framework developed using this approach has the potential to replace
the ad hoc methods currently in use and become a powerful tool for developing
software for visual and neural processors, which will power a future generation
of cognizant smart devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.