* 1910424
* III: Small: A Holistic Approach to Sentiment Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Bing Liu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,946.00

Sentiment analysis is the task of extracting and classifying people?s
sentiments, opinions, and emotions expressed in social media and other sources.
It has a very wide range of applications because consumer and public opinions,
sentiment expressions are instrumental for decision making of businesses,
organizations, and individuals alike. Although sentiment analysis has been
investigated extensively in the past, its accuracy is still low, which limits
its scope of applications. In the past few years, we and some other researchers
used a new machine learning paradigm, called lifelong learning, to help solve
some sub-problems of sentiment analysis with promising results. Lifelong
learning aims to imitate human learning by learning continuously,
retaining/accumulating the knowledge learned in the past, and using or
transferring the past knowledge to help new task learning and problem solving.
In the process, the learner becomes more and more knowledgeable and better and
better at learning. Traditional machine learning learns in isolation, and it
uses only the data of the particular application to learn a model. This research
will design more effective principled lifelong learning algorithms for sentiment
analysis and to create a continually updating knowledge base of attributes (or
aspects), e.g., for electronic products, and opinions about them and develop a
single framework to significantly boost the performance of sentiment analysis.
To broaden the impacts of this project, mature technologies will be transferred
to industry and demonstrated and used in classes, and students will participate
in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will develop
novel lifelong learning algorithms for four core sub-problems of sentiment
analysis with the goal to improve: (1) aspect extraction through learning on the
job, which learns to improve the model while working after model building; (2)
aspect grouping through lifelong aspect topic modeling, which uses past grouping
of aspects to help new grouping; (3) aspect sentiment classification using
lifelong attention models, which retain the previous attention distributions and
leverage them to build more accurate sentiment classifiers for new tasks; and
(4) coreference resolution via continuous association learning to discover
aspect and sentiment related coreference relations. The resulting algorithms
will be incorporated into a holistic lifelong heterogeneous-task learning model
to significantly improve sentiment analysis accuracy. Beyond sentiment analysis,
the project will also develop general lifelong learning algorithms that can be
applied to a wide range of other applications based on insights gained from
lifelong sentiment analysis. For dissemination, in addition to publishing
research papers, we will organize workshops and give conference tutorials on the
project topic, and release our annotated data and implemented software to the
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.