* 1910266
* RI: Small: Scalable Online Learning with Gaussian Processes
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Andrew Wilson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 10/31/2019
* USD 399,061.00

The modern world is filled with highly complex systems interacting to transport
goods and raw materials, to manufacture the tiny components that power phones
and laptops, and to assist surgeons in delicate medical procedures. Every day,
the operators of these systems must make general decisions like how to schedule
workers and deliveries, and specific decisions like how a certain robot in an
assembly line should function. In each case, a good decision must account not
only for what is known about the environment, but also what is unknown.
Sometimes more information should be gathered, and sometimes action must be
taken to avoid unlikely but costly mistakes. Moreover, every decision affects
the next, and errors and delays in judgement at each step can be propagated and
amplified. Scientists rely heavily on computer models to control for unknowns
when making decisions, but in many situations the models are simply too slow to
be useful. This research will greatly reduce the computational requirements
needed for a robust representation of uncertainty, meaning computer models can
quantify the effect of uncertainty more quickly and reliably, at a lower cost.
In a world where unknowns are carefully modeled, autonomous vehicles are safer,
infrastructure is more efficient, and scientific experiments are more
informative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaussian processes are a gold standard for
uncertainty representation. However, the high computational cost of making
predictions, after training, has limited their applicability in the sequential
decision making frameworks for Bayesian optimization and reinforcement learning,
where the quality of uncertainty estimates can have enormous impact. This
research develops algebraic methods that exploit advances in hardware design for
scalable Gaussian processes in these settings. This work will broaden the
applicability of Bayesian optimization methods to general purpose objectives,
with crucial scientific impacts such as automating NMR spectroscopy. This
research will also enable more realistic assumptions in model-based
reinforcement learning, to capture many possible future states of an engineering
system, efficient exploration of possible states, and representation of high
dimensional state spaces. These features are an important step towards automatic
control in complicated engineering systems, such as unmanned vehicles, where
data is costly to acquire and safety guarantees are critical. Overall this work
will help unlock the potential of probabilistic methods for sequential online
decision making, while providing interactive engineering demonstrations in
educational settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.