* 1910659
* CIF: Small: Ultra-Efficient Codes for Communication and Verifiable Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Elena Grigorescu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,202.00

The goal of this project is to develop ultra-efficient coding schemes for modern
communication and storage requirements brought forth by the pressing need to
analyze and work with large amounts of data. A coding scheme is a means of
protecting data from damage and loss. A desirable feature of coding schemes is
locality, namely the property of being able to quickly recover a segment of the
data by accessing only a tiny portion of a large data set. Other desirable
properties include verifiability, which allows verification that data is
properly stored, and privacy and security, which ensure that users' data is not
misused. The outcomes of the research find application in distributed cloud
storage. The communication schemes built in this research may be used in real-
world deployment to ensure security of the transmitted message. Furthermore, the
project aims to broaden participation in computing by involving undergraduate
students in research, and by developing course material to introduce young
children to basic concepts in coding theory and cryptography. The research will
be broadly disseminated through presentations in workshops, seminars and
conferences, and will be integrated in undergraduate and graduate courses at
Purdue University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research project will focus on the
study of local codes in probabilistic polynomial time channels, sequentially
bounded channels, and power-bounded channels. It will also study local erasure
coding schemes specific to distributed data, and develop novel cryptographic
primitives to protect privacy and ensure robust storage of data. Specific
outcomes of the research will include: (1) abstracting models that capture real-
world data relevant to storage and communication; (2) providing ultra-efficient
algorithms in these models; (3) incorporating privacy and security
considerations; and (4) developing novel analysis techniques that will integrate
and advance diverse areas of mathematics and theoretical computer science
including coding theory, sublinear algorithms, cryptography and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.