* 1910234
* CNS Core: Small: Designing Networks for Stringent Performance Requirements
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mohit Tawarmalani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

With the wide-spread adoption of online and cloud-based services, it is critical
that the underlying computer network infrastructure meet increasingly stringent
performance requirements (e.g., sustain throughput for business-critical
applications). These requirements must be met despite failures that are the norm
given the global scale of Internet service provider (ISP) and cloud provider
networks, and their rapid pace of evolution. This project will tackle these
challenges by developing novel techniques that enable network architects to plan
their network designs (e.g., design topology, provision capacity, algorithms for
re-routing traffic on failures) so that performance is acceptable over a large
set of scenarios the network may encounter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will bring together expertise in network systems, and optimization theory, and
advance the state-of-the-art in two key ways. First, the project will develop
(i) new mechanisms that may be deployed in the network to respond to failures,
and (ii) frameworks that can certify that the resulting performance is
acceptable over specified failure states. A novelty of the framework is the
ability to model rich and flexible network mechanisms. Second, unlike existing
methods that only consider worst-case performance, and may be overly
conservative, this project will develop novel ways to design for requirements
that must be satisfactory for a desired percentage of
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will enable significant real-world
impact by ensuring that networks comply with Service Level Objectives in the
face of failures, and lead to networks with lower cost, better performance, and
higher reliability. By making fundamental advances in optimization, the project
will impact other scientific disciplines beyond networking. The project will
engage with industry and network operator forums, and extensively involve
doctoral, Masters, and undergraduate students in the research. The project will
incorporate inter-disciplinary material in networking and optimization courses,
and will involve active participation in K-12 outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results from the project will be available
at: https://engineering.purdue.edu/~isl/certifiabledesign.html. The results will
be available throughout the duration of the project, and for three years
after.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.