* 1910720
* CSBR:  Ownership Transfer of University of Alabama Chytrid Culture Collection to University of Michigan
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Timothy James, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 79,416.00

This project will secure an endangered collection of about 450 living strains of
fungi from a group known as chytrids. The collection was developed by Dr. Martha
Powell and Dr. Peter Letcher at the University of Alabama (UA) over the last 42
years. It served as the biological material that supported over 100 scientific
papers on chytrids and contains unique strains unknown from any other
collection. Chytrids are a poorly studied group which require unique conditions
for their isolation and maintenance, and a large portion of known diversity of
the group is represented in this collection. Although these microscopic fungi
reproduce with a swimming spore (zoospore) they occur in soils as well as in
fresh and saline waters; they fill important ecological roles as parasites and
also as decomposers of unique material such as pollen, hair, and insect
exoskeletons. The UA chytrid collection will be combined with a previously
secured collection from the University of Maine into a joint collection termed
the Collection of Zoosporic Eufungi at the University of Michigan (CZEUM). The
CZEUM collection is being developed in order to serve as a repository for
chytrid diversity in support of research on chytrid fungi by the global
scientific community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has four primary goals.
The first goal is to complete a physical transfer of the UA chytrid collection
to the cryopreservation facility at the University of Michigan Research Museums
Complex where it will be stored in the vapor of liquid nitrogen at -193 degrees
Celsius. The second goal is to test the viability of each of the cultures in the
collection and refreeze viable material in the liquid nitrogen freezers.
Previously most samples had been stored in an ultralow freezer, which can lead
to deterioration of viability. A third goal is to cryopreserve the remaining
five persent of the collection for which cryopreservation had never been
attempted. The final goal of the project is to characterize the strains using
ribosomal RNA genes in order to provide an estimate of the true phylogenetic
diversity of the collection. This latter goal involves sequencing small subunit,
large subunit, and the internal transcribed spacer region of the ribosomal RNA
using Oxford Nanopore Technology for strains in which this data is lacking.
Successfully completed, this project will secure this unique reference
collection and will enhance infrastructure for research on chytrid fungi at the
University of Michigan and other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.