* 1910434
* CHS: Small: Feedback-based Stroke Rehabilitation Using Multiple Simultaneous Therapies
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Seok Hun Kim, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 528,251.00

Walking is a fundamental daily activity, and independent walking is a primary
goal for individuals with a stroke. However, less than 22% of people with a
stroke are able to regain sufficient functional walking to be considered
independent community ambulators. Many individuals with a stroke have asymmetric
walking patterns (e.g., different step lengths with each leg) that reduce
walking efficiency, decrease walking speed, and increase the likelihood of
injuries and falls. To get a feel for asymmetric gait, one can try wearing a
thick-soled heavy shoe on one foot and go barefoot on the other; then try to
walk with the same step length on each foot while maintaining a consistent
timing between placing each foot on the ground. This simple perturbation will
likely modify the gait such that the person has to push harder with one leg
during walking. In contrast to the one perturbation in this example, each of the
millions of individuals with a stroke have multiple asymmetric changes that
compound the detrimental effects. While there are many different therapies to
help individuals regain their walking ability, disabilities are unique and often
need a solution specific to each person. This project will use a combination of
existing therapies applied simultaneously to generate a user-specific therapy
that adapts to the individual's needs. This project focuses on gait
rehabilitation after a stroke but may lead to benefits in therapies for gait
recovery in individuals with lower limb amputations, hemiparetic cerebral palsy,
and other gait impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses research
questions such as: (i) what is the level of the symmetry that can potentially be
targeted for a patient that has inherent asymmetry in functionality; (ii) what
factors influence the perception of a symmetric gait; (iii) how to model the
interactions among multiple therapies used for rehabilitation. To answer these
questions, the research team will first understand how the effects from two
different therapies combine. Based on the results of multiple pairs of
simultaneous therapies, the second phase will use real-time feedback, based on
the measured gait to optimize the output from two or more individual therapies.
Controlling multiple therapies should allow for the control of multiple gait
parameters that can change the gait pattern in a user-specific way. Since
individuals with a stroke inherently have different force and motion
capabilities on each leg, perfect symmetry may not be possible. Throughout this
project, experiments will determine the bounds of acceptable asymmetry from a
visual perspective. This perception will help understand what clinical physical
therapists perceive about gait and help direct their attention to important
parameters, particularly those that both have a large impact on gait function
but are not easily perceived. Although the resulting gait may have some degree
of asymmetry in all measures, the gait pattern will likely be less visually
noticeable and meet the functional walking goals of individuals with asymmetric
impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.