* 1910213
* OAC Core: Small: Sust-CI: A Machine Learning based Approach to Make Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Applications More Efficient and Sustainable
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Anantharaman Kalyanaraman, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2023
* USD 499,998.00

Many high-end engineering and scientific applications routinely employ advanced
cyber infrastructure (CI). CI is formed of a combination of high performance
computing (HPC) systems, software, application developers, and application
users. Among these high-end applications, a growing number require repeated runs
on HPC systems that are not designed optimally for their executions. These
challenges are further exacerbated by the continuously changing hardware
landscape. Faced with these challenges how is a CI application developer
expected to develop and deploy applications in an efficient and sustainable
manner? This is the central research question that this project seeks to
address. The overarching goal is to develop a systematic and structured way to
explore design spaces of CI configurations using machine learning techniques,
and to demonstrate value in application and discovery potential through real-
world applications. Other project activities integrate and leverage upon the
research outcomes of this project, while preparing the next generation
scientific workforce. The project is also leading to the development of
curricular modules in parallel algorithms/applications and machine learning, and
conference tutorials for broader outreach. The project will lead to the training
of two PhD students in performing interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lays the foundations for a novel
computational framework referred as Sust-CI that enables the developers to
design and optimize cyber infrastructures for efficiency. This framework
synergistically combines algorithmic abstractions, programming tools, and
machine learning techniques to enable adaptive cyber infrastructures. This
approach will automatically learn policies to make design decisions to optimize
an objective specified by the developer (e.g., performance) in a data-driven
manner. The project is leading to the development of sample-efficient machine
learning algorithms for CI design space exploration and optimization. The key
idea is to provide advanced CI applications a new capability to derive knowledge
by exploring different execution traces (computational behavior) on the given
training problem instances. The research will lead to a first-of-its-kind design
space exploration framework to enable a sustainable use of CI resources toward
leadership applications in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.