* 1910687
* Modeling Star Formation in the Milky Way; Precision Updates to Cloudy Numerical Models
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Gary Ferland, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 06/30/2024
* USD 454,612.00

Astronomers test their understanding of our Universe by numerical models of
observations. These models use measurements from Earth-bound labs, combined with
many astronomical observations, to learn the properties of gas in star-forming
clouds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators' overarching goal is to improve
their modeling program, called Cloudy, so they can faithfully simulate Nature.
When the simulation is accurate, astronomers can deduce the temperature, density
and chemical makeup of these distant clouds. The planned improvements to the
investigators' program will increase the accuracy of chemical and quantum models
to yield more accurate understanding of our Milky Way galaxy. The results of the
investigators' model improvements will also increase our understanding of
galaxies at great distances from the Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will modernize methods for including the wealth of quantum
measurements used by the program. Currently the program uses simplifying
assumptions for modeling the continuum-to-line emission ratio, and the transfer
of continua, including dust properties. The investigators will more accurately
implement the equations for level populations. In terms of the treatment of
radiative transfer, Cloudy self-consistently models the physics of optical
pumping by background continua, free- and bound-electron scattering, and grain
emission and absorption. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alongside this research activity,
this project involves a strong outreach component. Lexington, KY is home to a
significant Hispanic population. They are underrepresented in STEM disciplines.
Building on an ongoing program, the investigators will introduce these students
to Science. The investigators will present their research at high schools and
host an annual "Festival del Espacio" event on their campus open to students,
their parents, and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.