* 1910216
* III: Small: Native Compilation, Query Processing, and Indexing for In-memory Graph Relational Data Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Walid Aref, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,461.00

A wide variety of applications spanning various domains have graphs as first-
class citizens, e.g., communication networks, road networks, social networks,
and biological networks. The nodes and edges of these graphs are often
associated with descriptors, e.g., labels and properties, or more generally,
attributes. Many of these applications need efficient and real-time processing
of the graph data. Because relational data systems are very mature and
ubiquitous, extending these systems to support graph data is a natural choice.
However, there is an impedance mismatch between the relational model and the
graph model at the various levels that makes extending relational systems to
efficiently support graph data very challenging. This project will address this
impedance mismatch and the hurdles that face graph applications that run over
graph-enabled relational systems in order to function properly and efficiently.
More specifically, this project will address the following research challenges:
(1) The expressiveness challenge to address the mismatch between the declarative
nature in querying relational data and the navigational nature in querying graph
data, (2) the scalability challenge to support large amounts of graph and
relational data and queries in real-time, and (3) the performance challenge to
address the complexity in answering graph and relational queries and the real-
time processing needs of graph applications. Addressing these challenges is the
focus of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses how to
overcome the impedance mismatch between the relational and graph models by
addressing the above challenges. Techniques are proposed to seamlessly and
natively process large graph databases inside relational systems without
negatively affecting the graph query performance. The techniques to be developed
include: (1) Graph query compilation techniques: State-of-art query compilation
mechanisms will be developed to mixes of graph and relational query evaluation
pipelines to efficiently execute compiled query processing plans that include
both graph and relational operators, (2) Graph-as-an-index: In-memory graph
indexing techniques that will facilitate the navigation of the graph relational
data using the graph topology. The graph indexes will efficiently support sub-
graph selection based on the attribute data of both the graph nodes and edges,
and performing graph operations on the selected sub-graphs. The techniques to be
developed will support dynamic graphs where both the graph topology as well as
the graph attributes can be updated. The introduced techniques will tolerate
updates that would otherwise invalidate graph intermediate representations that
are typically prepared offline to speedup graph query processing. (3) Native
graph+relational query execution: Introduce graph navigation operators that
operate over graph data in native mode, yet seamlessly integrate with relational
algebra operators inside query evaluation pipelines. The developed query
processing techniques will permit bidirectional navigation over the relational
and the graph data within the same query evaluation pipeline to permit further
query optimization strategies that are infeasible otherwise, and to efficiently
evaluate interleaved graph and relational operators in query evaluation
pipelines, and (4) Costing of the interleaved relational and graph operations
for query optimization purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.