* 1910150
* CNS Core: Small: A Software-Defined Approach to 5G Services for Robots
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Songwu Lu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Part I:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global deployment of the 5G infrastructure is
underway. This upcoming technology is envisioned to support billions of mobile
users today and trillions of connected things tomorrow. Robotic applications are
a new class of emerging applications for 5G, yet posing stringent requirements
on low latency, high reliability, and high speed. In this project, we propose to
innovate the 5G technology in its software stack (in the form of protocols) from
the device side rather than inside the infrastructure. We use showcase robotic
applications to drive our design effort. We challenge the conventional wisdom
that wireless access is the sole roadblock for low latency and high reliability.
Instead, we take the device perspective on 5G software innovation, which poses
as an equally critical pathway from our initial results. We seek to achieve
three goals. First, we refine the software stack of 5G for low latency within
the standards from the device side. Second, we ensure high reliability through
device-centric software techniques on the 5G system. Third, we provision 5G
devices with new capabilities of both learning and reasoning for both common
usage settings and failure-prone scenarios. If successful, it may help to
advance robotic applications in our daily life and the society. The proposal
further helps to train and prepare the next-generation workforce for 5G
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research has three key areas of technical contributions. First, we use the
robotic applications to drive our device-centric 5G innovations. It quantifies
the requirements on low latency and high reliability, makes a case for software-
defined reliability and latency tailored to applications, and offers benchmarks
for assessing the design. Second, we take the device-centric approach to high
reliability and low latency. Our solution leverages the state replica at the
design and optimizes 5G latency on both control and data planes. To improve
reliability, we exploit both concurrent network access (via connectivity to two
base stations and multiple concurrent wireless channels to each) and detect-and-
react for higher reliability. We devise novel proactive failure masking and
reactive recovery components, by leveraging existing 5G mechanisms and recent
checkpointing schemes. We further adjust various tuning knobs to the
application's reliability requirement. Third, we provide new learning and
reasoning functions at the device to open up the closed 5G network operations
and enable the applications for further adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.