* 1910881
* FET: Small: 2D Material Compound Synapse Arrays for Robust In-Memory and Neuromorphic Computing (2DNeuro)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Ivan Sanchez Esqueda, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 11/30/2019
* USD 500,000.00

Novel computing systems that emulate the brain have received significant
attention from the scientific and engineering community, as they can help
analyze large amounts of information while consuming only small amounts of
energy. Significant advances have been made on these neuro-inspired systems, but
there are still limitations that prevent their practical application on portable
devices. This work will investigate novel materials and designs that can
alleviate these limitations, enabling a better execution of critical
mathematical functions. The scientific breakthroughs resulting from this work
will support robust, efficient, and massively parallel computing for data-
intensive machine learning applications. A profound societal impact will be
achieved by laying the foundations for novel computing hardware that will
support cognitive systems and artificial intelligence of tomorrow. Another
objective of this project is to integrate research and education by training
students (including graduate and undergraduate researchers), by developing
educational tools in form of web-based interactive platforms, and by supporting
a graduate-level course in the topic of novel integrated memory and neuro-
inspired computing architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
establish the foundations of new storage technology based on two-dimensional
(2-D) atomically-thin materials, extending the practical engineering limits of
neuro-inspired systems. These storage devices, known as memristors, can be
programmed to different states, based on an externally applied stimulus. When
organized in specific configurations, memristor arrays can be used to implement
complex functions that are used by the system in a decision-making process.
However, because of randomness in the operation of memristors, variation is
inevitable, affecting the accuracy of the computation and the trustworthiness of
the system-based decisions. This work aims to combine novel 2-D materials with
new array configurations to mitigate the impact of variability in order to
improve accuracy and performance of computation, while maintaining the benefits
of low-energy consumption. The intellectual significance of this project extends
from fundamental science relating to atomic-scale storage in 2-D materials, to
applied engineering contributions relating to the demonstration of robust
memristor arrays for neuro-inspired computing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.