* 1910517
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Many-Antenna Full-Duplex for Mobile and Multihop Topologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ehsan Aryafar, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,846.00

The dramatic growth in the number of smart devices (e.g., smartphones, connected
vehicles, and wearables) and the resulting exponential growth in mobile data
traffic has increased the need for higher capacity wireless networks. Thus, the
wireless research community is searching for technologies to use the available
spectrum more efficiently. One prominent approach to increase spectral
efficiency is to use more antennas on wireless devices and allow them to operate
in full-duplex mode. However, as the number of antennas increases, wireless
communication becomes directional, which makes it harder to support mobile
devices. Full-duplex communication also increases interference, which
necessitates design of new algorithms to manage interference. The goal of this
project is to develop theoretical and practical methods to maintain full-duplex
spectral efficiency gains in multihop topologies of mobile devices with multiple
antennas. The findings from this project will be integrated into wireless
networking courses across multiple universities. The project team will work
closely with their industry partners to transfer the results of their research
to industry. The researchers will involve both undergraduate and
underrepresented populations in their research to encourage them to enter
science and engineering fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has
three main objectives: (i) Self-Interference Cancellation. The project team will
derive new self-interference cancellation techniques to enable full-duplex in
many-antenna wireless systems. (ii) Mobility Support. The project team will
design new beam tracking technologies to better support mobile users. The
algorithms will be augmented with contextual awareness to reduce tracking
overhead and increase users' quality of service. (iii) Multihop Spectral
Efficiency: The project team will develop joint beamforming, scheduling, and
routing algorithms to manage interference and maintain full-duplex spectral
efficiency gains in a network of many-antenna full-duplex nodes with single or
multihop traffic flows. Each research thrust will result in new theorems,
algorithms, and protocols. These theoretical aspects will be evaluated through
simulations and experimentation on programmable wireless hardware to
characterize the end-to-end system benefits in a variety of real-world
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.