* 1910153
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative: Towards Surge-Resilient Hybrid RF/VLC Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Ismail Guvenc, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 10/31/2023
* USD 248,814.00

The successful deployment of smart city-scale wireless services, such as the
Internet of Things (IoT), hinges on the presence of a reliable communication
infrastructure that can pervasively connect both human and machine-type devices.
In order to support the traffic anticipated from an IoT ecosystem, the wireless
infrastructure must be resilient to the surge of traffic that can result from a
plethora of events that range from hot-spot events and random failures to
natural disasters and targeted attacks. The goal of this research is to develop
a novel wireless network architecture that leverages both radio frequency (RF)
and visible light communication (VLC) to provide resilient and pervasive
connectivity. The developed architecture and associated frameworks will bring
together novel, cross-disciplinary ideas from communication theory, learning,
and game theory to explore the fundamental theoretical and experimental
challenges of a hybrid and resilient RF/VLC network. The research is coupled
with a comprehensive educational plan that includes new course material,
tutorials, and large-scale involvement of graduate and undergraduate students in
research related to resilient communications and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will introduce a novel framework
for designing, analyzing, and optimizing hybrid RF/VLC communications, in the
presence of failures, hotspots, and natural disasters. The key technical
contributions will include: 1) Novel scheduling algorithms uniquely tailored
towards RF/VLC systems that can maximize the number of users with available
connectivity, in the presence of traffic surges; 2) Effective transmission
mechanisms based on non-orthogonal multiple access that can enhance the spectral
efficiency of flash crowds; 3) Resilient self-organizing algorithms, based on
game theory and reinforcement learning, that exploit feedback across radio
access technologies to enable intelligent and resilient resource management in
the presence of incomplete information; and 4) Practical RF/VLC experiments that
will be used to validate the proposed research and bridge the gap between theory
and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.