* 1910885
* III:Small: Replication Studies for High Dimensional Data: Insights into Confounding and Heterogeneity
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Flint, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 536,490.00

In order for the scientific community to reach consensus on a scientific
finding, the finding must be replicated in multiple studies by different groups.
Unfortunately, not all scientific studies successfully replicate. When a
scientific finding is reported, its confidence is quantified by a p-value. In
principal, p- values should quantify how often a study should replicate. Over
the past decade, researchers have shown that scientific studies replicate at a
much lower rate than the reported p-values predict. This has led to a vigorous
discussion on the causes of replication failures as well as developing
guidelines for study design to improve the replication rate. In this project,
the research team will show that when studies are collecting large amounts of
data, it is possible to use this data to identify differences between the
studies and gain some insight into why studies do or do not replicate. This
information can be used to improve the individual studies and increase the
replication rate of the resulting findings. As replication is a fundamental tool
in scientific discovery, developing new approaches to analyzing replication
studies will have an impact in many areas of science. The team has a long
standing interest in involving undergraduate students in their research as well
as working to broaden the diversity of participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the replicability of high dimensional studies is considered. In a
high dimensional study, not only one p-value is reported, but typically
thousands or even millions of p- values are reported in each study. Genomic
studies are a motivating example of high dimensional studies as genomic data is
inherently high dimensional and thus in genomic studies, a p-value is computed
for each genomic features such as a gene expression level or genetic variant.
Typically, in a genomic study, out of all of the p-values, only a small subset
of them are considered significant (taking into account for multiple testing).
When a replication study is performed, the features of interest are the features
which were significant in the original study. The key idea behind this project
is that there is information on all reported features, even those that are not
significant. By analyzing them, insights can be obtained about the studies and
these insights can both improve the replication rate as well as the analysis of
each of the studies. The framework can be leveraged to address the following
problems: (1) Reduce the effect of confounders in each replicate -- improving
power and reducing false positives; (2) Accounting for ascertainment biases in
the reported results; and (3) Interpreting the differences between each
replicate or study to gain insights into the underlying causes of the
difference. The approach will be evaluated using 5 genomic
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.