* 1910067
* SHF: Small: Idiomatic Decompilation.
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 433,000.00

Experts known as reverse engineers specialize in studying executable programs,
which are computer software programs without source code, expressed as low-level
machine instructions on a computer. This task is difficult because the process
of translating a program to the machine level throws away all of the information
provided by high level programming languages like Java or C that are relevant to
helping humans understand what the program does. This project develops analysis
and machine learning techniques to augment and transform non-intuitive
executable programs into more idiomatic and understandable software code. This
work will help professional reverse engineers do their jobs more effectively;
these professionals engage in security-critical and economically-critical
activities like understanding and responding to malware and viruses, discovering
vulnerabilities, and fixing bugs in legacy software
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reverse engineers specialize in reading and
understanding a program's behavior from its executable to analyze malware,
discover software vulnerabilities, or patch legacy bugs. Unfortunately,
compilers discard considerable information that is key to human understanding:
comments, names, user-defined datatypes, and idiomatic structure. State-of-the-
art de-compilation tools produce code that is largely not idiomatic, and can be
very difficult for even experts to understand. This project develops techniques
that combine insight from program analysis and machine learning to construct
models to automatically transform non-intuitive compiled code into more
idiomatic and understandable code. In particular, these models (A) Provide
generic variable identifiers with more informative names. (B) Reconstruct names
and structure of user-defined types. (C) Transform non-intuitive control flow
into more idiomatic programming patterns. The project advances the state-of-the-
art in both language models (requiring novelties in, e.g., neural language
models and tree-based machine learning) and program analysis and transformation
to constrain the search problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.