* 1910396
* Confronting the Stellar Gyrochronology Paradigm Using Wide Binaries
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Derek Buzasi, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 395,048.00

A wide range of important questions being studied by astrophysicists, from the
habitability of exoplanets to the evolving structure of our galaxy, require that
we first accurately determine the ages of stars. While we have made great
progress measuring other stellar properties, age remains the most difficult to
determine. This research team will carry out several detailed studies that use
detailed observations of binary stars from ground-based and space-based
telescopes to better determine their ages. Undergraduate students will
participate in every aspect of this project, from data acquisition with the
campus and remote-access observatories in Arizona, Chile and Spain. This project
will also enable a new partnership with nearby Bethune-Cookman University (HBCU)
that will enhance the educational opportunities at both
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gyrochronology, an empirical relation between
rotation and age, is believed to be among the best current methods of stellar
age determination. This team will refine the current paradigm using over 3000
wide binaries already identified in the K2 fields. Wide pairs provide a unique
opportunity to unravel and calibrate the rotation-activity-metallicity vs. age
relations for main sequence stars. They span a much broader age and metallicity
range than stellar clusters. Efforts will focus primarily on follow-up ground-
based spectroscopy with the national observatories and CCD-based imaging with
the SARA (Southeast Association for Research in Astronomy; ERAU is a member)
telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.