* 1910594
* CNS Core: Small: Collaborative Research: Attaining the New Frontier of Spectral Efficiency with Tradeoffs in Computation Through Cloud Radio Access Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Saswati Sarkar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 334,002.00

Cloud radio access networks (C-RANs) will be part of the next generation of
wireless technology and will provide a leap forward in spectral efficiency.
C-RANs promote a fundamental paradigm shift by employing a large number of
simple base stations that consist only of radio heads (RRUs), while aggregating
the baseband units (BBUs) of multiple base stations together at processing
clouds connected through optical fiber or microwave links. This project will
harness the potential offered by the centralization of the BBUs and the
availability of a large number of distributed RRUs to attain scalable
performance gains. This will foster the proliferation and improved penetration
of wireless technology by supporting inexpensive, high-quality, ubiquitous
energy-efficient spectrum access through emerging C-RAN technologies. The wider
adoption of wireless technologies will allow traditionally under-served
Americans to have better access to information services, thereby improving the
nation's economic welfare. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained
in analytical and empirical research methods, which will improve the training of
the nation's workforce. Collaboration will be fostered, and the results of the
effort will be shared with the community through workshops focused on C-RAN
technology. The research team will engage in activities to reduce the gender-gap
in engineering by engaging local women in science and engineering clubs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a cross-layer approach to the design
of scalable and efficient network strategies for C-RANs through a combination of
mathematical techniques, exploration of context-specific tradeoffs, and
innovative empirical strategies. The project seeks to 1) design optimal,
information-theoretic codes and establish fundamental tradeoffs between
coordination and communication rates for realistic scenarios; 2) design C-RAN
scheduling techniques that cater to these optimal codes, as well as network
dynamics, requested content, users' mobility, and radio conditions to provide
scalable and efficient solutions for improved wireless communications; and (3)
perform experimental prototyping of resulting communication and coding
strategies on a C-RAN enabled wireless testbed to provide empirical performance
validation and validate the underlying assumptions and models. The project is a
holistic effort that will apply and contribute to the fields of information
theory, queueing, and game theory as well as mathematical optimization, and
empirical wireless research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.