* 1910218
* CHS: Small: Multidisciplinary Design Approaches for Privacy and Security
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Steven Weber, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2025
* USD 485,159.00

Digital devices and everyday objects are increasingly becoming smart, connected,
and artificially intelligent, and though this promises numerous benefits, it
also raises new privacy concerns and introduces new security vulnerabilities.
These concerns and vulnerabilities are wide-ranging, although they affect people
differently depending on someone's background, identity, and context. For
example, smart devices such as fitness trackers, voice controlled smart
speakers, and facial recognition smart cameras can be used to monitor family
members, share personal health data with third parties, surveil nannies and
caregivers, harass and abuse intimate partners, and trick users into sharing
passwords or divulging secrets. This project will develop novel prototypes and
strategies for addressing privacy and security concerns arising from smart
devices that are sensitive to the people and contexts with which they are used.
The main novelty of this project will be its multidisciplinary approach that
combines expertise in digital privacy and security with expertise in the design
disciplines of interaction, industrial, graphic, and architectural design. By
involving diverse non-expert and expert participation in the design,
development, and assessment of prototype solutions, this project will broaden
participation in privacy and security research and education in order to
generate solutions and strategies that are inclusive, appropriate, fair, and
effective for everyone. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key aim of this project is to
look for alternatives to the informed consent and usable choice approaches that
currently drive most user-oriented privacy and security research. These
approaches often fail: privacy policies are often ignored or impenetrable, and
can actually decrease trust even when clearly written, while choice-based
approaches often fail to fit privacy decisions and preferences that vary widely
according to experience, personality, identity, ability, and situation. To
address these issues, the research team will conduct qualitative fieldwork and
participatory design research that invites diverse non-expert and expert
participation. This multidisciplinary approach aims to contribute to privacy,
security, and human-centered computing research by (1) generating novel
multiform, socially-sensitive, and contextually-appropriate solutions to address
current and future privacy and security issues, particularly those associated
with the proliferation of connected, artificially-intelligent, and "always-on"
everyday technologies, (2) broadening and diversifying participation in privacy
and security problem framing, solutions-finding, and discourse, and (3)
developing forward-looking methods, strategies, and exemplar prototypes for
engineering, computer science, design, policymaking, and other experts and
professionals to anticipate and respond to future privacy and security
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.