* 1910208
* CNS: Small: Towards Intelligent, Coordinated and Scalable Management of Server Sprinting in Edge Data Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Shaolei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 380,224.00

Built at numerous distributed locations in proximity to end users, edge data
centers are essential ingredients of the next-generation computing paradigm to
enable ultra-low latency- for emerging services such as augmented reality and
assisted driving. Because of high capital expenses and/or limited physical
space, however, the infrastructure capacity of edge data centers is often
severely constrained and difficult to scale up for accommodating the constantly
growing demand. To overcome the capacity constraint without compromising data
center availability, this project exploits two important resources ---
distributed energy storage devices (such as battery units) and cold air thermal
energy storage --- and transforms them into server sprinting enablers for
delivering the best service quality. The key contribution of this project is an
intelligent and scalable framework based on state-of-the-art reinforcement
learning, which holistically coordinates servers' sprinting decisions on the fly
for maximizing the system-wide performance in highly dynamic and practical
environments. This project considers two complementary types of edge data
centers: those where the physical infrastructure and servers are managed by a
single entity; and those where different tenants house their own servers and the
physical infrastructure is controlled by the data center
operator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project can push the performance beyond the
currently achievable limit in edge data centers, translating into better service
quality and higher user satisfaction without costly infrastructure capacity
expansion. It extends the exploration of computer system optimization to a new
paradigm where scalable online learning is the core, and thus can catalyze a
shift in future system designs. This project also contains a significant
educational component and provides broad opportunities to attract a diverse
population of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.