* 1910667
* CNS Core: Small: MAC Layer Failure Control and Avoidance in Cognitive Radio Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jiang (Linda) Xie, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Cognitive radio has recently emerged as a promising technology to overcome the
imbalance between the increase in spectrum access demand and the inefficiency in
spectrum usage by allowing dynamic spectrum access. However, a fundamentally
unexplored issue in cognitive radio networking design is how to avoid and
control the failures at the medium access control (MAC) layer during spectrum
access. This issue is becoming a serious barrier to the success of cognitive
radio networks (CRNs). The potential MAC layer failures during spectrum access
are unique in CRNs. They will significantly degrade the network performance and
sometimes may even block the whole network's operation. Currently, no existing
work addresses how to avoid the MAC layer failures or how to mitigate the effect
on performance degradation caused by the failures in CRNs. This research is
potentially transformative as it will help generate innovative techniques to
numerous applications of the CRN technology, e.g., public safety networks,
emergency networks, health monitoring, and cognitive mesh networks. It will also
have significant impacts on research in emerging technologies with dynamic
spectrum access, such as vehicular networks, mobile health, and opportunistic
interconnections of heterogeneous wireless networks. The proposed MAC layer
designs can also be applied to systems of Internet-of-Things (IoT) with low-
power, low-cost IoT devices dynamically accessing the wide spectrum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to design,
analyze, and evaluate new MAC layer failure control and avoidance protocols for
cognitive radio networks (CRNs) without a common control channel. The proposed
MAC layer designs aim at minimizing the failure rate caused by various factors
during spectrum access and minimizing the average spectrum access delay. This
research is the first that systematically addresses the unique failures at the
MAC layer during spectrum access in CRNs under practical scenarios. This project
includes three major research tasks: (1) rendezvous congestion control to avoid
network congestion and to speed up the rendezvous; (2) handshake failure
avoidance to avoid synchronous deadlocks and to derive the optimal size of a
time slot for handshake; and (3) transmission failure mitigation to adapt the
optimal frame size and to maximize the overall throughput. This research will
offer a complimentary yet fundamental building block to existing CRN MAC
research. This project also integrates research findings into related graduate
courses and diversity support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.