* 1910264
* SHF: Small: Declaratively Creating Semantics-driven Visualizations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jonathan Aldrich, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 513,680.00

Visual diagrams are essential for communicating difficult technical concepts;
for instance, there is ample evidence that students learn more effectively and
can solve problems more efficiently when using diagrams rather than plain text.
Effective communication of scientific concepts is limited by the fact that good
diagrams remain hard to create: abstract logical or mathematical concepts are
difficult for non-experts to translate into compelling graphical figures, and
traditional software tools produce static diagrams that do not easily facilitate
interaction or exploration. This project develops a next-generation framework
called Penrose, where high-quality diagrams can be created by simply typing
expressions in domain-specific languages that reflect the way students and
scientists already talk about mathematics. The project's novelties are to
systematically encode the relationships between abstract mathematical statements
and their visual representations, and to automatically generate diagrams
satisfying these relationships via constrained nonlinear optimization. The
project's impacts are to significantly lower the barrier to creating effective
diagrams, and to accelerate the rate at which complex technical ideas are
communicated---especially in the domain of scientific education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes an interdisciplinary approach
between programming languages and computer graphics. At the language level,
Penrose enforces a clean separation between mathematical content and its visual
representation via two extensible specification languages, Substance and Style,
akin to HTML and CSS. On the graphics side, programs are compiled into a
constrained optimization program whose solutions describe a family of possible
diagrams. Automatic or user-assisted tools can then be used to select or
interactively explore specific diagrams. The systematic encodings provided by
Penrose can also be used to intelligently search for useful examples, special
cases, or counterexamples. A free web-based Penrose interface encourages
community development of new user-designed modules; integration of these modules
into an interactive mathematical tutor system helps to enrich and accelerate the
training of the next generation of scientists and engineers in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.