* 1910821
* CNS Core: Small: Towards a universal network verification framework
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Soudeh Ghorbani, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The reliability of computer networks is becoming ever more critical as networks
increasingly perform mission critical functions such as intrusion detection and
prevention. Verifying today's complex and large-scale computer networks,
however, remains a challenging task. Existing network verification tools focus
almost exclusively on different variants of reachability, e.g., is point A
reachable from point B? Thus, they are incapable of providing strong reliability
guarantees for modern networks. This project strives to provide a general
framework for efficiently verifying desired properties for today's networks.
Achieving this goal requires addressing fundamental open problems related to
reasoning about the behavior of the large-scale dynamic systems. In addition to
tackling these problems, the project supports education as its various sub-
problems can be defined as intellectually stimulating research projects for
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Towards the goal of
enabling efficient verification of correctness properties, this project provides
compositional programming abstractions that allow network operators to express
their network functions and desired properties. It will also provide an
automata-theoric framework that decomposes any arbitrary property into safety
and liveness properties. Verifying the total correctness of a firewall, for
example, involves verifying that its output actions such as blocking hosts meet
its specification (a safety property) and that it actually takes action, e.g.,
by blocking malicious traffic (a liveness property). Fundamentally, then, fast
verification reduces to efficiently verifying safety and liveness properties.
Alas, efficient verification of general safety and liveness properties for
large-scale stateful networks is an open problem. While existing network
verifiers can efficiently verify some classes of invariants such as loop-
freedom, they are not general and cannot verify all safety properties. Plus,
existing verification techniques do not scale to verify liveness properties fast
-- verifying these properties is algorithmically challenging and in some cases
undecidable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strives to bridge this gap by
providing algorithms for general and scalable safety and liveness verification
for stateful networks, e.g., by modeling the network behavior as compact Boolean
formulas. While fast, such abstract models are known to over-approximate the
system's behavior and a property violated in the abstract model may hold in the
original program. Thus, one of the goals of the project is to formally prove the
correctness of verification on these compact models, i.e., a property holds on
them if and only if it holds on the actual program. Finally, a compiler will be
provided to translate the verified programs to code runnable on existing
application-specific integrated circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
website, which will include its publications, code, results, and data, will be
publicly available at http://cs.jhu.edu/~soudeh/research/verification.html and
will be maintained for at least three years after the project is
completed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.