* 1910839
* CHS: Small: Embedding Discreet Digital Data in Physical Artifacts
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Eitan Grinspun, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Technologies for coding and transmitting digital information have been
thoroughly studied in recent decades, mainly for digital communication channels.
Meanwhile, the line between digital and physical is becoming increasingly
blurred in fields such as additive manufacturing, cyber-physical systems,
augmented reality, and internet of things. This trend presents an opportunity to
explore new coding problems on channels embodied by physical artifacts (such as
mass, sound waves, and light waves). For example, how can we encode information
in a machined part so that a robotic system can read the information for
automated manipulation? When a physical artifact is designed purely for human
consumption, its ability to be involved in the digital world is limited. But if
we could encode digital information (or tags) during the creation of physical
artifacts, the physical tags would have a wide range of uses in many
applications wherein physical artifacts interact with digital systems, including
assembly, sales, robotic navigation and manipulation, and augmented and mixed
reality. The goal of this project is to understand and address these emerging
issues, and to advance a systematic methodology for making physical artifacts
for both human and machine consumption. The approach will combine the design of
both a computational algorithm and a physical coding scheme, drawn primarily
from the fields of computer graphics, computer vision, signal processing,
multimedia, optimization, and simulation. The new tools will be useful across
numerous application domains, while the students trained during this research
will understand design problems in diverse areas and develop solutions from
multiple disciplines. The effort will have additional broad impact because the
investigators will invite participation by students with diverse backgrounds
(computer science, engineering, arts) and at different levels (undergraduate,
masters, and doctoral).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore and apply
the idea of discreetly and intrinsically encoding digital payloads during the
synthesis of physical artifacts by exploiting limitations in human perception.
In the context of this research, the term "physical artifact" refers to any
aspect of the physical world that is perceivable by a human (e.g., mass, sound,
light, etc.); the term "digital payload" refers to data intended for consumption
by a machine, while "discreet" means that the presence of the payload should not
alter a person's perception of the physical artifact, and "intrinsic" means that
the payload is encoded directly during the production process of the physical
artifact rather than during a separate step after production. The approach, from
a computer science perspective, will combine the design of both a computational
algorithm and a physical coding scheme. The work will focus on three concrete
cases of information encoding in 1) additive manufacturing, 2) acoustic waves,
and 3) optical waves. Informed by these case studies, the research will advance
a systematic methodology for coding information in a wide range of physical
artifacts. This methodology will be shaped at multiple aspects, including
understanding relevant perceptual characteristics of the physical artifact,
identification of imperceptible modifications of the physical artifact for data
embedding, analysis of the information capacity, understanding and improving
coding robustness, and implementation of an easy-to-use encoding and decoding
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.