* 1910147
* CHS: Small: Automatically Identifying Misunderstandings of Social Intentions in Online Conversations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Susan Fussell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2024
* USD 543,590.00

This project will develop new ways of understanding miscommunication in social
media and will design novel interventions to prevent or reduce
misunderstandings. Online conversations often become increasingly hostile over
time, resulting in disruptive behavior such as trolling, personal attacks,
harassment, and bullying. Prior work has shown that in some cases these
derailments can be traced back to ill-intentioned individuals and to social
contagion. In other cases, however, disruptions may result from simple
misunderstandings: readers may misconstrue the social intentions of the poster,
concluding that a message is meant to be friendly or hostile or aggressive when
actually the opposite was intended. This project will create a framework for
understanding when and why social intentions are misunderstood, computational
methods for automatically capturing the effects of such misperceptions on the
trajectory and outcome of online conversations, and tools that might help
prevent misunderstandings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research combines natural
language processing and computer-mediated communication expertise, in the
context of social computing and human-computer interaction. Unlike other work
that examines how the content of messages is misunderstood, this research aims
to understand problems identifying the pragmatic force of a message, for example
whether it is meant as a command or request, a joke, or a hostile remark. Such
"pragmatic failures" are rooted in the distinction between the literal meaning
of a message and its intended meaning, as well as in the varying propensity of
readers with different sociocultural backgrounds to perceive one or the other.
This phenomenon is especially problematic online, where many of the
paralinguistic social cues people rely on offline to disambiguate such
utterances are attenuated or even completely missing. Three sets of research
activities will: (1) investigate mismatches between the message creator's
pragmatic intentions and how they are interpreted by different target audiences,
(2) develop techniques to automatically identify when pragmatic
misunderstandings have occurred and to detect their effects on conversations,
and (3) develop interface tools to help prevent or overcome pragmatic
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.