* 1910812
* CIF: Small: Best Wiretap Codes for Real-world Physical-layer Security
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Willie Harrison, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 473,928.00

The pervasive nature of low-power devices in modern communication systems has
introduced scores of new and exciting possibilities as well as several
challenges in today's continuously connected world. Users now enjoy perpetual
accessibility to data and information through various network structures;
however, securing personal data has never been more challenging. Due to many
networks being comprised of low-power devices (e.g., as in the Internet of
Things), low-power secure alternatives to traditional cryptography are currently
in demand. One technique that shows immense promise for addressing these needs
is physical-layer security with wiretap coding. However, despite the several
decades of fundamental theoretical research, the search continues for practical
coding schemes that can address the security challenges of modern networks. This
project has the potential to be transformative in the field of wiretap coding
for physical-layer security. The proposed research targets a straightforward and
yet novel approach to wiretap coding that will produce provably-best coding
structures over various wiretap channel models. Such codes are likely to direct
security standards and protocols adapted to the Internet of Things and other
applications. The project seeks to recruit a diverse research team through full
inclusion in special undergraduate research and outreach programs at Brigham
Young University. Students from the research group will develop skills and
professional networks that allow them to go on to build greater diversity in
STEM professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key limiting factors in the development
and adoption of wiretap coding are: the current design theory seeks codes that
achieve secrecy as blocklength tends to infinity, and it is assumed that the
designer has full knowledge of the eavesdropper's channel state information.
This project seeks to overcome both of these problems by recasting the physical-
layer security problem as a joint signaling/coding problem, where signaling and
channel sounding provide an environment with high capacity for secrecy, and
wiretap coding then maximizes security in that environment through adoption of
specific finite blocklength wiretap codes. The approach requires the research
team to find the best codes for all possible states of the eavesdropper's
channel. This project addresses the coding side of the joint design problem, and
will identify fundamental limits of secure throughput in the finite blocklength
regime by finding and/or designing wiretap codes that can be proved to be best
for their size. The project addresses the following three main research tasks:
1) characterize fundamental algebraic properties of optimally-secure (best)
wiretap codes for simple channels; 2) find and design explicit, optimal, binary
code structures for simple channels; and 3) expand best binary coding results to
more difficult and realistic channel models and design optimal non-binary
wiretap codes. It is anticipated that a host of currently known algebraic code
structures will prove to be best for their size parameters. Generic algorithms
will also be sought that produce best (or nearly-best) codes for blocklengths
and dimensions where no known best algebraic structures exist. If successful,
these results will transform finite blocklength wiretap code design. Such a
collection of breakthrough results would empower communication experts to begin
adopting physical-layer security codes in modern communication networks with
full knowledge of the achievable rates of secure throughput for finite
blocklength wiretap codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.