* 1910410
* CIF: Small: Exploring and Exploiting the Universality Phenomenon in High-Dimensional Estimation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Yue Lu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,722.00

Understanding the performance of various algorithms used in practice is a
central question in information processing and machine learning. Such
performance guarantees are very important to practitioners. For example, data
analysts need to know how many data samples to collect for a given inference
algorithm to reach a prediction with sufficient statistical accuracy and
confidence. Although significant progress has been made in precisely
characterizing the performance of various estimation and inference algorithms, a
big gap exists between theory and practice. Most of existing theoretical work on
performance analysis relies upon strong and often unrealistic assumptions on the
underlying statistical models. Such idealistic models, while useful and
convenient for mathematical proofs, often do not fit the situations encountered
in practice. This project aims to narrow the gap between theory and practice in
performance analysis by leveraging the universality phenomenon. In short,
universality is the observation that universal laws govern the macroscopic
behavior of many high-dimensional systems, irrespectively of how different they
might be in their microscopic constructions. By exploiting the universality
phenomenon, this project contributes to an understanding of the fundamental
limits of various estimation and inference methods under more realistic models.
In addition, this project makes broad impacts through the dissemination of
datasets, the organization of workshops/tutorials, and the mentoring and
supporting of students from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of this project are organized into three main thrusts. In the
first thrust, the investigator analyzes the exact asymptotic performance of a
class of spectral methods that have been widely used in recent work on nonconvex
optimization approaches for signal estimation. In particular, the project
extends the current analysis from independent ensembles to more general
ensembles, and explores new applications including multiplexed imaging and the
training of multilayer neural networks. In the second thrust, the project
investigates the performance bounds for regularized M-estimators when the
sensing matrices are drawn from general non-independent ensembles. The third
thrust of the project uses extensive numerical simulations to explore the
strength, robustness, as well as the limitations of the universality phenomenon
in high-dimensional estimation. The numerical experiments are guided by the
theory and insights developed in the first two
thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.