* 1910675
* Collaborative Research: Protostellar Jets Across the Mass Spectrum
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Tan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 275,472.00

Stars, like our Sun, are known to form from clouds of molecular gas in
interstellar space. These clouds gradually collapse under the influence of
gravity, becoming denser and smaller. As this happens, any initial spin of the
cloud is amplified, much like when an ice skater pulls their arms in to spin
faster. This occurs because of a phenomenon known as the conservation of angular
momentum. However, if material that was to form a star fully conserved its
angular momentum, i.e., its degree of spin, then by the time it became as small
as a star it would be spinning so quickly that it would no longer be stable and
would be flung apart. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The answer to this riddle of how
stars like our Sun have been able to form, requiring quite low rates of spin, is
thought to be related to the phenomenon of "Protostellar Jets", which is the
subject of this research. Fast flowing gas, collimated into a pair of jets, is
almost always seen when young stars are forming, i.e., when they are
"protostars". These jets are thought to be launched from a spinning gas disk
that surrounds the growing star because of the action of magnetic fields
threading the disk that become wound up by the swirling gas. These magnetic
fields are thought to become powerful enough to launch some of the gas from the
disk, which carries away angular momentum from material left behind that can
then eventually settle on to the star. The remnants of such disks may become
systems of planets, like those of our solar system. The investigators seek to
understand how stars and planets are born by better understanding how
protostellar jets are launched. The investigators will perform computer
simulations of protostellar jets understand their properties, including from
relatively low-mass stars like our Sun, to much more massive stars that also
exist in our Galaxy. The results of these simulations will be compared to
observations of protostellar jets made by radio telescopes to test the
theoretical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact plan integrates
research with teaching and public outreach activities. At the University of the
Virgin Islands (UVI) three undergraduates will share in the research projects
each year, providing important opportunities for STEM career development for
underrepresented groups. This proposal will help strengthen a collaboration
between this new research group at UVI and the University of Virginia (UVA). The
collaboration plan includes student exchanges between UVI and UVA, expanding the
horizons of both groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.