* 1910939
* CHS: Small: Understanding Environment Perception and Task Performance in Human-in-the-Loop Tele-robotic Systems (HiLTS)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jeremy Brown, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 544,739.00

The human body is highly capable of dexterous manipulation. This dexterity is
developed and refined over many years based on touch or tactile feedback from
repeated practice performing manipulation tasks in many different environments
with varying types of constraints. There are situations, however, where
constraints on the environment or body prevent direct manipulation. For these
situations, such as minimally invasive surgical robots, bomb disposal robots,
and prosthetic limbs, manipulation can be provided through the use of
collaborative robots. Such robots or haptic devices, called human-in-the-loop
telerobotic systems (HiLTS), provide the much-needed tactile feedback as with
the natural limbs working on the manipulations directly. HiLTS are designed to
extend and, in some circumstances, improve the dexterous capabilities of the
human operator in virtual and remote environments. However, the information that
the human user receives from the haptic devices can be distorted by the hardware
and software mechanisms used. Existing research focus mostly on providing
stability of the haptic devices as humans explore a remote environment and such
a focus on stability can typically lead to a trade-off in the information (such
as stiffness) pertaining to the physical properties of the remote environment.
This project, therefore, seeks to understand how the trade-off between stability
and stiffness affect the user's understanding of a remote environment and the
ability to perform dexterous tasks in the environment. This knowledge can then
be used to improve the functionality of collaborative robotic systems used in
many different application contexts, including healthcare, defense, and
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the research issues
in providing dexterous manipulations through haptic feedback in telerobotic
systems. Dexterous manipulation, however, depends on how well the telerobot is
incorporated into the operator's sensorimotor control scheme. Empirical evidence
suggests that haptic feedback can lead to improved dexterity. Unfortunately, the
addition of haptic feedback, in particular, kinesthetic feedback can introduce
dynamics between the leader and follower of the telerobot that can affect both
stability and device performance. Concerted research efforts have focused on
making these device dynamics transparent to the operator while preserving
stability. True transparency, however, represents a theoretical ideal rather
than an attainable goal. Therefore, the project team will explore the effect of
"reduced transparency" by establishing an empirical understanding of the effect
of a telerobot's closed-loop leader/follower dynamics on the perception of a
remote environment and performance in tasks requiring knowledge of that
environment. Utilizing a generalized telerobotic testbed that features a rigid
mechanical, dynamic mechanical, and dynamic electromechanical transmission, the
research team will (1) independently and collectively investigate haptic
perception of environment stiffness and damping using a mechanical teleoperator
with rigid and dynamic leader/follower transmissions, (2) investigate
performance in two functional tasks requiring knowledge of environment dynamics
using a rigid mechanical teleoperator and an electromechanical teleoperator with
closed-loop leader/follower dynamics, and (3) investigate haptic perception and
functional task performance with bimanual mechanical and electromechanical
teleoperators that have symmetric and asymmetric leader/follower dynamics.
Investigations will also consider the utility of visual feedback in addition to
haptic sensory feedback. Overall, this research will lead to telerobots that
come closer to being embodied by their operators and will lead to improved
human-robot collaborative capabilities in HiLTS that will have benefits in many
different industries including healthcare, defense, and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.