* 1910168
* CIF: Small: Wireless Massive Access: From Fundamental Limits to Practical Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Dongning Guo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project will develop theory and techniques for supporting densely deployed
wireless devices. The project outcome will meet the urgent need for new wireless
technologies enabling the Internet of Things (IoT) that facilitates important
applications in healthcare, transportation, smart city, and public safety, to
name a few. With limited radio spectrum, the key is to design an efficient
system to support wireless massive access, where many devices are small and
battery-powered. Specifically, this project will study the fundamental limits of
wireless massive access under realistic assumptions and develop practical
designs that approach those limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pushes the
envelope of communications, information theory, and signal processing by
studying models with a massive number of users beyond the existing theory for
multiuser systems. This project will focus on two main technical challenges: 1.
To develop a theory for communication systems in the regime of a massive number
of devices. Important practical issues such as asynchrony and channel
uncertainties will be addressed at the fundamental level rather than as an
afterthought. 2. To design scalable codes that are resilient to various channel
uncertainties. Learning techniques will be applied to exploit device
idiosyncrasies to reduce uncertainties. Key design concepts will be evaluated
through experimentation with software-defined radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.