* 1910976
* SHF: Small: Automated Fine-Grained Requirements Traceability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Shiyi Wei, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 460,956.00

Requirements traceability is mandatory in safety-critical domains (such as
aerospace, transportation, communication, medical device software, etc.) and it
is essential in supporting acceptance testing or regulatory reviews. The
creation and maintenance of traceability links between requirements and code has
been identified by researchers as one of the grand challenges in software
traceability. Given that most requirements are written in natural language and
source code also contains large amounts of natural language, researchers
proposed using text-retrieval techniques for automated traceability-link
recovery. Text-retrieval-based approaches inherently suffer from low accuracy
due to the vocabulary mismatch between requirements and source code and the
coarse-grained granularity of the retrieved code (such as classes, files,
methods). As a consequence, developers rarely use traceability links in everyday
tasks related to code change. Improving the automated recovery between
requirements and code will help with important daily tasks faced by the software
engineers (such as bug localization and code reviews), which in turn will have a
potentially large economic impact, as it may lead to higher quality software and
less development effort. In addition, regulatory reviewers of safety-critical
software are expected to adopt results of this research project to improve their
work. The impact of their work on society is expected to be high as a
result.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project redefines the requirement-to-code
traceability-retrieval problem into a heuristic-driven approach, using static
code analysis and text analysis, which accurately matches functional constraints
embedded in requirements to their source code implementations. One contribution
of the project will be the identification and classification of functional
constraints present in requirements, written in natural language. Central to the
project is the hypothesis, supported by preliminary research, that developers
use well-defined patterns to express and implement the functional constraints in
code, which will be discovered and cataloged. The functional constraints
described in requirements will be automatically identified using natural-
language-processing techniques and deep learning. The implementation patterns
will be automatically identified using precise static-analysis techniques.
Overall, the novel requirements-to-code traceability paradigm will allow
recovering links at various granularity levels, as needed by various users.
Finally, the new type of traceability links will be used to improve essential
software-development tasks, namely bug localization and code
reviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.