* 1910077
* RI: Small: Training Modularized Learning Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jacob Abernethy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2022
* USD 465,735.00

Machine Learning systems are becoming ubiquitous and increasingly complex in
modern life. Many devices such as mobile phones continually run dozens of
predictive models, and these models receive input not only from the user but
also from each other. One way to think about the unexpected challenges of
multiple interacting learning systems is to consider how humans interact in
personal relationships or even how governments engage with each other during
international disputes. Such scenarios involve hard-to-predict dynamics, where
the introduction of a small amount of information or minor changes to strategy
can give rise to highly different outcomes. This project aims to understand
these interacting dynamics from an algorithmic perspective, with an eye towards
designing modular learning systems where the implementer can be certain that the
dynamics of training will reach a desired solution. The work will significantly
increase the range of tasks and challenges where learning systems are applied in
the real world and will have a strong impact on how artificial intelligence
interacts with society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with a focus on
game theory and builds off of a number of both classical and recent results in
solving so-called min-max problems, where one wants to find the equilibrium of a
zero-sum game. The hugely popular Generative Adversarial Networks provide a
great example where the training objective is framed as two competing modules
engaged in a search for a min-max solution. There has been a great deal of work
in finding equilibria using learning systems, and recent work by the
investigator has shown that several fundamental convex optimization procedures
can be viewed through the lens of learning in repeated play. The award will help
support the further development of mathematical frameworks to extend these
results beyond convex optimization and to design efficient algorithms with
provable guarantees in non-convex settings. One of the areas of particular
interest will be the use of continuous-time analysis in training complex
multiplayer problems, to understand when such dynamics lead to stable outcomes
and when they elicit chaotic behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.