* 1910561
* Completion of Scanning, Data Releases and Optimization of Analysis and Database for DASCH
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jonathan Grindlay, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2022
* USD 597,999.00

This grant will complete the scanning-digitization and processing of the
remaining approximately 200,000 glass plates of the Digital Access to a Sky
Century @ Harvard (DASCH) project, the first 100 year (1886-1992) full-sky
database of the brightness and positions of 50,000 stars or stellar objects.
This data is on 500,000 glass plates contains repeated measurements of the
variability of all detected stellar objects. The DASCH project will create an
all-sky 100 year photometric record which will allow the discovery and
measurement of all classes of stellar and quasar/blazar variability on time
scale of hours-days to many decades. By measuring historic outbursts of black
hole-low mass X-ray binaries to identify their duty cycle, an estimate can be
made of their occurrence in the galaxy. The DASCH data base will make
contributions to astrophysical studies as well to education by using the data
base in high school curriculum science lessons on astronomy, as well as to
meeting the public's interest in the variations of stars in night sky.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will preserve the DASCH data base for posterity
and make it available to the scientific community and the public. The remaining
200,000 of the 500,000 glass plates in the Harvard Plate Collection will be
scanned, digitized, processed and archived. This will allow the study of time
variable events of stars and compact extragalactic objects such as quasars over
the time period 1886-1992 for astrophysics, history of astronomy and high school
science lesions in astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.