* 1910565
* AF:RUI:Small:Approximation Problems with Tree Outputs Under Parameterized Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Guy Kortsarz, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2022
* USD 330,607.00

Trees are among the most important and fundamental (data) structures in many
areas of computer science and related fields. This project attempts to do a
comprehensive study of optimization problems which search for tree outputs, with
specific constraints on critical parameters. The classical Minimum Spanning Tree
(MST) problem is an example of a problem in which the output required is a tree.
Simple greedy algorithms that yield optimal solutions exist for the Minimum
Spanning Tree problem. Unlike the minimum spanning tree problem, exact solutions
for most problems that are addressed are considered intractable (in technical
jargon, NP-hard). A goal in this project is to design near-optimal solutions for
these problems. Another important aspect of the project is education. Training
and fostering undergraduate students as well as high school students is a major
emphasis of the proposed project. Guiding and mentoring these students will
enrich them individually and also permit them to make a greater impact through
their academic and professional endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
focused on problems whose outputs are trees with constraints on key parameters
such as degree and diameter. Typical problems considered in this project take
graphs as inputs and the objective is to find trees/forests with low maximum
degree and low cost or with low diameter and low cost. The problems become
harder when the input graphs are directed or when more general versions of the
problems are considered. Examples of such problems are the k-MST, the directed
steiner tree, and the k-steiner forest problems. These problems are NP-hard and
the goal of this project is to design approximation algorithms for these
problems and to prove hardness results. This project will also provide
tremendous research opportunities for undergraduate students as well as high
school students. Early exposure to research will inspire undergraduate students
to pursue academic interests and this will help strengthen the domestic PhD
pipeline in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.