* 1910568
* SHF: Small: Provably Efficient Dynamic Analysis Tools for Task Parallel Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* I-Ting Lee, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 498,976.00

The widespread deployment of multicore platforms --- from personal computers to
mobile devices to supercomputers --- has made it critical to develop support for
writing correct and efficient parallel software that can efficiently utilize the
multicore platforms. Parallel programming is no longer a trade performed by only
experts, or a practice required by a specific domain such as scientific
computing; it is now required for general-purpose computing. Yet, writing
correct parallel code that utilizes multicore efficiently is still notoriously
difficult. This project aims to develop a suite of software engineering tools to
aid the task of writing efficient parallel code. The project's impacts include
simplifying the task of writing correct and efficient parallel code and thereby
improving both the programmer's productivity and efficient utilization of modern
multicore hardware.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on developing
tools for task parallelism, a programming model widely employed by modern
parallel software platforms, such as OpenMP, Intel Threading Building Blocks,
and various dialects of Cilk and Habanero. With task parallelism, the language
constructs express the logical parallelism of the computation, and let an
underlying runtime scheduler automate tasks such as load balancing and
coordinations among subcomputations. The task parallel model provides many
benefits: it allows the programmer to focus on implementing the functionality of
the application without worrying about scheduling logics; the programming model
is processor-oblivious and has a well-defined cost model; finally, the scheduler
can provide provable guarantees on resource usage. In this project, the
investigators study and develop both algorithms and software support for tools
to debug unstructured and nondeterministic synchronization primitives, to
analyze scalability of nondeterministic code, and to combat work inflation in
task parallel computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.