* 1910117
* CHS:  Small:  Novel Technology Augmented Methods to Improve Team-based Engineering Education for Diverse Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Margaret Beier, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2024
* USD 522,064.00

This project will develop an automated system to measure core team processes.
Teams are increasingly prevalent in today's workforce, and the ability to work
effectively in teams is a competitive advantage. As a result, team-based
learning is now widespread in universities across all levels, ranging from
first-year engineering design courses to senior capstone projects. The rise of
team-based learning has created two inter-related challenges in effectively
delivering the optimal benefits of this learning modality. First, while
educators have matured in evaluating technical learning, such as quality of
results and presentation, they are still in the early stages of understanding,
measuring, and educating students on the process of effective teamwork itself.
Second, team-based research relies almost exclusively on self-report measures
and human observation, which are error prone and problematic. Thus, there is a
clear need to augment current methods so scientists and educators can better
measure the processes that lead to effective team performance. The project will
impact not only team-based education, but behavioral sciences more broadly. By
developing methods to objectively measure behavioral correlates of important
psychological constructs, behavioral sciences will go beyond the traditional
tools for research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in psychological theory and
research, and enabled by advances in engineering, this research will leverage
two forms of team interactions to understand key metrics related to individual
effectiveness, team dynamics, and the impact of diversity on both individual and
team metrics: (1) in-person interactions measured from the audio-visual
recordings of team meetings, and (2) work interactions measured from team's
shared written online collaborative documents. The system developed through this
research will include novel methods to extract action sequences from audio-
visual meeting data and from the online documents. Data will be collected in a
series of projects across three team environments: (1) targeted studies where
teams are formed for 90-minute project sprints; (2) medium-term teams working on
a 7-week engineering design internship, and (3) longer-term teams in a semester-
long engineering design course. Validated psychological assessments and new
metrics will be collected and assembled into an extensive and diverse dataset. A
multilayer network model will be developed to represent the different modes of
human interaction collected in the individual action sequences. The objective is
to extract network features that correlate with meaningful psychological
indicators of team dynamics and role emergence within
teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.