* 1910955
* Modeling dust condensation in protoplanetary disks
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Zhaohuan Zhu, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2024
* USD 552,474.00

The first step in planet formation is when dust condenses from gasses in a
protoplanetary disk. Where and how the dust condenses will determine the
composition of the planets. The inner planets of our Solar System formed at high
temperature. As a result, they are depleted in volatile elements compared to the
Sun. Previous studies of dust condensation have been limited by a series of
idealizations that were made to make the computation easier. These idealizations
included a single condensation temperature for each element or neglecting the
evolution of the gas disk. They might have limited the number of elements in the
model or ignored the thermal history of the system. The proposed work is to
build higher-fidelity models that incorporate many more elements than previous
models, and which incorporate the physics and development of the protoplanetary
disk. The results of this work will be compared to elemental abundances in our
Solar System to better understand the conditions in which our Solar System
formed and will be used to predict variations in planetary composition in
exoplanetary systems. The team will help to train future astronomers (and
increase the STEM workforce) by including postdoctoral scholars and graduate
students. They will also expand on their outreach efforts, including
neighborhood star parties in Las Vegas, and a popular "Astronomy on Tap"
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will combine two existing codes to
undertake new modeling of dust condensation in protoplanetary disks. The first
is a protoplanetary disk evolution code written by one of the postdocs who will
work on the project. The other is a thermodynamic code called GRAINS which
models the condensation sequence of dust particles under given thermodynamic
conditions. The resulting merged code will be called the Dynamical Disk Dust
Condensation (DDDC) code. One of the innovations in the code will be the
incorporation of gas pressure as a function of position in the disk and time.
This will have the effect of altering the condensation temperature for a given
element as a function of time and position. The resulting code will be used to
model the formation of our own Solar System by using solar mean elemental
abundances as input parameters. The team will then look at changes in
observables as they change various parameters, including mass of the disk,
angular velocity, temperature in the core, as well as thermal history and bulk
composition. The results will be compared to Solar System values to constrain
the early thermal history of our Solar System. They will also look at different
disk compositions to examine what variations might exist in exoplanetary
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.