* 1910973
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Active and Rapid Domain Generalization
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Hien Nguyen, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

Recent advances in machine learning have enabled a wide range of practical
applications including active authentication, autonomous driving, and medical
diagnosis. While machine learning algorithms achieve impressive performances for
these applications, they have to constantly deal with changing characteristics
of input data. Examples of such cases include: recognizing faces under poor
lighting conditions and side poses while algorithms are trained on well-
illuminated faces at the frontal pose; and detecting and segmenting an organ of
interest from low-resolution medical images when available algorithms are
instead optimized for high-resolution medical images. This problem is commonly
known as domain shift. The accuracies of machine learning systems decrease
significantly when domain shifts are present. As a result, users must spend
significant amounts of time and money to rebuild machine learning models to work
well on new data. This project aims to develop computational methods for
automatically detecting the presence of domain shifts, quickly adapting machine
learning systems to new data distribution, and intelligently seeking additional
information to improve the system's performance. Research outputs of this
project, such as software, publications, and best practices will contribute to
making a wide range of machine learning systems less vulnerable to perpetual
changes of input data, and safer to use in the presence of domain shifts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this project proposes four main
thrusts: 1) constructing meta-learning techniques to enable efficient adaptation
of classifiers to unseen domains using unlabeled data; 2) developing an optimal
reinforcement learning strategy for querying additional information that allows
effective generalization when the uncertainty is high; 3) building algorithmic
foundations for detecting the presence of domain shifts and preparing machine
learning systems for appropriate actions; and 4) validating the proposed
approaches with classification and segmentation tasks from large-scale datasets
corresponding to autonomous driving and active mobile authentication
applications. This project combines recent advances in variational inference,
reinforcement learning, and active learning to bring a modern and unique
perspective on how to deal with the problem of domain
shift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.