* 1910622
* CHS: Small: Reading, Doing, and Sharing Mathematical Expressions for the Blind: A Multimodal Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Francis Quek, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 11/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Reading, doing, and sharing mathematics are cognitively intensive tasks that
require significant amounts of learning and preparation. These skills form an
indispensable foundation for participation in all STEM fields and most careers.
So the lack of mathematical literacy severely disadvantages individuals who are
blind or who have a severe visual impairment (IBSVI). By the time they reach
middle school, IBSVI are typically 1-3 years behind their seeing counterparts in
mathematics, and the gap continues to widen in subsequent years. The key
challenge to accessing mathematical expressions is that they are laid out
spatially, and this spatial notation needs to be accessed interactively. This
project will develop and study solutions to support reading, doing, and sharing
of mathematics on modern tablet and handheld devices for IBSVI by balancing
across multiple modes of low-vision access, interactive sound, tactile and
haptic support, spatial landmarking, audio reading, interaction methodologies
and the structure of the mathematical expression. This will open the door to
personalized solutions that honor the ranges of visual abilities (e.g., degree
of tunnel vision, low-light capacities, tactile abilities) of IBSVI. The
research will investigate such multimodal reading, doing and sharing of
mathematics expressions starting in later elementary and middle
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research begins with the proposition that
information representation is designed for the sighted. The non-linearity and
hyper-dimensionality of mathematical expressions are encoded spatially and are
intended for visuo-spatial access and exploration. Furthermore, reading and
doing of mathematics is cognitively intensive, requiring years of learning to
build literacy. The project will address this chicken-and-egg problem where
literacy is needed to access mathematical material, and mathematical material is
needed to build literacy. This problem is compounded by the range of visual and
tactile abilities of IBSVI, who have a range of central vision acuity, light and
color sensitivity, degree of tunnel and tactile ability. The project will
develop a 6-element model comprising coarse visual cues, tactile-landmark
overlay grid configuration, audio/sonification feedback and reading, interaction
methodologies, dynamic haptic feedback; and structural organization of the
mathematical content. The model will be balanced for the range of mathematical
access needs and IBSVI visual/tactile abilities, and will curate a solution
space for supporting reading, doing, and sharing of mathematics. Reading, doing,
and sharing will be treated in tandem for students at the upper elementary and
middle school levels at the Texas School of the Blind and Visually Impaired
(TSBVI), where teachers will work with project researchers in an iterative
design, implement, and test process to address the authentic mathematics needs
of their students. Students will have sustained access to the research products
so that researchers can gain insight into how IBSVI learn 'and adapt to
technologies, avoiding the 'one-shot-syndrome' that often prevents research
approaches from moving beyond insights from first use
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.