* 1910149
* AF: Small: Faster and Better Algorithms for, and via, Mathematical Programming Relaxations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Chandra Chekuri, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Optimization algorithms underpin fundamental advances in computer science,
engineering and social sciences. As an example, the spectacular success of
machine learning in the recent past is partly due to the important role of a
class of continuous-optimization algorithms. In another direction there have
been a number of breakthrough advances on fundamental and widely applicable
problems for graphs and networks, such as the maximum-flow and minimum-cut
problems, based on fruitful interactions between continuous optimization and
discrete optimization. Increasing data-set sizes and new models of computation
require further advances in optimization algorithms to reap the rewards of the
data revolution. This proposal aims to develop faster approximation algorithms
for a class of continuous-optimization problems and to leverage these algorithms
to obtain faster approximation algorithms for several well-studied and
applicable problems in discrete and combinatorial optimization. The project will
support and train one PhD student in the design and analysis of algorithms at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The investigator plans to write
a survey on recent developments on fast approximation schemes for positive
linear programming with an emphasis on applications to implicit programs that
arise in combinatorial optimization. The investigator will continue to develop
and teach a course on algorithms for big data at the University of Illinois and
lecture notes and related material will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus of the project is to develop
fast approximation algorithms via mathematical-programming relaxations for a
number of fundamental problems in discrete optimization. This involves
developing fast algorithms for solving the relaxation as well as fast algorithms
for rounding. The interplay between discrete and continuous methods will be an
important technical viewpoint. The project will have two thrusts. The first is
to develop fast algorithms for solving positive linear programs and several
concrete applications. A particular focus will be on implicit linear programs
that arise in combinatorial optimization. The second thrust will be fast
algorithms for the traveling salesperson problem (TSP) and related problems in
both undirected and directed graphs. Applications to submodular objective
functions will also be considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.