* 1910530
* RI: Small: A Differential Geometry Paradigm for Constructing a Semantic Mid-Level Representation for Multinocular Pose Estimation and Reconstruction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Benjamin Kimia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 486,000.00

3D vision is the process of constructing a scene from images obtained from
multiple cameras or a single camera that is moving throughout the scene.
However, current 3D vision suffers some problems due to three core issues: the
emphasis on points rather than on curves and surfaces; sub-optimal integration
of information from multiple images, and the need for richer semantic
geometrical structuring of the scene. This project aims to rectify all three
shortcomings by developing new technologies which work with curves and surfaces,
integrate information from multiple cameras simultaneously, and use semantic
primitives to describes objects in the scene. These developments will complement
and present an invaluable addition to the plethora of existing techniques for 3D
pose estimation and reconstruction, especially in textureless scenes such as
man-made environments. Applications of this research include robotics,
entertainment industry, archaeology, architecture, urban modeling, and
metrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an end-to-end technology
for pose estimation and scene reconstruction using differential geometry of
curves and surfaces. First, it develops the technology necessary to use point-
tangents as opposed to just points in the pose estimation process,
transformative in reducing the number of necessary correspondences using
information that is already available. It will also identify the minimal
problems in this area. Second, the approach would allow for the integration of
information from many cameras using intuitively defined geometric equations that
can easily extend beyond three cameras, important in applications like visual
odometry. Third, it develops a technology for surface reconstruction from a 3D
curve graph acting like scaffold, while also taking into account both
unorganized point reconstructions in textured areas and a novel set of
differential photometric constraints in textureless areas. Fourth, it integrates
the image-based grouping process with a simultaneous 3D reconstruction process
resulting in a mid-level representation as a topologically connected set of
curve fragments and surface fragments, which better matches the requirement of
semantic and functional tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.