* 1910283
* I-Corps:  Restoration of Ovarian Endocrine Function in Adolescent Girls with Premature Ovarian Insufficiency
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Ariella Shikanov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to identify
stakeholders and customers and to develop the most appropriate path forward to
translate the company's technology to the clinic and bring it to the patients.
Currently young girls suffering from premature ovarian insufficiency (POI) as a
result of anticancer treatments have limited and inadequate options to undergo
puberty and start their transition into adult life. The existing hormone
replacement therapy (HRT) applied to induce puberty in girls with POI leads to
long-term morbidities, such as decreased bone density, predisposition to obesity
and diabetes. The company's technology allows the restoration of ovarian
endocrine function in prepubescent girls and has the potential to become a
central mainstream treatment for POI, which would result in significant
improvement of the short and long-term health and eliminate long-term
morbidities associated with premature ovarian failure. The commercial benefit of
the proposed treatment would result from significant lower health costs
associated with obesity, diabetes and osteoporosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project will further the company's understanding of the current state of
the field and the value of the proposed technology, and help identify the next
steps for preclinical and clinical studies. The company developed an
immunoisolating capsule that supports the survival and function of ovarian
allograft eliminating the need for immune suppression. The company's central
hypothesis is that ovarian tissue secretes the gonadal hormones, estradiol,
progesterone, androstenedione, activins and inhibins, in response to systemic
hormone stimulation in a pulsatile and dynamic rate required for physiological
progression through puberty, growth and associated metabolic changes.
Experimental data from in vivo mouse and primate studies have demonstrated
promising results of restoration of hormone function integrated in the endocrine
system and neuroendocrine axis, with no evidence of immune rejection or local
inflammatory adverse response. The next critical steps in the company's project
is to perform customer discovery and identify partners for first-in-human
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.