* 1910014
* III: Small: Task-aware Materialization for Fast Data Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Paraschos Koutris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 428,998.00

The data-to-knowledge pipeline is central to our data-driven world. It consumes
data in raw format and then cleans, transforms, integrates, stores, processes,
and analyzes the data to obtain knowledge in a usable format. Data analytics
pipelines are complex and their workflows typically consist of several simpler
tasks chained together. To speed up such pipelines, a ubiquitous optimization
technique is to materialize the intermediate result of a task, so that
downstream tasks can access the intermediate data as efficiently as possible.
Existing materialization techniques suffer from several drawbacks, including
prohibitively large cost in terms of storage and preprocessing time. To address
these drawbacks, this proposal will develop smart materialization algorithms
that can significantly accelerate the performance of data analytics
applications. As a result, it will enable data scientists to obtain actionable
insights faster and will impact research in areas such as biology, economics,
sociology and the medical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to design, implement and evaluate materialization techniques using
three novel ideas: task-aware materialization; fine-grained decisions on what
and how to materialize; and multiple design points that can trade off space for
time to achieve optimal performance of data analytics pipelines. The project
will also explore how to design data structures for materialization that are
adaptive to changes in the data and the downstream workload. From a theoretical
viewpoint, the proposed research will aim to obtain theoretical guarantees on
the tradeoff between space and time for materialization for different tasks.
From a practical viewpoint, it will result in implementing and evaluating the
developed algorithms on real-world data analytics applications, including
visualization through lineage tracking, statistical inference, pattern retrieval
in graphs and social network analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.