* 1910075
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Managing Thermal Integrity in Monolithic 3D Integrated Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Emre Salman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Monolithic three-dimensional (M3D) technology is an emerging integrated circuit
(IC) paradigm to maintain the exponential growth in transistor density in future
computing platforms. At a time when the fundamental limits of conventional
scaling are fast approaching, M3D ICs have the potential to enhance energy
efficiency at lower cost. A fundamental challenge in building complex M3D ICs is
to efficiently control the on-chip temperature. This project will develop a
systematic framework to assess chip-level thermal characteristics and ensure
thermal integrity in M3D ICs. Since temperature management is one of the most
challenging roadblocks for emerging M3D systems, the proposed research will have
a transformative impact on future semiconductor electronics. The methodologies
to be developed will be tightly coupled with recent advances in M3D fabrication
process, thereby strengthening the applicability and impact of this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past decade (and particularly last several
years), IC research community has witnessed highly encouraging developments on
reliably fabricating M3D chips. Despite the growing interest on multiple aspects
of this emerging technology (such as process optimization, computer-aided
design, heterogeneous integration), a reliable framework for ensuring thermal
integrity in dense M3D systems does not yet exist. This research fills this gap
with specific emphasis on leveraging M3D-specific characteristics during both
efficient thermal analysis and temperature management. These unique
characteristics include the existence of large number of thin layers, lower
temperature requirements during the fabrication process of upper tiers,
capability for flexible partitioning at different granularity, exacerbated joule
heating, and strong thermal cross-talk among the tiers. The primary objective is
to facilitate future progress on both design and fabrication aspects of M3D
technology by developing a comprehensive framework for managing thermal issues.
This objective will be achieved through (1) compact yet sufficiently accurate
thermal models with high fidelity and (2) M3D-specific design techniques to
ensure thermal integrity. The results of this research will provide a better
understanding of unique thermal characteristics in M3D chips and help mitigate
these thermal issues through efficient analysis and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.