* 1910106
* The pebble accretion model for planet formation: understanding thermal and chemical histories of astrophysical pebbles
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Zhi-Yun Li, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 06/30/2024
* USD 506,847.00

In the theory of planet formation, one of the biggest unknowns is how small
pebbles, that is, particles of roughly millimeter to centimeter size, coagulate
to form the initial planetary building blocks (planetesimals). A new model
called "pebble accretion" might be able to solve this problem. In the model, the
gas in the protoplanetary disk slows the pebbles around a planetesimal by
frictional drag. The slowed pebbles gently accrete onto the planetesimal instead
of hitting at high speed and fragmenting. However, there many unknowns in the
model, and nobody knows how well it will work. This project will refine the
pebble accretion model by studying the chemical changes that occur in pebbles as
they move through the gas in the accretion disk, and by accounting for the
thermodynamics of the planetesimal. Success of the proposed work will give a
better understanding of how planetary systems form, including our own Solar
System. The team will compare their results to Solar System bodies, as well as
observations of planetary accretion disks in other solar systems (where planets
are currently forming) by the Atacama Large Millimeter/Sub-Millimeter Array
(ALMA) facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program focuses on numerical
hydrodynamics simulations of the pebble accretion process, initially with two
separate efforts that are later combined. One effort will incorporate the
chemical evolution of pebbles as they move through the gas in the accretion
disk. The other will incorporate realistic thermodynamics for the planetesimal
and surrounding proto-atmosphere, as well as the effects of atmospheric drag on
the infalling pebbles. The team will separately produce global numerical
simulations of pebble accretion which track the history and chemical evolution
of all solids accreted by the planet. Finally, the team will combine both
approaches into one self-consistent model and use the results to develop
synthetic observations that they can directly compare to ALMA observations of
accretion disks and sub-disk structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.