* 1910441
* AF: Small: Symmetry, Randomness and Computations in Real Algebraic Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Saugata Basu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Sets defined in terms of real polynomial inequalities, called semi-algebraic
sets, are ubiquitous in science and engineering. Consequently, it is very
important to have efficient algorithms for computing properties of semi-
algebraic sets. One drawback of semi-algebraic geometry is the very high
algorithmic complexity for such algorithms. Semi-algebraic sets tend to get
topologically very complicated as the number and the degrees of the polynomials
defining them, as well as the dimension of the ambient space, increases. Thus it
is very important to identify situations, especially from the point of view of
practical applications, where this increase in topological as well as
algorithmic complexity can be controlled in a better way. The project will
address several key questions in algorithmic and quantitative semi-algebraic
geometry concentrating on the phenomenon of reduction in complexity induced by
symmetry, as well as by randomness, in various situations. The project will have
impact on several areas of mathematics and computer science and will train two
graduate students in quantitative and algorithmic real algebraic geometry and
its modern applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A part of the project will deal
with quantitative and algorithmic questions related to semi-algebraic sets
equipped with a group action. Since the action of the group descends to the
cohomology of such sets, the cohomology spaces get an extra structure of being
finite-dimensional modules over the group. This gives the advantage that one can
study the cohomology of such sets and compute their dimensions using the
structure of this module. The investigator plans to exploit this basic idea to
develop algorithms with exponentially better complexity than the best algorithms
for the same problems for general semi-algebraic sets. Since semi-algebraic sets
equipped with group actions occur frequently in practice, these algorithms will
have many practical applications. The second part of the project will deal with
random algebraic geometry, which is a relatively new and rapidly developing
topic. Since, unlike complex discriminants, real discriminants disconnect spaces
of parameters, there is no unique generic situation in real algebraic geometry.
Thus, study of real algebraic geometry often involves difficult classification
problems that soon become intractable, e.g. Hilbert's sixteenth problem. An
attractive alternative that also has practical applications is to choose an
appropriate measure and study expected statistics (such as Betti numbers) of
real varieties, rather than consider all possibilities. The investigator will
explore several problems through the probabilistic lens afforded by a widely
studied Kostlan measure, with the goal of proving that the typical behavior of
semi-algebraic sets defined by randomly chosen polynomials is often much better
than the worst-case deterministic behavior, and translate this reduction of
complexity into corresponding algorithmic results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.