* 1910001
* Concept Feasibility Study for a High-Performance Telescope Array
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Jin Koda, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 07/31/2022
* USD 462,295.00

Very dim galaxies challenge our understanding of how all galaxies formed. This
project will construct a telescope optimized for studying such galaxies. It will
use several refracting telescopes to form the equivalent of one larger
telescope. This telescope will be used to study the outskirts of our Milky Way
galaxy and other galaxies. The telescope will also be used to search for Earth-
like and even sub-Earth-mass planets around nearby stars. It will be made
available to educators and for public outreach. The project will develop,
implement and promote a new software infrastructure that allows access to the
telescope array to be allocated on either a per-hour or per-observation basis.
Credits for access to the telescope array will be distributed to researchers,
educators, and public outreach institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
developments indicate that (1) ultra-low-surface-brightness galaxies pose a
significant challenge to galaxy formation and evolution scenarios and (2)
telescope arrays built from off-the-shelf refracting telescopes are ideally
suited to identifying and studying these galaxies. Further, due to rapidly
developing commercial CMOS technology, very large-format (150 Mega-Pixel), very
rapid-read-time (less than one second), very low-read-noise (less than one
electron) CMOS cameras are just now becoming available. This project will
exploit these developments by building a high-performance telescope array,
located in the Southern Hemisphere, to obtain deep images of regions of the sky
at an unprecedentedly rapid cadence of 60 seconds. The low-surface-brightness
sensitivity of the array will enable studying the very outer regions of the
Milky Way, LMC, SMC, and other nearby galaxies and detecting ultra-diffuse
galaxies in nearby clusters and in the field. The rapid cadence of the array
will enable detecting transiting Earth-like planets in the habitable zones of
white dwarfs and studying microlensing signatures of Earth- and sub-Earth-mass
extra-solar planets and asteroids toward the Galactic bulge. This project has a
high potential to yield unexpected discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.