* 1910100
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Rigorous Approaches for Scalable Privacy-preserving Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bo Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 208,000.00

One of the most salient features of this time is the dissemination of massive
amounts of personal and sensitive data. Despite their enormous societal
benefits, the powerful tools of modern machine learning, especially deep
learning, can pose real threats to personal privacy. For example, over the last
few years, it has become evident that deep neural networks have a remarkable
power in learning even the finest details from large complex data sets. With
such powerful tools, the need for robust and rigorous guarantees for privacy
protection has become more crucial. The last decade has witnessed the rise of a
sound mathematical theory, known as differential privacy, that enables designing
data-analysis algorithms with rigorous privacy guarantees for their input data
sets. Despite the noticeable success of this theory, existing tools from
differential privacy are severely limited in offering acceptable utility
guarantees when dealing with complex models like those arising in deep learning.
This project will address those limitations by offering new principled
approaches for designing differentially-private deep-learning algorithms that
can scale to industrial workloads. The project will also involve collaboration
with industry, which will facilitate the evaluation of the developed algorithms
on real-world datasets and the development of open-source software tools. The
products of this project have the potential to transform the way massive sets of
sensitive data are used in modern machine-learning systems, which will impact
the way these systems are designed and implemented in practice. The activities
of this project will also aim at promoting diversity in computing by recruiting
women and members of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will develop a rigorous, multi-faceted design paradigm for
scalable, practical, differentially private algorithms for modern machine
learning. This paradigm is based on two general strategies: (i) exploiting
realistic and useful properties of the data and the machine-learning models to
circumvent existing limitations in the literature on differential privacy, and
(ii) leveraging a limited amount of public data (that has no privacy
constraints) to boost the utility of the algorithms. Based on these strategies,
the project will pursue following directions: (1) developing a new, generic
framework for utilizing public data in privacy-preserving machine learning, (2)
designing improved iterative training algorithms that can bypass the standard
use of the so-called "composition theorem" of differential privacy, and (3)
designing new differentially private stochastic-gradient methods tuned
specifically to non-convex and over-parameterized machine-learning
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.