* 1910526
* CHS: Small: Enhancing EEG-based Emotion Estimation  with Transfer Learning, Priming, and Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Thompson, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,973.00

Emotions influence the decisions we make every day. However, emotions are
difficult to measure. Surveys, the traditional method of emotion measurement,
take significant time and cause interruptions. Further, people do not always
know their own emotions -- think of the times when a person has shouted, "I'm
not shouting!" Direct emotion-measuring systems, based on sensors worn on the
body or head, have shown promise but are not yet ready to compete with surveys.
This project includes several new techniques designed to increase the
reliability and performance of these systems. The project will lay the
groundwork for wearable devices that can be used outside the laboratory, in
environments as varied as classrooms and theme parks. From there, this research
could lead to the development of human-computer systems which adjust in real-
time to maintain a person's interest. Such systems would be valuable for all
levels of education, as well as entertainment and other fields. During the
project, women and members of underrepresented minorities will participate, both
as researchers and as research participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is one of the first to combine emotion-estimating Brain-Computer Interfaces
(BCIs) with three methods: transfer learning, emotion priming, and virtual
reality. Transfer learning is expected to help BCI systems detect real emotions
rather than setting-specific brain responses. Transfer learning techniques will
be applied to data from different emotion elicitation paradigms to study how
well training data from standard methods can be expected to work in new
environments. An alternative training technique from psychology called "emotion
priming" will be used, and the effects on transfer learning will be studied.
Emotion priming is expected to increase the accuracy of emotion elicitation,
increasing the quality of training data and thus system performance. Virtual
reality will be used to manipulate the participants' arousal states through a
larger range than is possible through pictures and videos, in order to generate
more transferable results. Together, these investigations are expected to
dramatically improve the performance and, critically, the cross-task reliability
of these systems. Because the study of emotion impacts nearly every field of
human study, the development of a system for real-time measurement of valid
emotions has the potential to advance cross-disciplinary transformation.
Overall, these tests will fill a knowledge gap in the scientific literature, and
inform how future general-purpose emotion estimation systems are trained. In
addition, the project will provide shared data that may lead to even greater
advancements in the BCI field when used by future
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.