* 1910864
* RI: Small: Modules for neural computation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Konrad Kording, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 452,742.00

Artificial intelligence need not replicate the human brain, but may
constructively take inspiration from it. The brain is organized hierarchically,
from large brain structures to smaller regions, cortical columns, all the way
down to microcircuits made of a few interacting neurons. These modules may make
our brains more efficient by dissecting problems into locally solvable
subproblems. This in turn may make us learn faster by figuring out where in the
brain a mistake was made and allow us to do better on new problems. Modules may
also make the brain more efficient, allowing it to use fewer neurons and
synapses. In those areas where brains seem to benefit from modularity, modern
deep learning systems appear to be weaker. Building modules into deep neural
networks promises to greatly improve generalization, interpretability, credit
assignment in learning, computational cost and make them more resilient to
adversarial stimuli. The result of this project will be improvements to the
performance and understanding of modern artificial intelligence systems. The
project will contribute in a broad way to the dissemination of computational
results to neuroscience and of neuroscience results to the computational
community through a combination of summer schools, teaching, and publishing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet these goals, this project enables a broadly
interdisciplinary approach both to produce systems with modularity and to
dissect their modular aspects. The research aims to build networks that, while
learning, dissect training tasks by incrementally developing structural modules.
This is done by minimizing cost functions that evaluate the community structure
of neuron connectivity. It will design learning algorithms that encourage
modularity by performing credit assignment at the level of modules. This is done
by gating learning at both the neuron and the module level. Finally, the project
team will develop tools for interpreting modular networks. This is done by
performing psychophysical experiments with human subjects and by computational
analysis. All of these components interrelate, provide a unified picture of how
modularity can improve current machine learning approaches, and build a new
bridge between neuroscience and deep learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.