* 1910309
* CIF: Small: Fundamental Tradeoffs Between Communication Load and Storage Resources in Distributed systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Daniela Tuninetti, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,000.00

Future data communication networks will have to support multitude of devices
abundantly spread all over, collecting, processing and transferring data on the
fly. Such networks are expected to struggle to meet the demand from such data
communication needs. At the same time, the devices can leverage their
inexpensive and distributed memory units to reduce the cost of exchanging
information. A key question is which data should be placed in the memories so
that, irrespective of what the devices will be requested to compute in the
future, the amount of communication to satisfy these requests will be the
smallest possible. The more devices the system can satisfy with a single
transmission, the larger the savings are in terms of reduction of the number of
transmissions. These savings translate to reduced communication costs and an
ability to run computation-intensive and latency-critical applications at
resource-limited devices. This project aims to develop the theoretical and
algorithmic foundation for distributed computation in presence of local and
limited storage resources for future hybrid hierarchical networks, where
distributed devices collaborate to solve big-data inference tasks. Despite their
fundamental nature, the results of this research are impact the design of
emerging communication models in industry. This project also develops a rich
educational program for students, who will acquire critical skills to be
successful in a competitive, diverse, and global workforce
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research identifies critical questions related
to communication in distributed peer-to-peer settings with local limited storage
resources. The technical aims of the project are divided into two related
thrusts: distributed cache-aided "Fog Radio Access Network" architectures and
peer-to-peer distributed data shuffling. The former problem models the hybrid
network architecture envisaged for 5G wireless networks, while the latter finds
applications in distributed computation in big data and machine learning
algorithms. Both share the caching theme, i.e., leverage local storage to reduce
global communication load, but more importantly leverage the distributed nature
of the encoding in either the delivery or data shuffling phase. The concomitant
technical questions are novel in many aspects, and span information theory,
coding theory, and combinatorics. The research includes innovative approaches to
derive converse and achievable bounds, with provable performance guarantees. The
overarching goal is to develop a fundamental framework for distributed
computation, with implications to other open problems such as distributed index
coding and distributed interference alignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.