* 1910510
* Collaborative Research: Deconvolving the southern South American Pleistocene-Holocene dust production pathways
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* David Barbeau, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 191,823.00

Dust blown from the South American continent into the oceans has been an
important source of nutrients for marine organisms and is part of a complex
natural system that influences atmospheric CO2 levels over geologic time. Our
current understanding of how this system has operated in the past is limited,
largely because we have little information on when, where or how dust has been
generated on the continent. This project will trace individual grains of wind-
blown dust archived in the geologic record of southern South America in order to
determine where dust has been produced in the recent past, how it was
transported across the continent and then blown into the atmosphere, and how
these processes have changed through time and under different climates. The
information will help link terrestrial, atmospheric and ocean sciences, refine
future climate models, and foster collaborations between U.S. and South American
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine sediment sources
and transport pathways of central and southern South American loess deposits
using single-grain detrital mineral geochronology on silt- to sand-sized
sediment. Large observation (i.e., Large-n) U-Pb detrital zircon geochronology
will be applied to trace sediments through their production pathways in order to
determine the location and relative contribution of dust sources over time.
Samples will be collected from the Andes mountains, modern and recent river
deposits, and from loess and loessoid units in the foreland basin. These data
will help resolve conflicting models of South American dust production derived
from previous geochemical and geological approaches, and be used to reconstruct
spatio-temporal variations in dust production across the region. Results from
this investigation will shed light on hypothesized dust-climate feedback systems
operating in this sector of the southern Hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.