* 1910497
* CIF: Small: Reconstructing Multiple Sources by Spatial Sampling and Compression
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Prakash Narayan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 475,000.00

The mathematics of signal processing underlies much of the modern digital world
today. Digital signal processing relies on a technique called sampling, that
allows information to be gathered about the underlying signal using a subset of
samples from the signal, and information theory is used to describe fundamental
principles of sampling. This project takes an information theoretic approach to
develop fundamental principles that govern sampling of a small subset of a much
larger set of correlated signals and processing them efficiently in order to
reconstruct accurately a desired larger group of signals. These principles will
be useful in myriad applications, for instance, in: potential smart homes with
multiple networked smart sensor devices operating under transmitter power and
channel bandwidth limitations; aerial surveillance systems for monitoring city
traffic patterns or forest covers in which sources of information far outnumber
the unmanned aerial vehicles or satellites that can be deployed; computer vision
systems where data obtained from a limited camera scan and sensing must be
interpolated to form a larger picture; and spotting trends in large social
networks by polling small groups and gathering contextual
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tasks the signal processing system is to perform
include: limited random sampling of spatially correlated time-signals; compress
the samples for efficient channel transmission or storage; and recover, by
decompression, a desired larger subset of the original signals with high
accuracy. Optimality of such signal processing relies crucially on methods for
estimating the unknown statistical behavior of the joint signals. A common
framework will be developed for analyzing interwoven concepts of spatial signal
sampling, estimation of joint signal statistics, lossy compression and signal
reconstruction. New information theoretic formulations and approaches will be
developed in this project with the objective of understanding basic underlying
principles that will lead to implementable signal processing algorithms. The
technical approach involves the development of a theory for signal processing
with three main distinguishing features: (i) coordinated random spatial sampling
of subsets of multiple correlated signals; (ii) statistical learning of unknown
signal probability distributions; and (iii) universal rate-efficient lossy
compression of sampled signals followed by reconstruction. The objective is to
reconstruct a predesignated subset of signals with a specified level of
accuracy. Processing of the signals must be universal in that the combined
sampling, learning and compression must be robust in the face of inexact prior
knowledge of the underlying probability distribution of the signals. Rooted in
information theory, this research project also explores innate connections to
joint probability distribution learning (in statistical learning theory) and
correlated multi-armed bandits (in machine learning). The larger goal of the
project is to understand connections among universal spatial sampling,
distribution learning and compression rate-distortion performance. Furthermore,
it aims to create advances in information theory through the introduction of new
models and concepts, and in probability distribution learning and machine
learning through new formulations and solutions. Expected outcomes are new
techniques for joint distribution learning; and a characterization of
fundamental performance limits and the structure of optimal universal sampling
and compression that will guide algorithm design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.