* 1910878
* FET: Small: Stochastic Synthesis of Peptides and Small Molecules
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project accelerates the development of new drugs. Currently, the process of
developing a new drug takes an average of 12 years and tens or hundreds of
millions of dollars. Consequently, only a handful of new drugs enter the market
every year. It is essential to bring the level of automation inherent in
computing disciplines to the life sciences. The search space for possibly
beneficial and life-saving biomolecules is enormous. The proposed approach will
ensure that only biomolecules likely to satisfy the desired properties are
enumerated and empirically evaluated. Accelerated growth in the pharmaceutical
industry strengthens the US economy by creating desirable biotechnology jobs,
and increases our overall global competitiveness in
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies program synthesis
principles to automate the discovery of new drugs. The chemist is allowed to
specify the characteristics of the desired drug using a domain-specific
specification language. For example, a chemist developing a novel peptide drug
(a sequence of amino-acids) may request that amino acids at specific positions
have certain chemical properties, or that certain constant sequences of amino
acids with known behaviors appear in specific locations in the peptide. The
chemist can also specify the target proteins in the mix to which the peptide
drug should or should not bind. The binding strength of a drug translates to its
efficacy. Given a drug specification, the synthesis process automatically
identifies a ligand that complies with the specification, can be safely
synthesized and strongly binds to the desired
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.