* 1910859
* FET: Small: Theoretical and Algorithmic Foundations of Covert Quantum-Secured Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Matthieu Bloch, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

With the widespread of communication networks, protecting the ever growing
amount of sensitive information transiting through these channels has become a
daunting challenge; in an ever more complex and competitive interconnected
world, the mere act of creating and communicating sensitive information may
become a liability. This project will help address this security challenge by
developing systems that exploit quantum properties (such as those of photons
encountered in optical systems) to ensure that communications can remain secret
(in the sense that the information content is protected) and covert (in the
sense that the presence of communication cannot be detected). The project will
develop theoretical models in quantum information theory and algorithms that
offer provable guarantees for secrecy and covertness. In addition to
investigating quantum information-theoretic aspects of secure covert
communications, the research team will mentor students engaged in this research,
develop a graduate level course on quantum information theory, and engage in
collaborative efforts to experimentally test and demonstrate the proposed models
and algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design and analyze
protocols for communication over quantum channels between legitimate parties, in
such a way that the parties can provably assert if their communication has been
detected and generate secret keys with provably low-probability of detection.
Supported by preliminary results, this project will explore how to encode
information onto sequences of quantum states and how to decode the sequences
after transmission through a noisy channel, in such a way that adversaries that
are limited only by the laws of quantum physics can neither detect nor extract
information. The main challenge addressed is how to reconcile the need for using
an extremely diffuse information content to escape detection while still being
able to process the information at a receiver. The performance of the proposed
secret and covert key generation protocols will be compared to that of
established quantum key distributions protocols through the development of a
precise quantum information-theoretic framework in which to study the
possibility of covert and secret key generation over quantum channels; the
design of low-complexity algorithms allowing one to process the diffuse
statistical information content of covert signals; and the experimental
validation of theoretical models and algorithm in an optical
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.