* 1910064
* CHS: Small: Auditing Critical Dependencies Between Online Media Platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Christopher Wilson, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,811.00

This research will audit the dependencies between major online media platforms,
with a focus on major search engines, and investigate the extent to which they
rely on content from social media platforms. In recent years, the web has
centralized around a small number of mega-platforms that attract the bulk of
people's attention and the majority of content. Social media and search engines
in particular dominate people's online time, and serve as de-facto "homepages"
for many users. As these media platforms have grown to prominence, so too have
concerns about their power to create and shape online spaces. All of the large
online platforms use socio-technical algorithms to rank, filter, recommend, and
moderate content, thus privileging some information at the expense of other
information. Although mass media has always functioned this way, the novel
concern is that the algorithms that implement these processes are opaque, making
them difficult to understand, disintermediate, or contest. Algorithm auditing
has emerged as a powerful approach to increase transparency and accountability
around "black-box" systems, but the vast majority of existing audits fail to
grapple with the dependencies between major online media platforms.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to answer several high-level questions, including:
What fraction of search results link to social media? What social media
platforms and authors appear in search results? How do links to social media
vary by query? Are results for social media personalized? Do links to social
media increase content diversity, or are they a vehicle for misinformation? With
respect to simultaneous audits of search engines versus YouTube and Twitter,
more specific questions will be investigated about how the algorithms on the
social media sites (such as "like" recommendations and trending topics or
videos) influence search results. Further, because Google Search and Bing both
integrate specialized search components from Twitter and YouTube, simultaneous
audits will jointly investigate how the algorithms on these pairs of platforms
interact. To conduct these algorithm audits, hybrid techniques will combine
carefully controlled experiments from the vantage point of real users with
simulated online identities created by the auditor. This allows answering
questions about the impact of algorithmic curation, as well as revealing some of
its underlying causes. One major challenge when auditing online platforms is
achieving ecological validity. Here, this means selecting queries that are
representative of those executed by real people. To address this challenge, the
research will leverage a unique dataset of Google Search queries from a panel of
over 350 participants. This set of queries will be expanded with additional
terms curated from other sources, and queries will be diversified using
autocomplete suggestions. The results of this new algorithm audit methodology
will be useful to the general public, strengthening their media literacy, as
well as to the designers of the platforms themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.