* 1910021
* Observations to Constrain the Origins of Hot Gas Between Galaxies and Clusters of Galaxies Across Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Battaglia, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 353,116.00

This project addresses the question of why galaxies look the way they do
throughout the history of our universe. It will focus on the warm/hot gas that
surrounds galaxies and provides them with fuel to form new stars. There is only
incomplete theoretical understanding of the physical processes within galaxies
that heat and alter this surrounding gas. This project will measure the imprint
of this gas on leftover photons from the big bang which will provide new and
critical information on the physics of these processes. This project will also
run a pilot program to spark the interests of preschoolers in astronomy at two
Agri-Business Child Development (ABCD) centers. The ABCD program offers
comprehensive early childhood education to low-income families where both
parents are agriculturally employed. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
constrain feedback processes in galaxies using cross-correlation measurements
from large-scale structure surveys and cosmic microwave background (CMB)
experiments. Feedback processes play an important role in theories of galaxy
formation and evolution. They are thought to regulate star formation in galaxies
and affect the large-scale distribution of matter in our universe. An essential
aspect of feedback not well understood is its impact on the reservoirs of
warm/hot ionized gas that surrounds galaxies, the circumgalactic medium (CGM),
which provides galaxies with new or recycled material to form new generations of
stars. This project uses observations of additional fluctuations in the CMB
(specifically the Sunyaev-Zeldovich effects) to probe the thermodynamic history
of the CGM and provide essential information on the role of feedback in galaxy
formation and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.