* 1910678
* Signatures of peculiar velocities in the cosmic microwave background
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Elena Pierpaoli, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 377,720.00

The statistics of the peculiar velocity field of galaxy clusters (i.e., motions
not related to expansion of the universe) are highly informative about the
nature of dark matter, dark energy, and the theory of gravity. Currently,
peculiar velocity measurements on large scales are limited to only the line-of-
sight components of clusters, leaving most of the available information in the
velocity field inaccessible to us. The yet-undetected transverse components can
be traced through the cosmic microwave background (CMB) via two effects: (i) the
Birkinshaw-Gull (BG) effect in CMB temperature, and (ii) the Kinetic Sunyaev-
Zeldocivh (kSZ) effect in CMB polarization. In this research, we make a
realistic assessment of the detectability of these signals with the near future
CMB experiments, and also investigate the possibility of exploiting the
statistics of these signals for cosmology. The PI will develop a creative
educational product for K-12 students to promote awareness of and interest in
physics and cosmology, in particular the physics of galaxy clusters and
structure formation. K-12 teachers will be trained to use this educational
product leveraging on existing relationships via the USC family of schools. The
developed material will also be available online for all educators willing to
download and use it.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The amplitude of both BG and kSZ
effects are subdominant with respect to the primary CMB anisotropies and current
instrumental noise levels. Aside from this, the signals can be confused with
other emissions from within and outside the clusters, gravitational lensing
effects, and uncertainties in clusters' physical description. Therefore, it is
almost impossible to observe these effects for individual objects. Nevertheless,
it is still possible to achieve a successful detection of them by employing
novel statistical methods in the analysis of data. One example is to use
pairwise statistical estimators which have been shown to significantly increase
the detection signal-to-noise ratio. Throughout this project we will investigate
the possibility of measuring these signals in the near future using the next
generation of CMB surveys. We will provide forecast analyses through semi-
analytical and numerical simulations of clusters and introduce proper map-
filtering techniques and new statistical tools for this purpose. The current
general interest in producing larger and deeper CMB surveys with improved
intensity and polarization sensitivities makes this an appropriate time to
further the study of peculiar velocities and inspect their cosmological
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.