* 1910132
* RI: NSF-BSF: Small: Reconstructing Shape, Lighting and Reflectance Properties of Indoor Scenes from Video
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* David Jacobs, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 493,297.00

The goal of this project is to allow someone to use a video of an indoor scene,
such as a room in a house, to reconstruct the scene. The reconstruction will
contain all scene properties needed to enable images of the scene to be rendered
from new viewpoints, with new lighting. To do this it is necessary to recover
the depth and shape of every point in the scene. It is also necessary to
describe how each point in the scene reflects light, and to recover the lighting
in the scene. This technology will enable a wide range of applications in
virtual and augmented reality. For example, it will assist in generating images
that show what a room would look like if the furniture were changed, or to allow
augmented reality teleconferencing, in which physically separated speakers
appear to chat in the same room. The project will educate several graduate
students. The investigators will also develop related undergraduate research
projects, and projects for an AI summer camp for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One reason such inverse rendering is challenging
is the lack of labeled real data. The investigators will address this deficit by
using multi-view input for training and solving jointly for all components of
the scene. This will allow them to use a self-supervised multi-view photometric
reconstruction loss, enforcing consistency across views. They will combine this
real data with a large new dataset of highly realistic synthetic data. They will
also develop a unified architecture that recovers pose between views and
combines geometric and photometric information. This will allow the system to
predict appearance changes across viewpoints and to determine whether measured
appearance is consistent with recovered lighting and reflectance properties.
They will also develop novel representations of lighting in scenes, and of the
way that objects reflect this light that are compact and
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.