* 1910868
* CIF: Small: Mathematical Tools for Unifying and Simplifying the Analysis and Optimization of Wireless Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Annamalai Annamalai, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 420,878.00

The advent of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices that are connected through
wireless networks will dramatically transform the way people and machines
interact with their world, enabling many new applications ranging from
environmental sensing and disaster relief to smart grids, intelligent
transportation, and mobile healthcare. Given the limited wireless spectrum, any
wireless communication technique should optimally utilize the limited radio
resources. Network operators should be able to quantify the performance of the
emerging adaptable wireless networks under realistic assumptions of propagation
environments prior to deployment. However, the design space for such exploration
is huge and an exhaustive exploration of this space via experimental studies
and/or simulation approaches is typically impractical, time-consuming and/or
expensive. This project attacks this challenge by developing novel analytical
tools that are both simple in form and easy to evaluate, yet yield accurate
performance predictions in relevant operational regimes. These tools will yield
deep insights into the dependence of various design parameters on system
performance. This knowledge, in turn, will guide wireless system engineers and
network operators in their designs and efficiently perform system trade-off
studies at a fraction of computer simulations run-time and costs, especially at
early design stages. The educational and outreach activities will substantially
improve the wireless research and education infrastructure at a historically
black university and produce a skilled workforce in a rapidly growing field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, it is extremely challenging to accurately
characterizing the wireless link layer performances of advanced transceivers
that capture the non-linearity of the propagation medium, multi-path fading and
co-channel interference. The principal difficulty stems from finding
analytically tractable expressions (preferably in closed-form) for the density
function of various arithmetic combinations (e.g., partial sums, ratios,
products, powers) of random variables drawn from generalized fading
distributions. Moreover, limitations of the state-of-the-art exact analytical
tools impede efficient computations of some important new wireless performance
measures such as the higher-order statistics of channel capacity and symbol
error probabilities in generalized fading channel models. This project seeks to
address these challenges by focusing on three specific research tasks: (1)
develop new classes of asymptotic performance bounds/approximations for
accurately predicting wireless networks perturbed by multi-path fading and
interference in generalized stochastic fading environments; (2) develop closed-
form exponential-type approximations for powers of the conditional error
probabilities of digital modulations as well as alternative integral
representations for the Nuttall-Q, Marcum-Q and incomplete Gamma functions that
will facilitate the statistical averaging task of random variables in their
arguments; and (3) build upon the mathematical tools developed in tasks (1) and
(2) in unifying and simplifying the analysis and optimization of emerging
wireless systems. This project's framework is expected to yield computationally
stable and efficient solutions to numerous wireless performance analyses
problems that heretofore had resisted solutions in simple forms, facilitate
investigation and development of cross-layer design rules for next-generation
adaptable wireless networks as well as bridge some knowledge gaps in wireless
communication theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.