* 1910534
* AF: Small: Threshold Functions--Derandomization, Testing and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Anindya De, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 12/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Binary classification rules (or Boolean functions) are a standard way to get a
single binary (i.e., yes / no) decision from a large number of inputs -- an
example is when each voter casts an up / down vote and the outcome is up / down
depending on which motion receives a majority of the votes. A slightly more
involved example is when the function is not symmetric to all its inputs -- as
an example, in the European Union, each country is assigned a different "weight"
and a motion passes or fails depending on whether or not the "weighted majority"
votes yes or no. Such a classification rule (or Boolean function) is called a
linear threshold function (LTF) in mathematics and appears frequently in a
diverse range of areas including machine learning, computational complexity
theory, electrical engineering, mathematics, voting theory and even neuroscience
(where they were first studied as a way to model neurons in the human brain).
While simple and intuitive from a definitional point of view, LTFs are sometimes
inadequate to model more complicated types of classification rules (useful in
areas such as machine learning). In this project, the investigator will study
two natural generalizations of LTFs which are significantly more expressive than
LTFs and overcome this barrier; on the other hand, their definitional proximity
to LTFs make them amenable to rigorous mathematical analysis. Aside from
studying these functions through the lens of computational complexity theory,
this project will also explore applications of these functions to areas such as
machine learning, quantum computing and information theory (i.e., the
mathematical theory of communication). The project will train graduate students
who will achieve fluency in complexity theory and one or more of these
application areas. In addition, several of these topics will also be
incorporated in a new graduate course on Boolean functions taught by the
investigator at the University of Pennsylvania. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first generalization is a so-called "Polynomial
threshold function" (or PTF) which, roughly speaking, allows us to model "higher
order effects" (as opposed to LTFs which only allow for "linear effects" of the
inputs). The second generalization is a so-called "Intersection of LTFs" which
is a Boolean function obtained by applying several LTFs at once. Intersection of
LTFs are also a special case of convex bodies, a widely studied object in
computer science and mathematics. Jointly referred to as threshold functions,
these function classes admit simple geometric interpretations but remain poorly
understood from a complexity theoretic point of view. The investigator will
study these functions from three distinct vantage points: (i) Derandomization --
i.e., design of efficient deterministic algorithms to compute the probability
that a random input satisfies a given threshold function. (ii) Property testing
-- i.e., given black-box access to a function, design of an efficient algorithm
to test the hypothesis that the given function is a threshold function (either a
PTF or an intersection of LTFs). (iii) Harnessing the incredible expressivity of
these functions towards applications in information theory and quantum
complexity theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.