* 1910757
* NSF-BSF: CNS Core: Small: Improving Wireless Networks Robustness via Weather-Sensitive Predictive Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Gil Zussman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 475,000.00

This project focuses on the wireless networks that are used in the backbone of
cellular, smart cities, and emerging 5G networks. These networks rely on
millimeter-wave (mmWave) frequencies, which are sensitive to weather conditions
and specifically to rain events. Improving resilience to such events, the rapid
increase in wireless traffic, and the Quality of Service (QoS) demands of
mission-critical smart city applications, all call for dynamic network
management schemes. Therefore, weather-sensitive network control and management
approaches will be developed, aiming to improve network resilience and
performance. The innovation of this project is to use weather-affected
measurements of wireless link states in the network to accurately predict their
future states and to provide input to network control schemes. These schemes
include adjustments of links' modes and network topology to the moving rain,
prior to its effects on the signals. The algorithms designed will build on
extensive datasets of wireless links and the algorithms will be evaluated and
demonstrated in the National Science Foundation-funded COSMOS platform for
advanced wireless research (PAWR) testbed. The project will have a strong
outreach component, including programs for Harlem public school teachers and
Israeli K-12 students. On a societal scale, the development of algorithms that
enhance network resilience in face of weather events can improve network
connectivity in cases where it is most needed (e.g., emergency situations). In
general, enhancing the performance of future smart city and 5G networks will
help bridge the digital divide and bringing better connectivity to under-served
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project focuses on backhaul
and fronthaul networks which are currently transitioning to E-band (60-90
gigahertz) links that are very sensitive to rain events. Contrary to legacy (4G)
cellular networks where local physical layer adaptation has been sufficient, in
emerging smart city and 5G networks (that will require low latency and high
bandwidth), link and network layer adaptations will be essential. Algorithms
that use the self-extracted attenuation measurements from the network to predict
the channel states throughout the network will be developed based on
relationships between weather and signal attenuation. Then, weather-sensitive
cross-layered control algorithms will be developed. These algorithms will
jointly optimize power, modulation and coding, channel allocation, and routing
to satisfy QoS requirements in response to predicted changes in network
conditions. Finally, the project's contributions will include analysis of first-
of-their-kind mmWave backhaul measurements from a smart city network in Israel
and unique evaluation in a city-scale test-bed that integrates first-of-their-
kind mmWave transceivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.