* 1910193
* CNS Core: Small: Rethinking the Software Architecture for Mobile DNA Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Steven Ko, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 528,816.00

Portable DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) sequencers are new technology enabling
analysis of DNA in the field, outside of high-end biological laboratories. When
attached to mobile devices such as laptops or tablets, they provide in real-time
signals describing detected DNA. However, the current software tools required to
process and analyze these signals are not well suited for portable DNA
sequencing, limiting its possible applications. This project aims to develop,
and test in real-world use scenarios, new software system and algorithms to
enable DNA processing directly on mobile devices, without the need to access
advanced computational infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goal
is to make DNA analytics feasible directly on mobile supercomputers and
smartphones. The project breaks the rigid structure of the current tools in
three steps. First, it introduces new software abstractions, complete with
application programming interface, to express metagenomics DNA classification
workflows. Second, it provides supporting operating system components, including
domain specific memory manager for DNA databases, and heterogeneous tasks
scheduler. Third, it offers new algorithms for performing DNA reads mapping
directly in signal space, instead of the common string space. The validation of
the resulting solutions involves metagenomics survey of Great Lakes fisheries,
conducted in collaboration with the United States Geological Survey (USGS)
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software platform developed in this project makes
DNA analytics accessible to the end-users who have no access to advanced
computational infrastructure. By enhancing the USGS fish assessment procedures
with metagenomics, it contributes to the improved sustainability of both
fisheries and the communities that depend on them. Furthermore, the project
creates cross-disciplinary training opportunities, including new educational
modules and research internships, for graduate and undergraduate students in
Computer Science, Biomedical Informatics, and Environmental Engineering,
contributing to competitive workforce development. It also engages students from
inner-city Buffalo (New York) high schools to encourage their participation in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central project repository, including
project source codes and data, is open and publicly available, and maintained
at: http://www.score-group.org/doku.php?id=SMARTEn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.