* 1910598
* Measuring the Reionization of the Universe and the Growth of Molecular Gas at Cosmic Dawn with TIME
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Daniel Marrone, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,982,308.00

This project will develop a novel instrument to study the faint objects in our
universe across cosmic time. This project will illuminate how the first
astronomical objects ionized neutral hydrogen in the universe, an epoch called
reionization. The project will measure the rate at which new stars formed during
this epoch. The project will also engage young scientists, particularly
undergraduates and high school students from backgrounds that are typically
underrepresented in STEM. The project will help the students build networks of
mentors and peers at a variety of institutions. Such support networks are
critical for advancement in astronomy. They are often weak or absent among
students from marginalized groups. Thus this project will encourage broadening
participation in science among undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build the Tomographic Ionized-
carbon Mapping Experiment (TIME), a millimeter wavelength spectrometer. TIME has
16 spatial and 60 spectral pixels and spans a frequency range of 200-300 GHz.
TIME will use a novel technique for studying the universe called line intensity
mapping. Using this technique, investigators will robustly measure the 3D
fluctuations that trace redshifted [CII] emission spanning the epoch of
reionization to probe the evolution of our universe over that epoch. TIME will
also detect low-redshift CO fluctuations and map the cosmic history of molecular
gas, traced by the CO molecule, elucidating the role of this gas in the epoch of
peak cosmic star formation (cosmic noon), which is a critical period of galaxy
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.