* 1910853
* CNS Core: Small: Software-Hardware Reconfigurable Systems for Mobile Millimeter-Wave Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Srihari Nelakuditi, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2024
* USD 563,967.00

Millimeter-wave is a core technology for next-generation wireless and cellular
networks (5G and beyond). Networks using millimeter-wave technologies are
expected to satiate the rapidly growing customer appetite for mobile data and to
meet the stringent throughput, latency, and reliability requirements of emerging
applications, such as immersive virtual and mixed reality, tactile internet,
vehicular communications, and autonomous vehicles safety. However, high
directionality, high channel dynamics, and sensitivity to blockages render
state-of-the-art millimeter-wave technologies unsuitable for low-latency, high
performance, and ultra-reliable applications. This research project focuses on
designing software-hardware reconfigurable systems to address the key challenges
and improve the performance, availability, and reliability of mobile millimeter-
wave networks. This project will impact the broader population positively
because it yields near-term benefits in 5G infrastructure and paves the way for
long-term millimeter-wave research. Furthermore, this project will engage in
outreach activities and involve a diverse set of students, particularly, women
and minorities, leveraging the experimental nature of the research on next-
generation wireless and cellular networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses the key challenges by executing three thrusts: (1) MilliNet: To
overcome high signal attenuation, millimeter-wave radios must focus their power
via highly directional, electronically steerable beams. But, aligning the beams
and maintaining the link between devices during obstruction and mobility are the
fundamental barriers toward reliable connection. MilliNet, a faster beam
alignment protocol, draws on ideas from the sparse channel recovery, allowing
the radios to quickly discern the best physical millimeter-wave paths even under
thousands of beams and picocell choices. (2) ReconMilli: To achieve spectrum
flexibility, next-generation radios must be able to operate over a wide range of
the spectrum, from micro-wave to millimeter-wave. But the fundamental challenge
is that physical space on mobile devices is limited. ReconMilli, a
reconfigurable antenna design, joins multiple millimeter-wave antennas
physically into a micro-wave antenna, but splits it, when needed, into multiple
millimeter-wave antennas; thus, achieving spectrum flexibility and saving
physical space. (3) LiMesh: To make the deployment and maintenance of a 5G
picocell mesh easy, mobile operators will use multi-Gbps fixed millimeter-wave
links. Yet, disruptions in the wireless mesh are common; but, more importantly,
such disruptions are catastrophic for ultra-reliable connectivity. LiMesh, an
ultra-reliable picocell mesh design, leverages the fixed geometrical arrangement
of the directional links to infer disruptions using a space-time failure
correlation metric proactively. The research project will design, build, and
empirically validate the proposed systems in millimeter-wave wireless test-
beds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Computer and
Network Systems (CNS) division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.