* 1910030
* AF: Small: Shared-Memory Parallel Algorithms: Theory and Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Guy Blelloch, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2022
* USD 408,000.00

With the advent in recent years of multicore processors ranging from fifty
dollar hobby kits to multi-million dollar supercomputers, shared-memory parallel
algorithms have increasingly significant practical and theoretical relevance.
This project is developing new algorithmic approaches and results relevant to
today's shared-memory parallel machines. The impact of this project will be felt
in applications being able to make better use of the computational power of
modern multi-core architectures. The project seeks to develop library
implementations of many of these algorithms which will be made available to the
public. On the educational side, the project will result in coursework that will
help undergraduate students learn about parallel algorithms and their
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three areas. The
first is research on developing results in a model, the binary forking model,
that is more relevant to today's machines than some previous models. In
particular the model matches the software platforms that are available on most
parallel machines, and supports an asynchronous form of parallelism that are
most relevant to the machines they run on. The second area is to better
understand the parallelism already available in many sequential algorithms. The
goal is to derive algorithms that are simpler and more efficient. The third area
is to develop algorithms that allow the user to efficiently make batches of
updates to underlying data structures. This is referred to as batch parallel
dynamic algorithms, and follows significant prior work on sequential single
update dynamic updates. In the binary forking model each task can only fork into
two child tasks, but can do so recursively and asynchronously. At present no
tight performance bounds for the binary forking model are known even for some
basic problems such as sorting and graph connectivity, which this project seeks
to remedy. For the thrust on understanding parallelism in sequential algorithms,
the project will study the dependencies among sub-computations in iterative
sequential algorithms. In the thrust on parallel batched algorithms the project
is looking at applying the ideas to graph connectivity and related problems. The
goal is to achieve algorithms that are work-efficient relative to the best (or
near best) sequential algorithms---and in particular for graph connectivity to
achieve O(log^2 n) amortized work per update, while allowing batches of
updates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.