* 1910539
* OAC Core: Small: Scalable Non-linear Dimensionality Reduction Methods to Accelerate Scientific Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Jaroslaw Zola, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 04/30/2023
* USD 499,814.00

The progress in science and engineering increasingly depends on our ability to
analyze massive amounts of observed and simulated data. The vast majority of
this data, coming from high-performance high-fidelity simulations, high-
resolution sensors, or Internet connected devices, arise from physical processes
that, while complex and nonlinear, depend on only few parameters. However, these
low-dimension parameters are often hidden in the deluge of high-dimensional
data, and are frequently impossible to discover, and thus reason about, by the
existing methods. This project will develop new efficient methods to help
scientists and engineers, especially in manufacturing and robotics, to simplify
complex data such that dynamic processes underlying the data can be better
represented, understood and controlled. By leveraging nation?s advanced
cyberinfrastructure, these methods will accelerate pace of materials design,
reduce the cost and time-to-market of tailored devices, and aid the design,
control, and operation of new complex robotic systems. The research outcomes of
the project are closely integrated with the educational components, to train the
next generation of scientists and engineers on these new technologies, resulting
in a skilled and globally competent workforce, especially in the high-priority
areas of Artificial Intelligence, Data Science, and Scientific Computing. This
project thus promotes advancement of science, welfare and prosperity, as stated
by NSF's mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary research project
aims at developing scalable end-to-end non-linear dimensionality reduction based
solutions to accurately learn the dynamic behavior of complex systems. To this
end the project introduces new parallel primitives and algorithmic innovations
to enable deployment of non-linear spectral dimensionality reduction (NLSDR) and
manifold learning methods on the next generation extreme scale computing
systems. The project is based on the following key components: i) development of
novel locality-aware data distribution and task scheduling strategies for
individual NLSDR building blocks taking into account their inter-dependencies
when executing in distributed memory environments such as Message Passing
Interface and Map/Reduce clusters of multi-core processors, ii) design of new
algorithmic strategies to manage data influx while maintaining crucial
properties of the sub-manifold characterized by the data, and, iii) development
of end-to-end solutions for two transformative example applications pertaining
to advanced manufacturing and robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.