* 1910308
* RI: Small: Collaborative Research: Extracting Dynamics from Limited Data for Modeling and Control of Unmanned Autonomous Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* M. Ani Hsieh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2023
* USD 229,999.00

Autonomous robots can contribute to many real-world applications, such as
emergency response and search-and-rescue. For some applications, however, the
cost of deploying large robots may be too high, and small robots are preferred.
A common issue with such small robots is navigating reliably in the presence of
uncertainty. Current robot modeling and control approaches cannot capture the
intricacies imposed by the effect of uncertainty at small scales. In addition,
the small size restricts sensor and computational payloads, which limit the
robot's perceptual and control capabilities. This project introduces a data-
driven modeling framework to quantify and exploit uncertainty via control for
reliable navigation of small robots. The project enables undergraduate students
to become involved in research, and capitalizes on the student diversity at UC
Riverside, a Hispanic-serving Institution, to broaden participation of under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
mechanisms that uncertainties in robot-environment interactions affect robot
behavior. Small robot motion is more stochastic since errors at the actuators
and uncertain interactions with the environment amplify errors in pose. The goal
is to introduce a platform-agnostic, data-driven modeling framework to quantify
uncertainty and subsequently exploit it via control for reliable robot
navigation under uncertainty. The specific aims are to: 1) extract dynamics
using limited data for modeling uncertain systems; 2) synthesize uncertainty-
aware model-based controllers based on derived reduced-order models; and 3) test
and validate theoretical analysis and derived models and control algorithms with
aerial, ground, and marine robots. Spectral methods are used to extract spatio-
temporal dynamics and to quantify uncertainty. A model-reference adaptive
control scheme utilizes extracted dynamics and uncertainty for reliable robot
navigation. While the basic principles developed in this research are grounded
on small robots, this project's findings may generalize to larger robots with
limited sensing and noisy actuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.