* 1910346
* Collaborative Research: Starless Dark Matter Halos as a Definitive Test of Dark Matter Models
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Boylan-Kolchin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 363,393.00

Over the last 40 years, a large number of astronomical observations have
provided overwhelming evidence that approximately 80% of the mass-density in the
universe is in the form of dark matter. The leading theory for dark matter
posits that it is made up of as-of-yet undiscovered elementary particles of
nature, particles that are significantly more massive than the proton and have
very weak interactions with normal matter of the type that makes up the earth
and the sun and appears on the periodic table of elements. Importantly, the
leading theory ? known as Cold Dark Matter ? makes concrete predictions for the
way dark matter should be clustered and clumped in the space between visible
galaxies. Gravitational lensing is a technique that can potentially detect these
clumps. If they are detected and quantified as predicted it would provide the
most compelling evidence yet that the Cold Dark Matter exists. If not, then this
would be a major discovery that calls into question the leading theory of dark
matter. This project aims to make unprecedentedly accurate predictions of the
clustering and clumping of Cold Dark Matter structures and to interpret ongoing
efforts to utilize gravitational lensing as a test of dark matter models. The
proposal will also facilitate student training in high-performance computing,
data analysis, and quantitative reasoning, all of which are vital to future
economic vitality of the nation. The PIs will also devote considerable effort
towards high school teacher development, URM outreach programs, and public
science talks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal uses cosmological simulations
with an unparalleled combination of volume and resolution to rigorously quantify
properties of low-mass (M &lt; 107 Msun) dark matter halos. In the standard LCDM
cosmological model these halos are predicted to be starless and nearly baryon-
free. Gravitational detection of such dark matter structures would be
revolutionary, as it would immediately and definitively exclude all models that
explain observed mass discrepancies through modifications of Newtonian (or
Einsteinian) gravity. It would also rule out all models of dark matter with
truncated power spectra at this scale (e.g., the most popular Warm Dark Matter
models). The proposed work will provide predictions necessary to take full
advantage of upcoming gravitational lensing studies aimed at constraining the
number and properties of starless halos. The predictions rely on high
resolution, large cosmological volumes, and the inclusion of baryonic physics to
properly account for subhalo disruption, baryonic mass loss at reionzation, and
other dynamical feedback on the small halos under
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.