* 1910811
* Understanding the resilience of longleaf pine savannas following Hurricane Michael
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Gregory Starr, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 228,807.00

The Southern Longleaf Pine Ecosystem once covered much of the southeastern
coastal plain and is the most diverse forest ecosystem in the temperate zone.
Hurricanes are important and frequent disturbances in southeastern U.S.
ecosystems, and were important in shaping pre-settlement ecosystems. Hurricanes
significantly damage forests as the hurricane makes landfall and moves inland.
The damage extent varies with both hurricane characteristics and forest
composition and structure. Hurricane Michael moved across the Northern Gulf of
Mexico in 2018, resulting in catastrophic winds (Category 2 force) that reached
over 100 miles inland and caused extensive damage along its path. The storm's
impact to forests varied with local conditions (e.g. soil, topography) and the
forest management strategies present across this area. The implications of this
damage to the carbon, water, and energy cycles of these forests, the
relationships between impacts, storm intensity, and forest management, and how
the forests will recover are poorly understood. This RAPID award will explore
how the physical and ecological changes from hurricane damage affect the coupled
biogeochemical cycles of these forests. This award will provide local and
regional forestry and resource managers, conservation professionals, policy
makers, timber industry representatives, and small private landowners practical
understanding of hurricane impacts and the potential for recovery based on
demonstrations, development of management strategies, and potential policies for
natural resource management and conservation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this RAPID award is to determine the disturbance-related shift in
ecosystem structure and function as it relates to the resilience of the longleaf
pine savanna from disturbances such as hurricanes. In southern Georgia and
northern Florida, Hurricane Michael damaged longleaf pine forests by downing
whole trees and resulted in extensive loss of branches and leaves. Efforts to
maintain and restore longleaf pine ecosystems in this regional include long-term
studies that show the importance of its ecosystem services, including carbon,
water and energy exchange. Three of these long-term forest sites in the
southeastern NEON domain were in the hurricane path and are proposed to study
the mechanistic controls on carbon, energy, and water cycling following the
extensive hurricane damage. Using these sites, this study will provide a
vulnerability assessment of the effects of hurricanes and an understanding of
ecological resilience using thermodynamic metrics. The award will explore
fundamental thermodynamic concepts to understand the impacts and explain the
resilience and recovery of these forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.