* 1910368
* SHF:Small: Collaborative Research: Rectification of Arithmetic Circuits with Craig Interpolants in Algebraic Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Florian Enescu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 05/31/2023
* USD 189,861.00

Arithmetic circuits are a critical component of computer, communication and
cyber-security systems. Such circuits have to be designed for efficiency in
terms of power consumption, high performance and low cost. For this reason,
arithmetic circuits undergo careful and custom design. Manual custom design
raises the potential for errors or bugs in the circuits. Bugs in arithmetic
circuits can have catastrophic consequences with regards to safety and security
of systems. Attackers can maliciously exploit the vulnerabilities introduced due
to arithmetic bugs and compromise the security of cyber-infrastructure. To
address these issues, the investigators of this project conduct research to not
just detect the presence of bugs, but also to automatically rectify buggy
arithmetic circuits to make them free of errors. As the team of researchers has
expertise in computer engineering as well as in mathematics, the novelty of the
project lies in exploring cross-disciplinary concepts from these areas to auto-
correct arithmetic circuits, while maintaining low cost and efficient design
implementation. The project will impact the design of robust circuit backbone
for communication and cyber-security systems, as well as in ensuring cyber-
infrastructure to be resilient to arithmetic bug-
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the circuits perform arithmetic computations,
the investigators explore the concept of Craig Interpolation (CI) in the domain
of algebraic geometry. While the concept of CI is well known in many first-order
theories in logic and automated reasoning, it has not been studied from an
algebraic perspective. The investigators invent new theories and algorithms for
producing CI in algebraic geometry, and investigate how these algorithms can be
used to automatically rectify arithmetic circuits. A buggy arithmetic circuit
can be rectified in many different ways, i.e. many rectification functions can
be computed, each corresponding to different implementation costs. A key aspect
of the project's investigations lies in modeling the cost of logic synthesis of
rectification functions vis-a-vis the exploration of the lattice of all
algebraic interpolants. The project impacts computer-aided verification
technology, secure system design, and it advances knowledge and application in
mathematics as well as computer engineering. Validation of hardware for cyber-
security also protects the privacy and security of data, which has a direct
impact on our society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.