* 1910593
* CNS Core:Small: File System Offloading
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Sudarsun Kannan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,839.00

Computers use filesystems that facilitate applications to store and access data
in a storage device. Filesystems reside inside a trusted Operating System (OS)
and enable consistent, secure, and durable access to data. Applications run
inside untrusted user space and must cross the trusted OS boundary for accessing
storage hardware using filesystems. In this era of ultra-fast storage
technologies such as flash and nonvolatile memory, crossing the OS boundary for
input/output (I/O) access incurs high software overheads and impacts I/O and
application performance. Therefore, reducing software overheads is critical but
must be done without compromising data consistency, security, and
durability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the redesign of a
high-performance filesystem that allows applications to access the storage
hardware directly bypassing the OS, while respecting crash-consistency,
security, and durability. The project involves three research thrusts. The first
thrust identifies critical filesystem components responsible for crash-
consistency, security, and durability and offloads them into the storage
hardware allowing applications to bypass the OS. The second thrust explores the
use of accelerators for accelerating offloaded components for higher
performance. The third thrust redesigns offloaded components to exploit hardware
capabilities such as device capacitance that can reduce software overheads and
improve crash-consistency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By redesigning storage software,
this project has the potential to significantly improve I/O performance for a
wide domain of applications including Internet of Things (IoT) as well as
personal, datacenter, and mission-critical systems where running commodity OS is
not feasible. Equally, the ideas and prototypes developed will educate
undergraduate, graduate, and high-school students on the benefits of reducing
software overheads, understanding the hardware capabilities when designing
software, and hardware-software codesign. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate the
filesystem design, the project builds a software prototype and an accelerated
emulator running a wide-range of personal computing and datacenter applications.
The research publications, source code with documentation, and the instructions
for reproducing published measurement of the system will be made public and
available from the Rutgers University's
(https://www.cs.rutgers.edu/~sk2113/fsoffload) website maintained for the
duration of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.