* 1910796
* CNS Core: Small: Democratizing Network Hardware Offloads
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Srinivas Narayana, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 387,990.00

There are many practical applications for large-scale data processing. Examples
include weather prediction, scientific computing, and Google searches. While the
size of compute clusters has increased over time, the amount of data that can be
processed with a single compute server is a tiny fraction of the datasets,
placing a large burden on the interconnecting network that moves data among the
servers. Academic researchers and industry developers have endeavored to improve
the speed of this underlying network. Yet, the engineering effort required at
the server side to quickly and flexibly process data arriving over the network
remains enormous and out of reach for many application
developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to significantly broaden the
community of application developers benefiting from increasing network speeds.
The project leverages recent technological developments in network interface
cards (NICs) attached to servers, namely programmable NIC offload, to advance
developer-friendly abstractions, programming languages, and platforms. The main
technical contributions of this project are (1) an abstract NIC model to
represent diverse NIC substrates, and (2) compilation algorithms that translate
flexible developer programs into NIC implementations, and provide predictable
high throughput and low delay for the traffic processed by the NIC. The result
is to enable developers to process data flexibly on server NICs with guarantees
of high performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All software prototypes developed over
the course of this project will be released openly and freely to serve as
research experimentation platforms and as pedagogical tools. The PI will develop
curricular material to train graduate and senior undergraduate students in high-
performance network data processing. The project will also introduce research
activities to diverse high school student groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.