* 1910700
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: A Computational Theory of Brain Function
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Christos Papadimitriou, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

This project seeks to identify, explore, render rigorous, and validate one piece
of the solution to the puzzle "how does the brain work?" - one of the truly
fundamental and most challenging frontiers in all of science. Computation in the
brain will be approached at an intermediate level of scale, far larger than that
of individual neurons and synapses yet significantly smaller than that of the
whole brain. The core hypothesis is that "assemblies," large and highly
interconnected sets of neurons, are the engine of brain computation. Studying
computation at this level is crucial for understanding higher cognitive
functions, especially in humans, such as reasoning, planning, and language; and
this formulation of brain computation is particularly amenable to the
methodology and point of view of the theory of computation, and will further its
reach. This project is quintessentially interdisciplinary, and will provide
multi-faceted training to graduate and undergraduate students in Computer
Science Theory, Machine Learning, and Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology. It
will develop interdisciplinary graduate courses in this particular scientific
interface. The results of the project will be disseminated broadly via
conferences and journals in all these disciplines, but also in colloquia and
public lectures, while students of a great variety of backgrounds will
participate in a cutting-edge research experience.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Assemblies can be the basis of a powerful computational system
involving a repertoire of operations including project, associate, and merge.
These operations can be shown, through theorems and simulations, to be plausible
(that is, they can be "compiled down" to the level of neurons and synapses) and
useful (in the sense that they can help explain extant experimental results).
The project will pursue this assembly hypothesis through: (1) expanding our
modeling and our mathematical techniques of analysis for the study of assembly
computation; (2) developing more accurate and efficient simulation methodology;
(3) embarking on a multi-pronged exploration of the computational power of
assemblies in novel modalities beyond formal computation, in particular (a)
probabilistic and dynamical systems-like computation through pattern completion
and (b) learning and prediction; (4) mathematical modeling and algorithmic
investigation of the ways in which the dynamics and biases of synaptic
connectivity, as well as assembly overlap, affect the various modes of brain
computation; and, importantly, (5) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
experiments, and the analysis of the results of these experiments and extant
electrocorticography (ECoG) data through novel algorithmic and machine learning
techniques for the purpose of identifying evidence of assembly computation in
the human brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.