* 1910023
* Long Time Behavior for Partial Differential Equations in Random Media
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Leonid Ryzhik, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

This project carries out mathematical studies of physical, biological and social
dynamics systems in heterogeneous and random environments. Such systems are
ubiquitous in nature, and include examples as diverse as ecology, economic
growth, and fluid turbulence. The mathematical modeling of such problems
involves partial differential equations with highly oscillatory coefficients.
Typically, such problems involve a multitude of temporal and spatial scales, and
numerical simulation of the microscopic details of the solutions is beyond reach
even of the modern computers. A typical propagation distance may be of the order
of hundreds or thousands of wavelengths and as many correlation lengths of
random fluctuations. This necessitates the use of various approximate
macroscopic effective models in practice. The overarching goal of the project is
to develop a better understanding of the validity of such macroscopic models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the first part of the project is to develop
new tools and better understanding of the effective limits for equations of the
parabolic type, starting with the random heat equation, and then for nonlinear
problems arising in the fluid dynamics and reaction-diffusion modeling, with the
focus on very long time scales, when fluctuations in the solutions start
building up in ways beyond the classical central limit theorem time scales. The
second part of the project investigates the qualitative behavior of the
solutions of systems of integro-differential equations that arise in
macroeconomics. Such equations model phenomena from the diffusion of knowledge
and GDP growth to the international trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.