* 1910571
* FET: Small: Efficient Inference Tools for Quantum Systems: Algorithms, Applications, and Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jianfeng Lu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Quantum information science has entered an exciting new era. Researchers are now
actively trying to build quantum computers that can achieve significant gains
over classical computers. For example, Shor's quantum algorithm for factoring
large integers can achieve an exponential speedup over the current best
classical approaches. To realize this goal, however, researchers must design
fault-tolerant protocols that deal with the fragile nature of quantum phenomena.
In this broader context, this project will design efficient protocols to extract
reliable information from noisy quantum devices. Another part of this project
will use information-theoretic tools to study the information-processing power
of quantum networks. The results are expected to have broad applications in
quantum information science. The PIs will also mentor graduate students and
provide undergraduate research opportunities in quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to distinguish quantum states is
an important part of quantum communications and quantum information science.
Even in relatively simple quantum systems, it can be difficult to design and
implement good protocols for quantum state discrimination. One goal of this
project is to answer the question: Are there efficient methods of quantum state
discrimination that apply to large classes of practically relevant states? This
is related to another part of the project, whose goal is to understand the
strengths and limitations of quantum technology in the emerging era of noisy
intermediate-scale quantum devices. This project will investigate the rate at
which information and entanglement decay in noisy quantum networks. For
instance, we will derive noise thresholds, below which information and
entanglement can propagate through networks. Such results can be applied to
fault-tolerant quantum computing and also to analyze information scrambling in
chaotic quantum systems, such as black holes. Many research directions in this
project are built upon mathematical tools for analyzing quantum systems, such as
the strong data-processing inequality. The final part of this project will
develop these tools and derive information-theoretic limits for quantum state
discrimination and quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.