* 1910274
* CHS: Small: Efficient Simulation of Thin Materials With Discrete Tension Field Theory
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paul Vouga, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 494,077.00

Thin shell simulations are a foundational tool in scientific computing. They are
used to analyze the behavior of biological structures such as vesicles and cell
membranes, to simulate deformation of fabrics and composites, to predict
scarring and wrinkling of skin in surgery training and visualization tools, and
to analyze buckling and crumpling of structural elements in buildings and
vehicles. This research will establish new algorithms for simulating the
physical behavior of thin curved materials such as fabric, paper, or sheet
metal, with unprecedented efficiency, whereas such simulations currently are
notoriously difficult and computationally expensive because thin objects like a
sheet of paper or cloth bend far more readily than they stretch and will prefer
to buckle and crumple in geometrically complex ways rather than compress.
Moreover, this complexity is unpredictable and chaotic; the exact pattern of
wrinkles can vary wildly even for identical objects under identical loads.
Finally, predicting how a thin object behaves under frictional contact with
itself and the environment is especially challenging; due to the thin geometry,
expensive collision detection and response algorithms must be used to ensure
that thin parts do not tunnel through each other, no matter how quickly or
forcefully they are pushed together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make thin material
simulations more practical for use in engineering, design, and robotics
applications, where performance is critical, this project will develop a more
efficient, simplified model for how to simulate deformation of thin materials.
The key insight, borrowed from the tension field approach in continuum
mechanics, is that the behavior of thin objects is dominated by lines of tension
through the material, while fine-scale wrinkles induced by compression and
bending are extraordinarily expensive to resolve yet contribute little to the
object's coarse-scale shape or mechanical behavior. By exploiting this insight
and focusing computational effort on tracking and simulating the lines of
tension, the performance of thin shell simulations can be substantially improved
without sacrificing accuracy. Put another way, in regions of pure tension the
elastic membrane energy is convex and standard shell finite element methods
perform well. Whereas in regions of pure compression, or mixed tension and
compression, buckling occurs since there is a scale separation between the
resistance of thin materials to compression and to bending, and the post-buckled
state of the shell contains many highly nonlinear, complex wrinkles and creases,
yet the coarse shape of the shell can nevertheless be approximated by ignoring
the wrinkles and treating the shell as a collection of 1D curves aligned to the
tensile stress directions on the shell. The detailed work plan will comprise
work on tension-dominated surfaces, mixed-stress surfaces, and contact and
friction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.