* 1910347
* Conference on Information and Communication Technologies for Development 2019 - Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Neha Kumar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 12/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports student participation at the Tenth International Conference
on Information and Communication Technologies for Development (ICTD). ICTD
studies and seeks to improve the impact of technologies on social, political,
and economic development, particularly in lower-resource contexts and countries.
Such contexts pose unique constraints and opportunities that can highlight
assumptions about how we build and design technology; addressing these
assumptions can improve our ability to design and deploy beneficial technology
both in the U.S. and abroad. The funds will primarily support U.S. students
selected for the conference's doctoral consortium who do not have other
available funding to support their attendance. As colloquium participants, these
students will receive valuable feedback about their dissertation research and
have opportunities to interact with a number of ICTC scholars, particularly the
doctoral consortium mentors. This, in turn, provides opportunities for their
professional development and strengthens the ICTD research community. The
organizers will make a particular effort to reach students traditionally
underrepresented in computer and information science and engineering in order to
broaden the impact of the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The colloquium will
take place on Jan 4, 2019. Before the colloquium, students and mentors will
prepare by reading each others' materials. The bulk of the colloquium will
consist of small-group discussions in which mentors and students interactively
discuss the focus, contributions, methods, and ethics considerations around each
participant's dissertation proposal. There will also be full-group discussion of
professional issues, such as navigating the job market, developing and funding a
research program, and negotiating work-life balance. Applications will be
reviewed by three of the organizers and selected based on the relevance and
clarity of their research to the conference topics, students' career stages, and
financial need. The organizers will also work to ensure diverse attendance and
mentorship in terms of research topics, methods, locations, institutions, and
student's personal and intellectual backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.