* 1910268
* CNS Core: Small: Supporting Massive Wireless Connections in the Internet-of-Things (IoT) with Multiple Zadoff-Chu (MZC) sequences
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Zhenghao Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 496,751.00

In this project, a novel wireless Low Power Wide Area Network (LPWAN)
technology, referred to as MZC, for Multiple Zadoff-Chu, will be designed. LPWAN
is a crucial component in Internet of Things (IoT), which will improve everyday
life and business efficiency. IoT depends on LPWAN technologies to maintain
connections to the devices, which face unprecedented challenges, because the
communication range may be long, the number of devices may be very large, and
the devices may rely on a single battery for years. MZC will offer significant
advantages over existing solutions in network capacity, speed, communication
range, and power consumption. Preliminary experimental results show that MZC
outperforms LoRa, a leading LPWAN technology, using less than one-eighth of the
bandwidth resource, as well as much lower signal power, which suggests that MZC
will achieve over 8 times the network capacity and a longer communication range
or a longer battery life. Given its potential benefit, MZC will become a very
strong contender and may potentially reshape the LPWAN technology landscape.
This project will advance the knowledge on fundamental issues in wireless
communication and networking in the very low Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) regime.
Results obtained in this project will be used in related classes. Undergraduate
students and students from underrepresented and minority groups will be actively
recruited.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;MZC is motivated by the excellent properties of
the Zadoff-Chu (ZC) sequence, which have been used and proven in LTE (Long Term
Evolution) networks. In MZC, a transmitted ZC sequence will generate a peak at
the receiver, the location and phase of which can be used to modulate data. A
number of tasks will be investigated, with the goal of optimizing the design at
every layer, and implementing a functional prototype to facilitate the
transition to practice. In particular, first, the physical layer will be further
optimized with better methods and error correction codes to cope with signal
degradation and error caused by practical issues such as synchronization error
and carrier frequency offset. Second, a hybrid Medium Access Control (MAC) layer
will be designed, which has both a scheduled access method and a random access
method, the latter based on a novel scheme called Peak Location Division
Multiple Access (PLDMA). Third, core problems in the networking layer will be
solved to maximize the overall network capacity, exploiting the low interference
among ZC sequences with different roots, which allows nodes to use the same
frequency channel without causing significant
interferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.