* 1910891
* CNS Core: Small: Towards Seamless Mobility in Mobile Edge Computing Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jiang (Linda) Xie, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Mobile edge computing (MEC) has emerged as a promising technology to overcome
the challenges of executing latency-sensitive and computation-intensive
applications at resource-limited mobile devices, by pushing mobile computing,
network control, and storage resources to the edge of mobile wireless networks.
The mobility support issue is considered as a critical component to ensure the
success of MEC. Although the mobility support issue has been extensively
investigated in conventional wireless networks, mobility management schemes
proposed in these networks consider the communication-only scenario, while MEC
networks tie communications together with computing activities. Therefore, many
issues related to mobility support in MEC networks remain unexplored. Existing
communication-oriented mobility solutions will have serious performance
degradation due to the neglect of computation related metrics in mobility
solutions. In addition, new uplink and downlink traffic distribution in MEC
creates unique challenges for seamless mobility support. This research will help
generate innovative mobility support techniques for numerous applications, e.g.,
autonomous driving, cognitive assistance, mobile health, and Internet of
Everything. It will also have significant impacts on research in emerging
technologies with high mobility scenarios, such as connected vehicles and
unmanned aerial systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to design, analyze, and evaluate new algorithms for providing
seamless mobility support in mobile edge computing (MEC) networks with
integrated computing and communication activities. The proposed design is aimed
at minimizing service disruptions and performance degradation caused by user
mobility in MEC. This research is the first that systematically addresses the
unique challenges encountered during the course of seamless mobility support in
MEC networks. This project includes three research tasks to achieve the seamless
mobility goal: (1) design a smart handoff triggering scheme to achieve a fast
and accurate trigger for seamless mobility support; (2) design a service
rebuilding process for seamlessly restoring offloaded services on the new MEC
server after a handoff is triggered; and (3) design a service allocation scheme
to minimize performance degradation during mobility caused by radio resource
allocation unfairness. This research offers fundamental building blocks and
provides invaluable insights towards seamless mobility in MEC networks. This
project also integrates research findings into related graduate courses and
diversity support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.