* 1910603
* CHS: Small: Improving user trust of autonomous vehicles through human-vehicle collaboration
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Nicholas Giudice, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 531,878.00

Fully autonomous vehicles (FAVs) represent a key future direction for
transportation, especially for populations who are currently disenfranchised by
traditional, manually operated vehicles, such as those with visual impairments
or older adults. Unfortunately, the benefits of self-driving technology for
these demographics have yet to be adequately considered in the design of FAVs.
This concern is part of a larger problem in which the majority of people simply
do not trust that self-driving cars will meet their needs. This project explores
new ways to share decision-making information between people and FAVs. Instead
of existing systems where the FAV makes the decisions in a "black box" way that
users don't see or understand, the project will develop a Human-Vehicle
Collaboration (HVC) framework in which effective communication about the
vehicle's decision-making process improves users' sense of agency and decisions
around trusting the FAV. Through studying people's reactions to and
understanding of FAV driving decisions and developing algorithms and interfaces
that help FAVs communicate in ways that address them, the HVC framework will
promote appropriate levels of trust in FAVs for all users, while providing
substantial benefits around improving accessibility for under-served
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HVC framework will be designed and
evaluated using a high-fidelity driving simulator that tests new interaction
methods for sharing information during key driving events. Research will use
this simulator and experimental platform to manipulate a host of variables
relating to decision states while driving. Human data will be collected on
reaction time, interpretation of vehicle decision-making, physiological measures
based on galvanic skin response and heart rate, as well as pre-post survey
measures for assessing trust in fully-autonomous vehicles. Results will form the
foundation for developing and testing HVC profiles that provide individualized
interactions and collaborations during driving events. These profiles and the
resulting guidelines represent a key deliverable for the project as they will be
designed from the outset to improve trust, accessibility, and the overall
optimization of fully-autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.