* 1910225
* CHS: Small: A Genealogical Framework to Understand the Emergence of Online Groups
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Brian Keegan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,724.00

The project will study the emergence of online groups by examining their
overlooked but important connections to existing groups. New online groups do
not appear spontaneously, but are created by users who participated in existing
online groups. A new group's early members carry their own activity history,
which reveals their past group memberships as well as the relations between
existing groups and this new group. The ability to trace the behavior of users
before they start new groups presents a unique opportunity to understand how new
groups emerge, how social norms arise in new groups, and what factors contribute
to the success of new groups. This research will quantitatively model the
genealogical relationships between online groups by tracing the sociotechnical
lineage of "child" groups through their early members' previous participation in
"parent" groups. Platform administrators or group moderators can use
genealogical approaches for adopting existing norms in other groups,
recommending new groups to users, and identifying opportunities to create new
groups. A genealogical perspective can also explain the variability in group
success as well as how norms spread throughout online groups. This work will
enable transformative changes in online communities, either via redesign of
their platforms or through implementation of new community
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project draws on theories about formation of
online communities, organizational ecology, and kinship to explore how a group's
position within a genealogical graph influences the group's identity, norms, and
success. This research will analyze log data about user behavior over time from
Reddit and Wikipedia. Aggregating the socio-technical lineages of multiple
groups together generates a genealogical graph documenting how new groups emerge
from the old. These genealogies will be evaluated across platforms, users, and
time. The project will advance human-centered data science methods by employing
qualitative methods, such as interviews and focus groups, to validate the
proposed genealogical graphs, which will inform quantitative methods for
building genealogy graphs from large-scale log data sets and analyzing their
structure and dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.