* 1910133
* CNS Core: Small: Lease-based, Utilitarian Mobile System Design to Enable Energy-Efficient Apps
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yinzhi Cao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Mobile devices are a pervasive computing platform with a rich set of programming
interfaces for third-party developers to write software applications. However,
mobile application programming is challenging. Software developers need to
consider user interactions, changes in the conditions in which the mobile
application is running, and carefully monitor resources on the mobile device. As
a result, many mobile applications have software errors (bugs) that waste energy
and cause the battery to be discharged quickly. The goal of this project is to
provide a comprehensive solution to reduce energy waste caused by software bugs
and enable application developers to create energy-efficient
apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project studies how real-world
applications with energy bugs behave by collecting their runtime information and
characterizing the energy misbehavior. This project then explores a utilitarian
mobile operating system design with a new abstraction lease, to manage mobile
resources efficiently even when applications have energy bugs. To facilitate
application developers to leverage the new operating system design, this project
further designs new interfaces for developers to define custom utility, a
library to perform online optimization on utility and energy efficiency at
application runtime, and an energy profiler to optimize low-utility
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile applications today provide services integral
to our daily life. Building energy-aware applications is ever more important.
This project can effectively improve our understanding of application runtime
behavior, significantly reduce the impact of potential energy bugs, and help
application developers more easily build energy-efficient applications. This
project will also promote teaching, outreach, and training by exposing students
to the real-world challenges and design principles in building energy-aware
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outcomes include paper
publications, technical reports, presentations, course material, datasets, and
software. The outcomes will be made available for download at
https://www.cs.jhu.edu/~huang and be maintained for at least five years beyond
the completion of the project. The source code of the new mobile operating
system design will also be released and available on
GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.