* 1910192
* RI: Small: Robust Models for Sequence Labelling in Social Media Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Thamar Solorio, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2024
* USD 323,918.00

In the last decade social media platforms have increased their impact on the way
people communicate; these platforms are now considered an essential
communication tool that people use broadly to share information, but also to get
informed about the latest events on any topic. Consequently, the information
running through those platforms, generated by users, companies, the media, and
political entities, is extremely relevant to understand current events,
behaviors, and more, and the automated distillation of this data is of great
practical value. Current technology for text processing fails to perform
information extraction accurately on social media data since these sophisticated
algorithms have been trained on highly edited English text with a narrow set of
topics, such as that in newswire data. In contrast, social media data has a
fluid grammar, a very large vocabulary, unlimited topics, and includes multiple
languages that are often mixed in the same text. This project addresses the many
challenges involved in the automated processing from social media sources.
Additionally, the research team will develop and release new annotated data that
will enable new research in this direction. Furthermore, this project will
address broadening participation in computer science by supporting graduate and
undergraduate students, several of them from underrepresented groups in Computer
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying premise of this project is that a
tighter coupling of representation learning with linguistic and domain knowledge
will allow the models to learn the tasks by distilling all relevant linguistic
abstractions in each single text, without requiring prohibitively large amounts
of labeled data, as is typically the case in end-to-end deep-learning models.
This award will design robust approaches for sequence labeling tasks that can
analyze social media data with a two-pronged approach. First, the research team
will study the challenges imposed by social media data and their correlation to
prediction performance. Then the investigators will design new model
architectures for sequence labeling tasks where domain and linguistic knowledge
supervise the learning process. The evaluation of the proposed models will
include data from different social media sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.