* 1910551
* RUI: Using a Large Sample of White Dwarf Stars to Study Stellar Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kurtis Williams, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2024
* USD 273,424.00

White dwarf (WD) stars are the endpoint of stellar evolution for the vast
majority of stars. As such, they are useful forensic probes for studying the end
stages of the stellar life cycle. A white dwarf is a compact star that contains
the mass of the Sun within a volume comparable to that of the Earth (about a
million times smaller). White dwarfs no longer undergo nuclear fusion like the
Sun, but continue to glow from residual heat for billions of years. A research
group at Texas A&amp;M University-Commerce will carry out a program to use data
from the Gaia space mission combined with observations from ground-based
telescopes to double the sample of known WDs in young open clusters, or
groupings of a few thousand stars of about the same age. These scientists will
use this large sample of WDs to address several open questions in a range of
astrophysical areas including: variability in total mass lost by stars during
late stages of stellar evolution, the lower mass of the progenitors of
supernovae, or stellar explosions, the evolution of close multiple star systems,
and the fate of planetary systems. This project will expand an existing
successful effort to improve undergraduate student learning and retention in
introductory STEM classes by providing funding to train and mentor undergraduate
learning assistants for revised, learner-centered introductory astronomy
courses. The project will also offer first-generation college students and
underrepresented students from depressed rural areas opportunities to
participate in astronomy research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;White dwarf stars in
open star clusters are versatile and powerful forensic probes for studying the
end stages of the stellar life cycle. In particular, white dwarf studies allow
us to constrain the total mass lost by stars during their post-main sequence
evolution, the lower mass limit for core-collapse supernova progenitors, the
formation rate of double degenerate systems, rotation rates of red giant cores
and their coupling to the star's envelope, and white dwarf atmospheric and
structural evolution. White dwarfs in open star clusters are especially useful
tools in large part because the many crucial stellar parameters are known,
including total age (white dwarf cooling time plus progenitor lifetime) and
metallicity. The project builds on earlier studies of white dwarf stars in open
clusters made by the investigators; parallax and proper motion data from the
Gaia mission and multi-epoch deep imaging of open clusters virtually eliminates
uncertainties in cluster membership, vastly reducing the number of inferences
currently made in the published literature. Through the use of national, state
and local university facilities, the researchers expect to nearly double the
number known open cluster white dwarfs and to be able to implement ensemble
studies of white dwarf formation and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.