* 1910302
* New Wide-band Digital Technology and   Interference Excision for Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Ryan Lynch, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 03/31/2024
* USD 745,194.00

Radio astronomy lets us see an otherwise invisible side of the Universe, and in
doing so allows us to study topics as diverse as the birthplaces of stars and
planets, black holes and Einstein's theories, and the very fate of the Universe.
Research in these areas is becoming increasingly difficult, however, because so
much of the technology that we rely on in our daily lives, like cell phones and
wireless internet, also emit radio waves. These can overwhelm weak cosmic
signals. This project will make use of cutting edge digital technology to
develop the next generation of sensitive detectors for radio telescopes. It will
also improve our ability to share the radio spectrum with non-astronomers by
differentiating between human-made and cosmic radio signals. This project will
provide an educational experience for first-generation college students. It will
give them a hands-on research experience and the skills needed for future
success in technical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New analog and digital
technology is making it feasible to process ever larger radio bandwidths; but
this comes as the radio spectrum is seeing increasing commercial, civil, and
private use. This project will develop the next generation of digital technology
for radio astronomy. It will lay the foundation for more stable and sensitive
wide-bandwidth, high data-rate instruments on the world's most sensitive radio
telescopes. At the same time, the project will develop new techniques for
identifying and removing human-made radio signals while preserving scientific
data. The project includes a summer internship for first-generation college
students. Students will help to build a catalog of human-made radio signals
while learning valuable professional and technical
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.