* 1910997
* FET: Small: Collaborative Research: Integrated Spintronic Synapses and Neurons for Neuromorphic Computing Circuits - I(SNC)^2
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Jean Anne Incorvia, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 308,882.00

There are many pressing problems today where data-intensive tasks are needed to
be accomplished in real time. This can range from sequencing DNA, to self-
driving cars recognizing a person walking by, to predicting the trajectory of a
flying object. In these examples, traditional computing faces a performance wall
where the computing time and energy is severely limited by memory access. If
computers could be built closer to the way the brain computes, where memory and
computation are densely connected together like the neurons (and synapses) of
the brain, these tasks could be performed with a million times less energy. This
requires doing research on designing and building artificial neurons and
synapses, and research on connecting them together into neuromorphic circuits.
Due to the many different kinds of problems this new type of computing will
address, research in this area will have impact not only in the semiconductor
industry, but also far-reaching impact in medicine, defense, and new
technologies. This project will educate and train multiple Ph.D.-level and
undergraduate students in this interdisciplinary field, with skills highly
sought after in academia, national labs, and industry. It will also have
significance for broadening participation of women and under-represented
minorities in computing: the researchers seek to educate and train women and
Hispanic students from their state of Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanodevices
made from magnetic materials (such as iron) have many properties that make them
uniquely suitable as artificial neurons and synapses to enable such computing.
Nevertheless, a number of technical problems remain in using magnetic devices
for neuromorphic computing, which this project aims to address: there has been
little experimental study of circuits that combine spintronic neurons and
synapses, the devices and circuits designed so far do not capture all the
desired biological behaviors, and there have been no circuits designed that
operate without external silicon-based devices. This interdisciplinary
collaborative effort between experiment and circuit design will address these
challenges by building and studying circuits using three-terminal magnetic
tunnel junction devices. The research will result in design and fabrication of
new types of these magnetic devices that more accurately represent the brain's
functions, and in measurements of the magnetic devices' behavior in circuits.
The project has the potential to establish magnetic materials as a platform for
neuromorphic computing, similar to how silicon is the platform material for
traditional computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.