* 1910840
* CIF: Small: Leveraging Coding Techniques for Distributed Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Aditya Ramamoorthy, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 492,271.00

Clusters of computer processors that process huge amounts of data at specialized
locations called data centers are ubiquitous in both industry and academia. The
usage of distributed clusters is a necessity rather than a luxury since many
modern datasets are too large to be stored in the memory or disk of a single
computer. However, using such clusters to obtain answers quickly and efficiently
presents many new challenges. These include dealing with issues such as slow or
failed processors (ie., worker nodes) and taking into account the time for these
worker nodes to communicate among themselves for collaboratively executing a
job. Such issues are critical, as it is well-recognized that for such large
scale systems, worker node failures are the norm rather than the exception. The
project will investigate classes of methods for the robust and efficient
operation of large-scale distributed computing clusters. Furthermore, the
project will train graduate and undergraduate students in data analytics and in
using industry standard techniques for working with these
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
leverage coding-theoretic ideas to make distributed computation robust to
stragglers (slow or failed worker nodes) and reduce the communication overhead
of distributed computing paradigms such as MapReduce and Spark. While there has
been some recent work on the topic of straggler mitigation for distributed
matrix computations, the majority of prior work proceeds by treating stragglers
exclusively as node failures. This project will investigate rigorous techniques
for leveraging slow (but not failed) stragglers. In particular, the sequential
nature of computation within a worker node will be taken into account when
designing codes for our systems. The second part of the project will deal with
issues around the numerical stability of recovery within distributed matrix
computation. Several well-known erasure codes that have been proposed for this
problem perform rather poorly on this metric. The project will design classes of
codes that are useful in straggler mitigation and analyze them through the lens
of numerical stability. The last part of the project will address the reduction
of shuffle phase traffic in MapReduce-like systems that are used for executing
jobs over distributed clusters. Prior work in this area proposes techniques that
are information-theoretically optimal (under an appropriate model). A major
assumption of prior work is that jobs can be split into arbitrarily small parts.
However, in practical systems, this assumption severely limits the actual gain
in the overall job execution time. This project will study a large class of
techniques that reduce shuffle phase traffic and the overall job execution time
by leveraging the properties of suitably defined linear block
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.