* 1910130
* Collaborative Research: K-KIDS -- A Reconnaissance of the 5000 Nearest K Dwarfs
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Todd Henry, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2023
* USD 326,679.00

The environments of the 5000 nearest K Dwarf star systems will be explored to
answer the question, "How does our Sun compare to other stars"? Surveys will be
carried out to provide a detailed understanding of star and planetary formation
processes. It will characterize how unique is our Sun and tell us how our Sun (a
G Dwarf star) compares to other G,K,M Dwarf stars, provide fundamental
statistics that will drive theoretical work on star and planet formation and
provide a list of stars where other solar systems may be found, allowing future
astrobiologists to evaluate the environment around these stars. Students will be
involved in this research and gain STEM expertise in science, mathematics,
computer science, and engineering through their participation in this research
program. Novel observing programs on binary stars will be developed for the
undergraduate students at Southern Connecticut State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program K-KIDs, a reconnaissance of the 5000 nearest
K Dwarfs, will study the K dwarf stars using three surveys. A wide field survey
to characterize companion stars, a high resolution speckle imaging survey to
split single stars into doubles and higher order multiples at spatial scales
similar to our Solar System, and a high resolution spectroscopic survey to
reveal close stellar binaries and discover low mass brown dwarfs and Jovian
planet companions and estimate metallicities and ages for the stars. This will
allow the discovery of how unusual our Sun is, provide fundamental statistics on
G,K and M Dwarf type stars for theoretical studies on star and planet formation,
and provide a candidate list for locating other nearby solar systems in the
galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.