* 1910393
* N-body Interactions, Protostellar Explosions, &amp; Feedback in Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* John Bally, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 09/30/2023
* USD 484,777.00

The investigator studies how massive stars are formed. Massive stars have
relatively short lives, quickly burning their hydrogen and helium into heavier
elements, like carbon, oxygen and silicon. The production of heavy elements in
stars is an essential step in the formation of planets and the emergence of
life. While long-lived, low-mass stars like our Sun produce some light elements
up to carbon, it is the luminous and short-lived massive stars that produce all
the heavier elements. Thus, the rate of cosmic heavy-element enrichment is
determined by the abundances of low- and high-mass stars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stars form from the gravitational collapse and
fragmentation of interstellar clouds. Star formation is self-regulated, limited
by the injection of energy by new stars. Such feedback can terminate accretion
and help to set the final stellar masses. Measuring feedback impacts is one of
the goals of this proposal. At the end of stellar life, massive stars explode as
supernovae and their freshly synthesized elements are mixed into interstellar
clouds. The relative abundance of low- and high-mass stars is determined by star
formation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stars are almost never born alone. Most stars
form in clusters and groups where gravity can lead to interactions among stars.
As stars move about inside a cloud, gas drag can lead to orbit decay. Close
encounters can trigger accretion from their circumstellar disks onto the stars
to produce luminous flares. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator has several
goals. They will analyze the Orion explosion and its impact on the environment.
Then they will determine how common Orion-like protostellar explosions are and
measure their feedback impacts. To achieve their goals, they will use radio
astronomy methods to search for accretion-powered explosions from young stars
and numerically model protostellar encounters to estimate their roles in setting
stellar masses &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Science is the driver of technology with
drives future economic landscapes. The investigator promotes public discourse on
the foundational role of pure research for establishing new technologies. This
research will provide training in multi-wavelength astrophysics and the use of
new observational tools, data-mining and numerical
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.