* 1910118
* III: Small: Statistical Low-Rank Factorization Tools for Ecological Network Link Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Rebecca Hutchinson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 540,000.00

In many kinds of networks, it is interesting to try to predict which links exist
or could exist even though they have not been observed so far. For example, in
order to make recommendations, Netflix predicts new links between users and
movies - movies that the user has not watched yet but is likely to enjoy based
on the ratings that similar users have given to similar movies. Link prediction
has been well studied for movie and product recommendation, but link prediction
between species in an ecosystem has received less attention. Understanding and
predicting unobserved links in ecological networks is important for natural
resource management, species monitoring, and crop production. Link prediction in
ecological networks has some similarities to link prediction for recommendation
but also some sharp contrasts. In particular, ecological network data contain
more errors than user-movie or user-product networks because field sampling
cannot capture all of the true links in the network. Ecological networks are
also influenced by factors like the abundance of species and competition for
limited resources, and these networks change over time and space. Led by a
cross-disciplinary team of investigators, this project will thoroughly address
the unique challenges that arise in ecological networks. It will put forth a
unified framework including modeling tools and computational infrastructure for
analyzing ecological networks from incomplete data over time and
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In terms of theory and methods, many key aspects of
link prediction in ecological networks such as statistical models, scalable
algorithms, and multimodality integration are still poorly understood. This
project will provide a suite of analytical and computational tools addressing
these challenges. The research will follow three synergistic directions. First,
basic framework development will produce statistical models and optimization
algorithms that account for the unique traits of ecological networks. Second,
the researchers will put forth solutions for highly challenging issues like link
prediction under limited resources and species competition. Third, the team will
provide a systematic evaluation plan for the problems of interest. Designing
effective statistical models and robust, scalable algorithms for ecological
networks is well-motivated for both modern ecology research and computer
science. This project will lay out the foundations for ecological network
analytics by leveraging modern data science tools such as low-rank matrix/tensor
factorization, graphical models, and neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.