* 1910957
* I-Corps:  Software for the Next Generation Sequence Analysis for Homogeneous Populations
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Aleksandr Zelikovskiy, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is improving
public health systems by predicting, monitoring, and preventing outbreaks of
infectious diseases. The broader applications of the proposed software system
for analysis of sequencing data will also include tracing cancer development and
analyzing its potential to grow, mutate, and resist treatment. The proposed
software system will be integrated into laboratories' pipelines for clustering
and assembling sequencing reads into complete genomic sequences. The proposed
statistical algorithms will analyze the sequencing data more accurately which
improves sequencing quality without an increase in sequencing depth thus further
reducing sequencing cost. The proposed software system will attract
epidemiological and medical laboratories by more accurate analysis and cost
reduction of high-throughput sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project deals with growing demand for powerful computational tools for analyzing
high-throughput sequencing data. Existing software tools can successfully
extract different sequences form the same sample but, in many applications,
(such as an investigation of outbreaks of infectious disease, cancer research,
and genome-wide association studies) it is necessary to distinguish multiple
distinct yet closely related genomic sequences. The main obstacle for such
studies is a high sequencing error rate and short length of reads produced by
high-throughput sequencing technologies. The proposed software system can
overcome these obstacles by using statistical algorithms capable of sorting out
the sequencing errors delivering complete genomic sequences and accurately
identifying point mutations distinguishing closely related
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.