* 1910733
* III: Small: Visualizing Robust Features in Vector and Tensor Fields
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bei Phillips, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 515,812.00

Vector and tensor fields provide a powerful language to describe physical
phenomena in many scientific applications. In atmospheric sciences, vectors are
used to represent air movements with speed and directions and to capture typical
and atypical atmospheric conditions. In materials science, stress and strain
tensors are used to specify the behaviors of material bodies experiencing
deformations and to facilitate the study of material strength. The main
objective of this project is to define and quantify robust features in vector
and tensor fields and to derive scientifically meaningful visualization for
knowledge discovery. Robust features are objects, structures, or regions of
interest that are stable under small perturbations of the data that arise from
measurement noise, numerical instability or simulation uncertainty. Robust
features are defined and evaluated via close collaborations with domain
scientists to help them discriminate spurious from essential structures in the
data. In materials science, the extraction of robust features in stress tensor
fields will help the materials scientists better characterize and predict 3D
cracking for manufacturing stronger materials. In neuroscience, quantifying the
robustness of degenerate elements in brain imaging will offer new metrics and
visualization in characterizing tissue microstructure for disease diagnostics.
In bioengineering, robust vortex extraction and tracking of 3D conduction
velocity fields in the heart will help bioengineers develop new metrics that
detect and characterize ischemic stress associated with a heart attack. In
atmospheric sciences, extracting and visualizing robust features in wind data
will help the atmospheric scientists establish situation awareness of hazardous
weather conditions such as wildfires and to provide wildfire weather forecasting
and resource planning for firefighting personnel. This project will also provide
a unique environment for multidisciplinary activities and training opportunities
for students in integrating visualization with scientific applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a new approach to feature-
based visualization with three interconnected aims. First, it will derive novel
mathematical formulations of robust features for vector and tensor fields and
their ensembles. Second, it will develop new robustness-driven algorithms in
feature extraction, tracking, simplification, visual representation, and
uncertainty visualization. Third, it will apply and evaluate the proposed
framework via close collaborations with scientists in four high-impact
application areas: materials science, neuroscience, bioengineering, and
atmospheric sciences. Using simulated micro-mechanical fields in an uncracked
polycrystal, the project will integrate robust features with visualization to
improve the interpretability of micro-mechanical fields and the prediction of
fatigue-failure surfaces. Using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) from the Human
Connectome Project, the project will investigate quantifiable characteristics of
crossing fibers as part of a long-term goal for deep brain stimulator placement.
Using 3D conduction velocity generated in volumes of swine and canine tissues,
the project will generate feature-based signatures from vortex stability and
evolution and use them, in the long term, for disease diagnostics and medical
intervention. Using ensemble datasets generated from the High-Resolution Rapid
Refresh Model (HRRR), the project will use robust features in the visualization
and statistical analysis of atmospheric models to identify atypical atmospheric
conditions for wildfire weather assessment. The research results will be
instantiated by a collection of research papers and open-source software tools
targeting the communities of collaborating scientists and the large research
community. These software tools will be made available via GitHub under MIT or
BSD licenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.