* 1910303
* Applications of Geometric and Group-theoretic Methods to Network Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Renato Mirollo, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2023
* USD 290,391.00

A fundamental challenge in science is to understand how collective behavior
emerges in complex systems. For example, how do the thousands of heart cells
that form the heart's natural pacemaker network manage to fire an electrical
pulse simultaneously? How does a flock of birds or school of fish organize so as
to fly or swim together? What causes a population of fireflies to flash in
unison? How can we prevent a single component failure in a large power grid from
cascading through the entire network? The investigators' particular interest is
in networks of oscillators, in which the individual components cycle
periodically in time. Oscillator networks can exhibit a variety of collective
behaviors, ranging in simplicity from complete synchronization, when all the
oscillators behave in unison, to more complex patterns such as chimera states,
where part of the network is synchronized while the rest exhibits asynchronous
behavior. The investigators develop mathematical tools, using geometry, group
theory, and dimensional reduction, to greatly simplify the analysis of
oscillator networks and their stability. The virtue of this approach is that the
behavior of a large network with many variables can be precisely described using
only a small number of equations. They use these methods to design and analyze
networks with applications to reservoir computing and machine learning, an
important and developing area of modern data analysis. An important ramification
of this work is to forge interdisciplinary collaborations between the more
applied study of oscillator dynamics and the pure mathematical study of low-
dimensional geometry. Graduate students are engaged in the research of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of this project is the
application of geometric and group-theoretic techniques to the study of networks
of Kuramoto and more general types of oscillators. The application of geometric
techniques makes possible the explicit description of the dynamics on group
orbits. Building on on their earlier work using this methodology, the
investigators take up four topics. The first classifies higher degree order
parameter functions that have a geometric (gradient) structure similar to the
classic Kuramoto model with first degree order parameter. Topic 2 uses geometric
techniques to understand the dynamics of multi-population models, particularly
to clarify the dynamics of chimera states, which are states with some but not
all of the populations completely synchronized. Topic 3 extends this structure
to networks of higher-dimensional oscillators, with states on spheres of
dimension 2 or higher, that are used to model flocks, swarms and other social
networks. Topic 4 applies this technology to machine learning and reservoir
computing. Graduate students are engaged in the research of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.