* 1910958
* SHF: Small: Redesigning the System Architecture for Ultra-High Density Data Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Feng Chen, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Computer storage systems are advancing towards extremely high density. With
emerging storage technologies, such as Quad-Level Cell (QLC) and 3D vertical
NAND, built using advanced 10 nanometer manufacturing processes, one single
server will be able to accommodate petabytes of data in the near future. Such an
unprecedented storage density growth allows us to build highly consolidated
server systems at low costs, but in the meantime, it also brings a variety of
critical challenges in terms of scalability, reliability, and shareability.
Simply transplanting the existing system stack onto vastly condensed storage
would create a severely unbalanced system - although the storage is able to
accommodate a huge amount of data, the unoptimized hardware and software
components in the system stack are unable to efficiently and reliably manage and
deliver the data. Thus, the growth of storage density should be regarded as a
fundamental system change, which demands a full-scale re-assessment on the whole
system stack. This project systematically studies these challenging research
issues by using a cohesive approach to reconsider the storage system
architecture design at different levels. This project also aims to increase its
impact by training students in research activities, contributing to educational
activities, and outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses the critical technical challenges by adopting a holistic, cross-layer,
whole-system approach for optimizations across multiple layers in the computer
system hierarchy. Specifically, the project investigates various important
aspects in the storage architecture design to re-balance the system for highly
condensed storage, such as reconsidering the mapping structure for I/O
efficiency, leveraging the QLC flash storage and non-volatile memory for
efficient data management, offloading computationally intensive storage
operations to hardware accelerators. The project also studies the intermediate
layers in the system stack to manage hardware and provide simplified, semantic-
rich storage services. A set of key data-intensive applications is further
studied for effectively leveraging the next-generation high-density
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.