* 1910431
* CHS: Small: Developing a Probabilistic Grammar of Graphics for Flexible Uncertainty Visualization
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Matthew Kay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 09/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This project aims to build a more systematic understanding of data
visualizations of uncertain information and to make it easier for data
visualization designers to construct such visualizations. When reporting on
high-stakes and uncertain topics ranging from elections to natural disasters,
journalists routinely employ uncertainty visualizations in an attempt to help
the public answer important questions, such as "Who will win the next
presidential election?" or "Should I evacuate in the face of potential
flooding?". For example, journalists use "cones of uncertainty" to illustrate
hurricane path predictions, despite evidence that uncertainty cone
visualizations are hard to interpret and better uncertainty visualizations
exist. The adoption of more effective uncertainty visualizations in practice
lags behind research, in part because the construction of more sophisticated and
effective uncertainty visualizations is harder than the construction of common
but less effective uncertainty visualizations like confidence intervals, while
developing prototypes to explore the design space of uncertainty visualizations
is costly. This project will create a formal description of a wide variety of
uncertainty visualizations, a toolkit that uses this description to make the
creation of such data visualizations easier, and evaluations of whether the
toolkit makes it easier for designers to create visualizations of uncertain
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formalizations of data visualization construction
into algebras or grammars have sought to decrease the technical sophistication
users need to explore a range of correct and effective visualizations. While
several popular examples exist, none of these grammars formalize the notions of
uncertainty or probability, requiring users to recombine statistical
transformations and geometries (or worse, to transform input data outside of the
visualization framework) in order to create effective uncertainty
visualizations, including modern frequency-framing uncertainty visualizations
like hypothetical outcome plots. This work proposes a probabilistic grammar of
graphics that directly incorporates probability distributions to make it easier
to explore the design space of uncertainty visualizations. The work will involve
systematically cataloging existing uncertainty visualizations, developing a
consistent grammar to describe them, then implementing that grammar in existing
frameworks and evaluating its potential to make it easier for both experienced
visualization designers and visualization design students to construct high
quality uncertainty visualizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.