* 1910950
* III: Small: Collaborative Research: PE4GQ - Practical Encryption for Geospatial Queries on Private Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Cyrus Shahabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 306,814.00

The mobile computing revolution led to the emergence of novel and exciting
applications centered on geospatial data, such as location-based services,
geosocial networks, and ride-sharing. These apps enable users to receive
services customized to their locations and to interact with nearby peers.
However, recent years also witnessed a growing number of risks associated with
sharing of location data. Using location information, adversaries may stage a
broad spectrum of attacks, ranging from physical surveillance and stalking, to
inferring private details about an individual?s health status, political or
religious affiliations, alternative lifestyles, etc. The proposed project will
investigate secure and efficient techniques to protect the locations of mobile
users before they are sent to online services. The focus will be on encryption,
which provides a high level of protection, on the same level currently used for
confidential data such as social security numbers and bank account information.
Location privacy is an important component of the broader online privacy
concept. Strong protection for users? whereabouts will bring significant
societal benefits in the current online ecosystem, where privacy attacks occur
more frequently and with far greater ramifications than before, as illustrated
by recent high-profile privacy breaches that affected prominent players in the
social media industry (e.g., Google, Facebook,
Yahoo).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several prior research efforts focused on
protecting locations through mechanisms like location cloaking, differential
privacy or geo-indistinguishability, but none of these existing approaches can
properly address the challenges of online, continuous sharing of locations. The
only direction that achieves a sufficient amount of protection is represented by
cryptographic approaches, but despite recent breakthroughs in the area of
functional encryption, processing on encrypted data is very slow and/or
insufficiently expressive to support the use case scenarios required by
location-centric applications. The objective of this project is to bridge the
gap between geospatial applications on one side and functional encryption on the
other. The proposed PE4GQ (Practical Encryption for Geospatial Queries)
framework will allow researchers and practitioners to make use of encrypted
search primitives on geospatial data with practical computational and
communication overhead. The project will adopt existing functional encryption
techniques and customize their use to the specific requirements of geospatial
queries. The project will address several challenging tasks: (i) identifying a
small set of representative plaintext operations that occur commonly in
location-centric applications and can be used to express more complex spatial
queries; (ii) identifying appropriate cryptographic building blocks that can be
used to securely evaluate the operations identified in the first task; (iii)
investigating data representations and query encodings that allow efficient
secure evaluation by reducing the number of expensive cryptographic primitives;
and (iv) investigating performance optimizations that reduce encrypted data
processing overhead by taking into account information from the spatial domain
(i.e., through cross-layer design).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.