* 1911262
* RAPID: Impacts, Disruption, and Displacement After Low Attention Disasters: Experiences of Non-owner and Immigrant Households
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Jon Wolseth, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 05/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project examines life disruption, recovery
resources, and displacement with a focus on non-homeowner and immigrant
households in Marshalltown, Iowa after an EF-3 Tornado. The damage from this
tornado was concentrated in older low-income neighborhoods with many uninsured
houses, limited government assistance, and low capacity to provide replacement
housing within the community. This research examines recovery needs resulting
from social vulnerability especially tenure and immigration. The results will
assist planners, emergency managers, and policymakers to incorporate approaches
within recovery programs that better communicate assistance eligibility criteria
with immigrants. This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare.
In this case, the benefits will be insights to assist recovery of our most
vulnerable populations after a disaster.

This research addresses gaps in the disaster literature with respect to low
attention disasters that affect immigrants, renters and contract homeowners.
Vulnerable households like immigrants and non-homeowners are at a disadvantage
for accessing recovery assistance to complete home repairs and subsequently at a
higher risk of long-term displacement. This project collects data to examine
recovery experiences of immigrants and non-homeowners in the aftermath of the
Marshalltown tornado that did not receive much attention and resources despite
causing major damages in low income neighborhoods with a relatively higher
percentage of minority, immigrant, and non-homeowner households. Hence, it
offers a unique possibility for assessing the complex recovery challenges
related to housing tenure and immigration after low attention disasters. Methods
of data collection consist of conducting focus groups with households, one on
one interviews, and participant observation. Analysis methods include
qualitative coding of data through theme identification and constant comparison.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.