* 1911583
* OPUS CRS Characterizing and deciphering the forces driving long-term ecological change
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Donald Waller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 06/30/2021
* USD 0.00

This project seeks to understand how local site conditions, landscape factors,
and species functional traits interact to affect how species and communities
respond to shifts in climate, species invasions, nitrogen deposition, habitat
fragmentation, and high deer densities. These forces include environmental
change, habitat loss and fragmentation, invasion by nonnative species, nitrogen-
deposition (acid rain), and deer browsing. This project will investigate all of
these to understand how they affect forest communities, alone and in
combination. It will also examine the plant characteristics that affect how
species respond and how the impacts of these forces vary over sites that differ
in how intense each force is, local conditions, and surrounding landscape
conditions. The research team will also compare results in Wisconsin to those
occurring in European forests to better understand the generality of the
patterns. Sharing results and identifying the particular forces that threaten
particular species and forest types will allow us to better protect species and
ecosystem changes and manage these to provide ecosystem services. Further, the
project will develop a citizen-science monitoring network to provide key data,
improving our ability to wisely manage forests and wildlife.

This research will synthesize 18 years of research from Wisconsin extending over
five community types, >250 sites, and almost 400 species. Baseline data from 50
years ago will be combined with resurveys to characterize and analyze ecological
change in detail. It will first quantify shifts in alpha, beta, and gamma
diversity for species, traits, and phylogenetic relationships, drawing on
recently-developed diversity theory. It will then determine the relative
strength of neutral (dispersal-based) vs. niche-based forces in community
assembly. This will involve applying both a mass-action model and models based
on hierarchical joint-species distributions. With these modeling approaches,
insights into how other populations can rescue local populations from extinction
as well as the spatial scales at which niche and environmental filtering
processes operate will be elucidated. The results from this study will advance
ecology and conservation biology by linking large and diverse datasets extending
over broad areas and multiple decades to modern methods of analysis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.