* 1911341
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliances: The Illinois LSAMP STEM Pathway and Research Alliance (ILSPRA)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2026
* Demetri Morgan, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,136,686.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation program is an alliance-
based program. The program's theory is based on the Tinto model for student
retention. The overall goal of the program is to assist universities and
colleges in diversifying the nation's science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) workforce by increasing the number of STEM baccalaureate
degrees and postbaccalaureate participants in STEM graduate studies to
populations historically underrepresented in these disciplines: African-
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Illinois Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ILSAMP), led by Chicago State
University (CSU), is reorganized to consist of a diverse group of 15 public and
private universities, community colleges and non-academic organizations in urban
and rural settings within the state of Illinois. In addition to CSU, four-year
institutions include DePaul University (DPU), Governors State University (GSU),
Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU),
Southern Illinois University, Edwardsville (SIUE), University of Illinois at
Chicago (UIC), and University of Illinois at Springfield (UIS). The
participating two-year institutions are Prairie State College (PSC), Malcolm X
College (MXC), Morton College (MC) and Saint Augustine College (SAC). The two
non-academic sector partners consist of Argonne National Laboratory and the
Field Museum of Natural History. Broadening participation research will be
conducted to further strengthen the LSAMP model. Findings from the project will
be disseminated broadly via the Louis Stokes Midwest Regional Center of
Excellence in Broadening Participation (LSMRCE), via scholarly journals and STEM
conferences nationally and internationally. By the end of the 5-year project the
ILSPRA will significantly increase the number of URM students graduating with
STEM degrees and joining the STEM workforce or matriculating into STEM graduate
programs. Additionally, new knowledge will be generated through the
implementation of key elements of innovative programming such as the Learning
Assistant (LA) model across the alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ILSPRA
project team will implement three primary objectives:1) Provide
academic,professional and social activities to increase URM students'
engagement, retention, and progress in STEM baccalaureate degree programs, 2)
Provide opportunities during the critical transition junctures to support URM
student from two-year to four-year institutions and from four-year institutions
into STEM graduate programs or workforce, and 3) Develop and disseminate
innovative STEM mentoring models based on the academic, personal, and
professional experiences of URM STEM students and mentors in this ILSPRA
program. The Governing Board, made up of the Presidents or other senior
administrators from the alliance partner institutions, will provide the buy-in
and the institutional clout for their respective
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.