* 1911233
* Toward an Accurate Model for the Gas Around Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Cameron Hummels, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2023
* USD 185,656.00

Observations of nearby galaxies show that these galaxies are still growing, as
gas clouds surrounding them fall into these galaxies. So far, models of how
galaxies grow, and stars form, do not fully explain the observations. The
investigators will more finely model the physical properties of the infalling
gas. The investigators have strongly argued that better numerical models will
explain the discrepancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The circumgalactic medium (CGM),
the low-density gas surrounding galaxies, is increasingly recognized for its
crucial role in the complicated process of forming new generations of stars in
galaxies. Observations of the CGM indicate large quantities gas are present
around galaxies. However, theorists cannot explain why that gas exists in such
large abundances, because current computer models severely underpredict it.
Recent discoveries indicate that traditional simulations fail to resolve small
cool gas clouds, potentially explaining the mismatch between theory and
observation. The investigators are now running state-of-the-art simulations
which track the cool gas component explicitly. In this study, they will make
novel comparisons between our simulations and many observations of the CGM. The
investigators will use the observations to deduce how accurate their models are
at explaining the elusive behavior of the CGM and its effects on galaxy
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, public education efforts held in
scientific institutions bias target audiences towards people already excited
about science, while ignoring much of the rest of the community. The
investigator's team organizes public education activities in non-traditional
venues like parks, pedestrian streets, public transportation, bars, etc. to
truly reach a wide cross-section of our society, including underrepresented
groups in STEM. The investigators will extend existing outreach efforts by
designing and building an "AstroViz" kit, capable of projecting state-of-the-art
computational simulations at these non-traditional public education events.
These projections will employ the advanced visualizations that enable the public
to quickly grasp concepts not easily conveyed through words alone. Applied to a
nearby sidewalk or storefront, the investigators projected visualizations will
better draw the attention of the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.