* 1911702
* RUI: Low Energy Electron Scattering from Fundamental Molecular and Atomic Targets
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Murtadha Khakoo, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 441,531.00

The project involves experiments to study how low energy electrons collide with
atomic or molecular gases, undertaken in collaboration with theoretical
physicists. The studies will help elucidate the basic physics of collisions as
well as have applications in ozone chemistry, combustion, the microelectronics
industry, and astrophysics (from observations of light emitted in electron
collisions with atoms and molecules in space). The project heavily involves
undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented groups in a region
of the country which has predominantly Hispanic and other minority students. The
students are mentored to learn hands-on broad experimental science laboratory
skills and go on to further education towards a Masters or PhD. In the past 26
years, the project has involved about 120 undergraduate students. In 2005, the
PI was given a prestigious National Award for Outstanding Research in an
Undergraduate Institution "For his challenging and sophisticated experiments in
electron-atom collisions that have provided significant tests of atomic theory
and for his energetic, sustained mentoring of students in his
research."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project is to obtain scattering
cross sections for electron scattering from fundamental atomic and molecular
gaseous targets, for elastic electron scattering and for excitation and
ionization of these targets at very low energies (around 1eV to 100eV),
including energies well above the ionization energy of these targets. Recently,
to complement their differential-angle, high-resolution, low energy
electrostatic electron spectrometer, the laboratory (PI and undergraduate
students) designed and built a differential-angle time-of flight electron
spectrometer, which is uniquely suited to study very low energy electron
collisions. This is presently the only system existing world-wide. In 2018-2019
it provided benchmark collision data for molecular hydrogen to test the
theoretical work from Curtin University and Los Alamos National Laboratory. The
two lab spectrometers continue to be deployed to study other fundamental targets
such as carbon monoxide and water. The PI collaborates with leading groups in
theoretical modeling of electron scattering, e.g. at Los Alamos National
Laboratory in USA, Drake University in Iowa USA, Curtin University in Australia,
Charles University in Prague, University College in London UK, and several
theory and experimental groups in Brazil, Canada and
India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.