* 1911017
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Fuzzing Cyber-Physical System Development Tool Chains with Deep Learning (DeepFuzz-CPS)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Christoph Csallner, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,918.00

Developing a modern technical product such as a car, plane, or a complex medical
device includes designing the complex interplay between sensors (which measure
physical product and environment state) and actuators (such as small electric
motors that control the product). To design this interplay, engineers rely on
complex design software tools. This project will address two problems these
engineers face. (1) First, little systematic knowledge of the design tools or
the resulting designs is available to guide engineers. For example, little is
known about how basic design properties (such as various design size measures)
relate to design quality attributes (such as design complexity and
comprehensibility). This project will thus collect and analyze a large number of
publicly available designs to build such knowledge. (2) Second, since the design
tools are complex they can contain software bugs. These bugs may in turn
silently introduce bugs into widely-deployed safety-critical systems, since
product control software generated from designs is often deployed in safety-
critical environments. Bugs in such systems often lead to costly product recalls
and may have serious consequences. This project will thus develop techniques for
automatically finding software bugs in such design tools.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of the following three major components. (1)
First, this project will build the largest curated corpus of publicly available
cyber-physical system models and related artifacts. Preliminary results
analyzing this corpus both confirms and contradicts earlier findings that are
based on significantly fewer models, suggesting the utility of a large corpus
for future research. (2) Second, to side-step the age-old problem of missing
complete formal specifications of cyber-physical system tool chains, this
project instead will design a novel scheme to infer the cyber-physical system
language validity rules via deep learning from the project's model corpus.
Sampling the deep learner will enable generating additional models for the
researchers' existing differential cyber-physical system tool chain testing
infrastructure. (3) Third, this project will supplement the deep learner's
training set via the first systematic cyber-physical system-model mutation
scheme based on equivalence modulo inputs. Initial experiments have found
several bugs in a commercial cyber-physical system tool chain that have been
confirmed by the vendor of the tool chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.