* 1911836
* Understanding the Impact of Mechanical Constraints on the Dendrite Formation in Lithium Metal Anodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Christian Linder, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2023
* USD 441,410.00

Lithium metal is one of the most appealing anode materials for lithium-ion
batteries due to its high specific capacity and its low density and negative
electrochemical potential. Utilizing lithium metal in lithium/air or
lithium/sulfur batteries can achieve a theoretical specific energy several times
higher than in existing lithium-ion batteries, which could boost technology
innovations of lithium-ion batteries based applications such as portable
electronics, electric vehicles, and energy storage systems. However, dendritic
lithium growth during charge/discharge cycles poses a major safety challenge to
cells made with lithium metal anodes. In this project, dendritic lithium growth
is suppressed by inserting an extra stiff layer in lithium-ion batteries acting
as a mechanical constraint. The project will fundamentally improve the
understanding of the relationship between mechanical deformation and lithium
dendrite growth. New generation workforce will be trained in the use of state-
of-art computational tools to conduct multidisciplinary research at the
interface between computational mechanics and electrochemistry. New course
contents on energy storage material properties and modeling aspects will be
integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses and hands-on activities will
be created to teach high school students various energy-related
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to
fundamentally understand the role of mechanical deformation on lithium dendrite
formation using a new computational modeling framework. This framework includes
a staggered optimization scheme to account for an evolving lithium anode
geometry and various multiphysics effects during lithium dendrite formation
under mechanical constraints. Resulting phase diagrams will provide
experimentalists new insights on the dendrite behavior to tailor material
properties and cell design to suppress dendrites. The research will untangle the
complex coupling between electrochemical, thermal, and mechanical behaviors at
dendrite interfaces. It will answer many fundamental questions such as whether
or not dendrites will penetrate the separator by passing through its pores or by
piercing it, how mechanics changes the electrochemical properties at the
vicinity of dendrites, or how mechanics is changing dendrite morphologies.
Ultimately, this work will provide feedback to experimentalists to engineer
interface designs and structural designs for better and safer lithium metal
anodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.