* 1911401
* Developing CHamoru Language Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Robert Underwood, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 274,312.00

The CHamoru people of Guam, a territory of the United States in Micronesia, have
historically spoken the indigenous language CHamoru as part of their linguistic
repertoire for over 3,000 years. However, as of 2017, 70% of CHamoru speakers
are currently over 55 years of age and less than 5% are younger than 30 years of
age. The language is no longer being transmitted inter-generationally.
Complicated features of the language and unique cultural knowledge and practices
are being lost. Most of these features and practices are undocumented, including
the use of specialized language for traditional practices. Since these parts of
the language are sparsely documented, this knowledge repository is exclusively
held in the minds of older speakers. In addition, the indigenous CHamoru people,
along with other Pacific Islanders, face major disparities in educational
advancement and are underrepresented in all of the sciences quite significantly.
This project seeks to address both the scientific and educational challenges.
This project will document the expanse of CHamoru knowledge and produce a
lasting record of this knowledge, simultaneously useful for scholars and the
CHamoru community itself. This archive of recordings (audio and video) will be
the only one of its kind on CHamoru and will facilitate further scholarship on
the language. Broader impacts include broadening participation of
underrepresented U.S. citizens in the social sciences, specifically linguistics.
The data will be archived at Kaipuleohone UH Digital Language Archive at the
University of Hawai'i at Manoa, as well as archived at the Micronesian Area
Research Center (MARC) on Guam to develop a local repository. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Developing CHamoru Language Infrastructure: Goggue Yan Chachalani
Mo'na I Fino'-ta [Embrace and Make a Way Forward for Our Language] seeks to
provide an in-depth understanding of the underpinnings of the CHamoru language
as spoken by remaining first language speakers and to develop a cadre of
language documenters drawn from university students and language educators in
Guam. Carefully selected first language speakers, who are acknowledged experts,
will identify traditional terms and cultural practices related to five specific
cultural areas (fishing, agricultural, spirituality, medicinal plants, and
artisanal crafts). The first language speakers will also be asked to produce
speech samples in open-ended and guided interviews to document unique linguistic
features which are rapidly disappearing or significantly altered in second
language speakers. These include intonation, vowel harmony, consonant
assimilation, derivational affixation, and use of CHamoru's focus system. This
project will develop a repository of marked and tagged interviews and
elicitations. This project will simultaneously generate new information and
collect existing data and in a way that is useful for linguists, the community,
and academics studying endangered languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Documenting Endangered Languages Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.