* 1911370
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: OK-LSAMP Alliance Phase VI
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Nicole Colston, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,194,784.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Oklahoma LSAMP (OK-
LSAMP) program was established in 1994 in response to the need for a more
diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is
particularly acute in the state of Oklahoma. The Alliance is comprised of twelve
institutions and provides a national model for addressing the paucity of
underrepresented minorities earning STEM degrees and achieving success in
professional careers. The institutions are Oklahoma State University, The
University of Oklahoma, The University of Tulsa, Langston University,
Northwestern State University, Southwestern Oklahoma State, Southeastern
Oklahoma State University, East Central University, Northeastern State
University, Oklahoma Panhandle State University, The University of Central
Oklahoma, and Cameron University. The four main objectives of the alliance are
to: 1) Recruit, retain and graduate 25% more URMs in STEM fields; 2) Understand
and implement key success factors for recruitment, retention, and graduation of
transferring URMs in STEM fields from 2-year to 4-year institutions in Oklahoma;
3) Increase the number of scholars gaining international experiences by 30% with
an emphasis on partnerships with international centers and international
research opportunities; and 4) Increase the graduate school participation of
URMs in STEM by 25%. These objectives will be accomplished by continuing
successful programming from previous years while supporting scholars' scientific
development in research, professionalization, graduate school preparation and
international experiences to compete in a globally competitive workforce, which
support the National Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-
class, broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the
scientific literacy of all citizens."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
research study will identify and talk across differences between Western and
Indigenous paradigms. The multi-year, mixed methods research study will focus on
three core areas of difference: career thinking related to higher education, the
dialectical experience of STEM identify development, and educational experience
(research, mentorship, discipline-specific, institutions, etc.). An external
evaluation team will implement both quantitative and qualitative instruments to
assess the overall quality of the programs on the individual campuses as well as
the entire alliance related to the overall goals of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.