* 1911480
* Collaborative Research: A New Yeast Biomanufacturing Platform for Making High-value Products from Oils and Fats
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Seongkyu Yoon, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2024
* USD 355,532.00

The United States produces more than 20 million tons of plant oils and animal
fats every year. Used for food and feed applications, they generate low or
limited economic value. The plant oils and fats wasted during food production
negatively impact the environment. This project aims to develop a yeast to
convert oils and fats into a series of high-value products. These products might
include omega-3 fatty acids, carotenoids, and wax esters. If successful, this
project could use yeast to create products that improve human health with
minimal environmental impact. High school teachers will be trained in the lab,
as will undergraduates and graduate students. Current outreach activities to the
Texas School for the Deaf and a local K-5 elementary school will be augmented,
as will efforts to recruit underrepresented minorities and women to pursue STEM
training. Overall, the project will support the development of a workforce
prepared for leadership in the growing bioeconomy
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica will be
metabolically engineered to convert oils and fats into high-value products. Both
cellular engineering and bioreaction engineering research will be integrated in
this project to establish this biomanufacturing platform. First, the yeast will
be engineered both metabolically and physiologically to facilitate the uptake of
extracellular substrate and the bioconvesion of intracellular fatty acids.
Second, the uptake of fatty acid substrates will be enhanced through modifying
cellular transporters. Third, biosynthesis pathways will be created and
optimized to convert the intracellular fatty acids into omega-3 fatty acids, wax
esters, carotenoids, and other products. Forth, on the bioprocess side, mass
transfer limitations of extracellular oils/fats/fatty acids in a bioreactor
caused by the insolubility of the hydrophobic substrates in aqueous medium will
be reduced through the use of a multi-phase (gas, oil, aqueous) computational
fluid dynamics (CFD) model. Ultimately, a general bioreactor model will be built
to describe processes for both extracellular mass transfer of oils/fats and the
intracellular bioconversion of fatty acids into each specific high-value
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.