* 1911289
* EAGER:Technology Development, Strategic Risk and National Policy: The Impact of Chinese State-Capitalist Investments in U.S. Shale Gas
* SBE,SMA
* 07/31/2018,05/31/2023
* Usha Haley, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2023
* USD 15,600.00

The United States is the largest producer of shale gas and has the most advanced
technology. China, the world's largest energy consumer, is strategically
targeting shale gas, but lacks competitive advantage. China's response is to
invest in U.S. small and medium-sized enterprises that have pioneered
exploration and development of energy resources and technology. This project
explores how Chinese investment is shaping U.S. technology development and, how
shale-gas investments and risks evolve as information is shared cross-
nationally. To understand how the locus of control affects technology
development in shale gas, the project investigates the complex interactions
between national differences in R&amp;D funding mechanisms, technology-producing
organizations, and natural-gas geological structures. The central hypothesis is
that China's investments in U.S. shale gas will lead to technology development
suiting its unique institutions and geology, affecting variety and selection of
technology; subsequent shale-gas production will alter technology trajectories
and investments in U.S. shale gas with strategic, environmental and national-
security repercussions. The project provides tools to identify high-leverage
investments, improving decision-making and social welfare while enhancing
national security. This research will allow policymakers to identify investment
opportunities in shale-gas research and to gauge how investments should shift
for optimal social benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few policy tools evaluate
effects of foreign governments' investments in U.S. technology. This project
develops metrics to consider how state-capitalist investments shape global
technology development, with immediate policy implications for U.S. national
security, trade, employment and environmental protection. The research moves
beyond economic input-output or engineering models, developing new expertise on
how and why contextual decisions on technology occur. Specifically, the research
determines the effects of China's investments in U.S. shale gas on technology
development. The project employs mixed qualitative and quantitative methods. The
research design includes an industry survey, patent analysis, personal
interviews/site visits, regulatory analysis and case studies of a Chinese State-
owned Enterprise's and a Chinese private company's investments in U.S. shale
gas. For science and technology policy, this research clarifies interlinked
processes, histories, geological features and investments that impact technology
trajectories in energy generally, and oil-and-gas specifically.