* 1911321
* TESTING MODELS FOR RIVER AVULSION STYLE WITH REMOTE SENSING DATA AND NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Doug Edmonds, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,831.00

One of the most dramatic, yet rarely witnessed, events is when a river avulses
(or moves) to a new spot in a floodplain. River avulsions can be hazardous
because they move incredible volumes of sediment and cause extensive flooding.
Despite this, it is not known why some avulsions are hazardous and others are
not. This research will develop new remote sensing methods to detect avulsions
and test theories using numerical modeling for why some avulsions are large and
create significant landscape change and floods, and others are small. The team
will engage in training undergraduate and graduate students in cross-
disciplinary methods, and also use the research results to develop new science
curriculum for children in upper elementary to middle school grades that is
aimed at increasing likelihood of pursuing Earth Science at advanced
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to advance the science
of river avulsions by using the remote sensing record and numerical simulations
to test models for how avulsions move across the floodplain. The team will test
if avulsion style changes moving downstream; preliminary data suggests that near
the mountain front avulsions tend to reoccupy older channels, while those
farther away tend to create their own channels. This arises because sediment
size decreases downstream, and finer sediment is more easily transported
overbank into the floodplain, filling abandoned channels, and forcing avulsions
to create new channels. The hypothesis will be tested by 1) detecting avulsions
in modern foreland basins by using big data remote sensing tools, e.g., Google
Earth Engine, to search through Landsat data, 2) quantifying avulsion tendency
to reoccupy or create their own channel with our fingerprinting algorithm that
isolates the area disturbed by the avulsion, and 3) building a cellular avulsion
model that includes downstream fining and overbank sedimentation. The model will
be used to test the connection between downstream fining and avulsion behavior.
This award is cofunded by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics (GLD) and
Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.