* 1911526
* IIBR Instrumentation:  Collaborative Research: Development of a Single-Biomolecule Detection Instrument via Digital Counting of Nanoparticles
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jiang Zhe, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 08/31/2023
* USD 394,855.00

An award is made to University of Akron and Pennsylvania State University to
create a digital instrument for rapid detection of a broad range of biomolecules
with single-molecule resolution. The highly interdisciplinary research will
fulfill the urgent needs of low-abundance biomolecules detecting in many
biological research areas and provide excellent educational experiences for the
students involved in the project. The design concept and the digital instrument
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses. The students will
be trained and prepared with the expertise needed for the next generation of
engineers and researchers by being exposed to the underlying engineering/science
principles and hands-on experiences. The research activities will also provide
excellent training opportunities for undergraduates and K-12 students. Through
multiple education and outreach programs such as "High School Bridge",
"Increasing Diversity in Engineering Academics" and "Women in Engineering"
programs at UA, and "Multicultural Engineering Program", "Exploration U
Programs", and the "Spectacular Science Event" programs at PSU, we will recruit
undergraduate and middle/high school students, with an emphasis on
underrepresented and female students, to participate in the proposed research
activities. The goal is to extend the learning environment beyond the classroom,
motivate the student interests and improve the retention in STEM fields via
interacting with experienced researchers. The proposed education and outreach
activities will help cultivate a high-tech environment in Ohio and Pennsylvania,
two of the rust-belt states in the nation, and directly impact revitalization of
high-tech industry through science education. This instrument is expected to
advance cellular and molecular biology research, and become a useful tool for
the scientific communities in Northeastern Ohio, Pennsylvania and the nation.
Other societal benefits include improving biodefense, protecting the environment
and facilitating disease diagnosis and prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed instrument will advance the field of biomolecule detection for the
following innovations and capabilities. First, with the unique design of
micropillar cartridges through molecular recognition, measurement of
biomolecules can be converted to digital signals. The digital counting does not
need tedious calibration curves or involve signal decay. Thus, the measurement
will be more robust and reliable. Secondly, one target biomolecule can in
principle be represented by one digital spike, which holds great potential for
digital detection of biomolecules of ultra-low abundance, at single-molecule
resolution. This ultra-high resolution and digitization capability are difficult
to achieve with current state-of-the-art methods. Thirdly, this instrument will
be a promising universal platform for detecting a broad range of biomolecules.
Fourthly, this instrument will enable rapid detection of multiple biomolecules
simultaneously by using multiple cartridges. Fifthly, the sensors will have a
long shelf life and allow for field applications since the sensors are tolerant
of harsh environments. An instrument with these unique capabilities is currently
unavailable. This sensitive instrument holds great promise for the analysis of
various biomolecules from small-size samples. Thus, it can be utilized to
advance many biological research areas including, but not limited to, cell
signaling, stem cell biology, neuroscience, tissue engineering, and cell
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.