* 1911617
* GP-IMPACT:  Project EPIK - Earth, Planets, Ike, and Kuleana - Preparing the next generation of diverse geoscientists in Hawaii
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Scott Rowland, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 328,584.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawai'i at Manoa GP-IMPACT project EPIK
(Earth, Planets, 'Ike, and Kuleana) seeks to diversify and broaden participation
in the geosciences by developing a transformative pre-college pathway to
recruit, retain, and prepare the next generation of diverse geoscientists, with
a particular emphasis on Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders (NHPI). EPIK has
three primary objectives: 1) Develop a strategic partnership between Hawai'i's
Native-Hawaiian-serving high schools and the University of Hawai'i to increase
participation of underrepresented groups in, and awareness of, the geosciences;
2) Create a well-defined pathway for Hawai'i high school students to UHM
undergraduate programs in geoscience, reinforced by timely mentoring and access
to pre-college coursework; 3) Broaden the perspective of Hawai'i's youth as to
the role and significance of geoscience careers within their community,
emphasized by the value of indigenous 'ike (knowledge) and the Native Hawaiian
regard for kuleana (responsibility) of the Earth. EPIK will provide inquiry- and
place-based learning experiences, at both local high school campuses and at UHM,
that aim to develop science and technology skills for Hawai'i's emerging
geoscience students. EPIK educational programs will aim to expose students and
teachers to a robust introduction of practical Earth science concepts, including
those that address Hawai'i's geologic and environmental challenges, connect with
Native Hawaiian culture and traditions, and enhance students? desires to pursue
careers in geoscience that are critical for working toward a sustainable future
for Hawai'i.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2 &lt;br/&gt;EPIK's long-term mission
will be to establish a thriving educational pathway for Hawai'i's emerging Earth
science stewards. Four synergistic EPIK components will be established to
accomplish these goals: 1) EPIK-Net: a geoscience network of Hawai'i high school
teachers and UHM students, faculty, and supporting personnel who will work
collaboratively toward the common goal of increasing NHPI participation in the
geosciences by raising awareness about the geosciences as a viable career path
and providing mentoring to interested students; 2) EPIK-Day: a collection of
innovative, succinct, and mobile educational sessions conforming to high school
science standards for visiting school groups on the UHM campus, or transported
to high school campuses upon request; 3) EPIK-Summer: a 2-week summer camp
comprised of inquiry- and place-based workshops and field trips to unique
geologic settings, serving both high school student participants and Hawai'i
teachers from Native-Hawaiian-serving schools; 4) EPIK-Scholar: a pathway for
high school students to earn college course credit and tuition scholarships for
Earth Science courses offered through the UHM Summer Scholar program. Moreover,
a major emphasis of the EPIK program will be to strategically integrate
geoscience place-based 'ike (knowledge) with the Native Hawaiian regard for
kuleana (responsibility) to promote awareness and expertise in geoscience-
related fields that support a thriving yet sustainable community for
Hawai'i.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.