* 1911574
* GP-IMPACT: Creating Pathways for Literacy, Undergraduate Majors and Careers in the Geosciences through Institutional Collaborations
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Robert Thorson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 315,761.00

Over the next several decades, Connecticut and New England will face increasing
challenges caused by more frequent and stronger hurricanes, flooding and sea
level rise, unsafe drinking water, and crumbling infrastructure. Geoscientists
work at the intersection between these challenges and their data- driven
solutions, increasing the need for geoscience literacy and a strong geoscience
workforce. The project emphasizes the development and implementation of methods
for broadening access to geoscience education, research opportunities, and
career pathways in the State of Connecticut. The core of this project creates 4
pathways for entering the geoscience major at UConn, followed by strengthening
the internship and career mentoring programs. The principal investigators will
focus on pre-college to early college students, with the goal of enhancing
student retention and career preparation. Specifically, they plan to 1) recruit
majors at the pre-college through early college stage through four critical
gateways: a UConn Early College Experience (ECE), the UConn pre-College
Experience, UConn regional campuses, and community colleges throughout
Connecticut. The UConn ECE program allows motivated high school students to take
UConn courses at their high schools for simultaneous college- and high-school
credit. The pre-college experience gives high school students the opportunity to
enroll in a 1 week short-course at UConn prior to enrolling in college, thereby
offering exposure to the discipline. The other two entry points into the
geoscience major--community colleges and UConn regional campuses-- will be
linked to the new Department of Geosciences through workshops and training
opportunities for their faculty. 2) The researchers will develop new strategies
to retain geoscience majors and prepare them for emerging career opportunities.
Funds will support internships and externships at the Connecticut Department of
Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP), the Geological Society of
Connecticut (GSC), local land trusts and environmental companies with strong
ties to UConn geosciences, while simultaneously developing a career mentoring
program for all undergraduate students. Within these new programs, the
investigators will emphasize the increased involvement of under-represented
groups. The end goals are to expand public awareness of geosciences in CT and
strengthen a new Department of Geosciences at UConn. The broader impacts of this
project are many, are infused throughout all activities, and are transportable
as a model for other states and institutions. A large part of the activities
will be workshops and trainings for 2 year and regional campus faculty, and
support for pre-college students attending the summer program and undergraduate
students doing internships. These outreach efforts will enhance the visibility
of geosciences throughout the state. The network of partnerships and
collaborations the team plans to create will provide support for undergraduates
to be successful after graduation and will be a cornerstone in the educational
program in a new department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of UConn Geopaths
are to develop programs at various academic levels to provide pathways into and
through the geosciences. Specifically, the project will 1) create an Early
College Experience (ECE) course for high schools in Connecticut; 2) create a
pre-college summer experience for pre-baccalaureate students interested in the
geosciences; 3) build bridges and better integration between UConn regional
campuses, 2 year colleges and the UConn Storrs main campus; 4) develop an
undergraduate internship program at UConn with the Connecticut Department of
Energy and Environmental Protection (DEEP) and other entities; and 5) develop a
career mentoring program at the University of Connecticut to prepare students
for their post-baccalaureate futures. The principal investigators plan to engage
UConn's successful statewide Early College Experience (ECE) program to pilot an
introductory geoscience course at two high schools, and recruit teachers for ECE
courses in other school districts, particularly those in Hartford and
Bridgeport, where minority populations are high. The researchers will partner
with the Center for Excellence in Teaching and Learning (CETL) at UConn to
facilitate teacher recruitment and assess activities related to this project.
The team will link programs at UConn's four regional campuses and the state's 2
year colleges with the main campus at Storrs to feature geoscience for
underrepresented groups. The researchers will create a field-based Pre-college
experience for high school students to expose them to geoscience in outdoor
settings. Finally, the principal investigators will enlarge the nascent
undergraduate internship program via partnerships with DEEP, consulting firms,
entities like land trusts, and the Geological Society of Connecticut, which will
enhance their post-graduation success. A mentoring program will be established
to assist students in navigating the pathway towards a rewarding geoscience
career. These initiatives will be sustainable, measurable, and
transportable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.