* 1911688
* Origins and evolutionary consequences of a genetic mechanism for developmental plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Erik Ragsdale, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 860,000.00

Environmentally induced variability, or 'developmental plasticity', offers a way
for animals and plants to "match" their traits, at least to some degree, to
their surroundings. In extreme cases, this variability results in disparate,
alternative forms. Although plasticity in general is common in animals and
plants, very few examples of how environments cause "switches" between
alternative trait outcomes are understood at the level of genes. It is even more
obscure how the internal genetic machinery for a switch arises in evolution.
Furthermore, what consequences this flexibility has for the natural selection of
traits, which take different forms under different conditions, are not well
understood, due to our limited understanding of the genes involved in the
switches and what these switches act on. In this research, the nematode
Pristionchus pacificus and several related species - which assume different
feeding-forms in response to starvation and local competition for food - will be
used to determine how genes have come together in evolutionary history to form a
switch that mediates developmental plasticity. A comparative approach will be
used infer what effects this switch has had on the genes, and ultimately the
traits, it influences. In addition, the investigators will train undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral students in research integrating genetics,
developmental biology, and evolution, and it will support two science-outreach
programs at Indiana University: (i) the PI will host and mentor underrepresented
minority high-school students in their own research projects in an annual summer
program; (ii) the PI will help Indiana high-school teachers to develop and
implement projects, experiments, and activities as classroom resources to
improve the teaching and learning of state life science
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance a functional genetic
understanding of developmental plasticity, specifically of its regulatory and
target genes, and it will provide the necessary framework for understanding both
the mechanistic evolution and the evolutionary significance of polyphenism,
i.e., discrete developmental plasticity. First, it will describe how nutritional
sensing interfaces with the polyphenism switch in the nematode model
Pristionchus pacificus. This aim will be met by functional tests of switch
components, particularly genes isolated from a forward screen for polyphenism
mutants. Second, the research will reconstruct the evolutionary history of an
integrated switch mechanism for the mouth polyphenism in P. pacificus and other
species in its family (Diplogastridae). This aim will be met by comparative
reverse genetics and transgenic experiments. Third, it will determine the
molecular consequences of polyphenism and its loss across diplogastrid
nematodes. This aim will be met by molecular evolutionary analyses of
polyphenism target genes. In summary, the research will integrate a model for
polyphenism genetics into a phylogenetic framework of several lineages
characterized by plastic - and secondarily assimilated morphologies.
Specifically, the research will establish a model for polyphenism that
encompasses: (i) the mechanistic requirements for its origin; (ii) the molecular
capacities for its regulation to change; and (iii) its proximate (genetic) and
ultimate (evolutionary) consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.