* 1911053
* CHS: Small: Strong-Story Narrative Planning for Authoring Proactive Intelligent Virtual Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Stephen Ware, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 09/30/2023
* USD 493,256.00

Interactive virtual worlds have a wide variety of applications, including
military training simulations, classroom tutoring systems, therapeutic
recreation of events, and entertainment. These worlds invite the user to take on
the role of one character while the world and its cast of virtual characters are
controlled by the system. Together, the user and the system create an
interactive story narrative. To be meaningful and keep the user engaged, the
user must be free to act and see the results of their choices, but designing all
the branches of an interactive narrative by hand quickly becomes too much work
for a human designer. Artificial intelligence can mitigate this problem by
creating the narrative automatically as the user makes choices. This project
will address several of the technical limitations that are currently preventing
scientists from creating realistic, adaptive virtual environments. One key
limitation is that algorithms for exploring the space of possible narratives and
choosing the best one are currently too slow to be practical, especially in the
face of the unpredictable choices that human beings make. Another is that it's
hard for the people who design virtual environments to make sure the narratives
have the right structure and teach the right information. This project will
develop and test technologies that address these limitations in the context of a
virtual reality training simulation that helps police officers learn how and
when to use force when dealing with the communities they serve. Virtual reality
training provides a safe, affordable, repeatable way to provide realistic and
memorable training for dangerous situations. The artificial intelligence
techniques developed for this project will make sure the training simulation is
realistic and provides effective teaching no matter what choices the user
makes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most previous approaches for using AI to control
virtual environments have focused on creating realistic individual virtual
humans. A world full of realistic characters can be realistic, but there is no
way for the designer to impose pedagogic or aesthetic structure on the
narrative, limiting their usefulness for training. This project will extend
previous research on narrative planning algorithms to produce a centralized
narrative planner that reasons far into the future about the user, the world,
and all of its virtual characters to achieve the same level of narrative
structure and quality created by hand-authored experiences, the realistic
character behavior of the previously mentioned unstructured environments, and
the user agency of open world environments where the player can take any action
at any time. Narrative planners anticipate millions of possible futures and are
constrained by models of how humans behave according to their beliefs and
intentions. Planning a narrative far in advance is computationally expensive,
but it can be done at a human level or better by employing non-Markovian
heuristic search that accounts for narrative structure to explore only promising
partial stories. These same algorithms and models can then be used to help the
designers of virtual environments understand what is possible, impossible,
likely, and unlikely in the virtual worlds they create. The same models of
belief and intention used to model realistic virtual humans can be used to
anticipate and understand the human user, and when the user acts unexpectedly,
the planner's ability to anticipate millions of possibilities can adapt the
narrative automatically to compensate. These algorithms will be validated
through a number of computational experiments and finally by measuring their
effectiveness in an adaptive virtual reality police training simulation used by
real police officers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.