* 1911256
* I-Corps Teams: South Texas CRYO
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Arturo Fuentes, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Vipin Chaudhary
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the area
of human and animal health care. The proposed device will continue to improve
and modernize the US heath care system allowing it to remain competitive in the
global marketplace. The technology aims to streamline the manufacturing process
of blood products (e.g. Cryoprecipitate AHF) by reducing production time,
increasing product throughput and improving product consistency while enabling
customized medicine when using blood products (e.g. controlling the specific
levels of fibrinogen and anticoagulants for the specific need of the patient).
Besides personalized medicine, the technology also enables ways for improved
product consistency. The commercial impact relies on developing a technology
that addresses the current issues with the current technology. The proposed
device focuses on the most frequent complaint of current technologies by staff,
technicians and doctors, which is the time consumption nature of the process.
The costumers and/or users of this technology include general hospitals, blood
banks, medical centers, and animal hospitals. Specifically, the most likely
typical customer to buy the medical device would be the administrators of
hospitals and blood banks. The most likely end users of the medical device are
lab technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to streamline
the current manufacturing process of cryoprecipitate [Antihemophilic Factor
(AHF)] by reducing production time, increasing product throughput, and improving
product consistencies. Cryoprecipitate is a blood-derived product that contains
proteins called clotting factors. Among these factors is fibrinogen, one of the
most important components that allows the blood to form a strong, sturdy clot in
a process called secondary homeostasis. It is most commonly used as part of a
massive transfusion where large numbers of blood components are required to
assist with clotting (i.e. to help control bleeding or reduce the risk of
bleeding during a surgery). Commonly, the cryoprecipitate production process
involves a tedious manual process requiring that a technician massage the
product before the product is pooled into an administration bag for patient
delivery. At some medical institutions the current process for cryoprecipitate
production is time consuming (e.g. kneading process), labor intensive (i.e. lab
technicians are at risk of carpal tunnel syndrome/tendonitis or ganglionic
cysts), and hospitals cannot meet volume demands (i.e. outsource needed). The
proposed medical device aims to shorten the amount of time, decrease the manual
labor needed, increase cryoprecipitate product throughput, and improve product
consistencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.