* 1911612
* Documenting Arapaho Place Names with Virtual Reality Elicitation Using 3D 360 and Aerial Drone Video
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Phineas Kelly, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2024
* USD 381,529.00

Technological developments have the potential to provide new methodologies for
data collection in many fields. This project uses new methodologies in
linguistics in order to document a Native American language, Arapaho (ISO 639-3
ARP). The project uses aerial drone video and 3D 360 video panoramas to document
landscapes that are culturally significant to the Northern Arapaho people. The
project also documents stories associated with those culturally significant
landscapes. This methodology will thus "virtually" bring elder speakers of the
language into places and contexts that may be physically impossible to go to in
person. Given the importance of land and environment in indigenous communities,
if successful, these technologies could be portable for documenting linguistic,
cultural and other scientific knowledge of inaccessible regions. The Native
American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990, enacted into policy
the recognition of the unique status and importance of Native American
languages. The Northern Arapaho language is a critically endangered Native
American language now fluently spoken by fewer than 100 elders on the Wind River
Indian Reservation in the state of Wyoming. Broader impacts include increased
participation of underrepresented groups in social science and coding.
Additionally, Northern Arapaho undergraduate and graduate students at the
University of Wyoming will help the project team create STEM education units
that teach basic augmented and virtual reality application development using the
language and cultural content documented by the project. Those students will
also aid the project team with implementing these STEM units in schools across
the Wind River Indian Reservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project explores
the potentials of aerial video and 3D 360-degree video in language elicitation
sessions. This project looks to answer questions of virtual reality's efficacy
in language revitalization, as well as the efficacy of virtual reality language
applications, and the subsequent technological knowledge that comes with
creating those applications, to promote the transmission of cultural knowledge
within K-12 curricula. The project's findings will be useful for linguists
interested in exploring new methodologies for language documentation and
elicitation. Once tested and formalized into a working research methodology, the
applications created by this project can be utilized to other Indigenous peoples
to aid in revitalizing their languages and cultures and infusing STEM curricula
with culturally relevant content. Documentation generated through project
activities will also be used to create interactive language learning
applications that combine Northern Arapaho landscapes and language in 3D virtual
reality for use in K-12 classrooms in a tribal nation's schools. This project is
jointly funded by the Documenting Endangered Languages Program (DEL) and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.