* 1911418
* RUI: Nuclear Physics at Hope College With Undergraduates: New Science Enhancing the STEM Workforce
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Paul DeYoung, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 12/31/2022
* USD 240,000.00

The abundance of the elements in the universe, especially those with atomic
number greater than iron, depend on the nuclear properties of a wide variety of
neutron-rich nuclei, many of which are formed in supernovas and neutron star
mergers. The properties of these nuclei are determined by the strong and weak
nuclear forces and the PI and his students will explore the specific subtleties
of the nuclear force by studying the structure of neutron-rich nuclei near the
neutron dripline. In addition, nuclear physics techniques and technology will be
combined with the Hope College accelerator to characterize a wide variety of
samples ranging from electrodeposited films to superconductors to environmental
samples. Undergraduate researchers will play a central role in all of these
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along with other researchers in the MoNA
Collaboration, a measurement of the energy of the lowest spin and parity level
(1/2 minus) in Be-13 has been approved and will be made with the spectrometer in
2020. As soon as possible, Hope College researchers will participate in a second
collaboration experiment with a focus on F-28. Both of these experiments will
require moving MoNA into a new vault at the National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory. Hope researchers will continue to analyze the beta decay of Ni-61,
Ni-63 and Rb-71, which are of astrophysical interest. The Summing NaI (SuN)
detector has been equipped with a moving tape target surrounded by a beta
detector fabricated at Hope College. Hope researchers will participate in
several approved experiments at the NSCL and Argonne with special emphasis on
those requiring the SuN detector (including studies of Sm, Br, I, Sn, and
others). Lastly, the local Hope accelerator will be used to apply particle-
induced gamma-ray emission, particle-induced x-ray emission, and Rutherford
backscattering spectroscopy to characterize a range of samples in partnership
with other research groups from Hope and outside.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.