* 1911251
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: ARK-LSAMP
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Mary Benjamin, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 3,170,554.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. The program also supports research in
broadening participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Arkansas-Pine Bluff, lead institution for the Arkansas Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation (ARK-LSAMP), will implement a new STEM Pathways and
Research Alliance (SPRA) project over a five-year duration (2019-2023). Eight
two-and four-year institutions comprise the ARK-LSAMP alliance and will
implement the interventions. In addition to UAPB, the participating institutions
are: Arkansas State University (ASU), Philander Smith College (PSU), the
University of Arkansas-Fayetteville (UAF) and the University of Arkansas-Little
Rock (UALR), Phillips Community College of the University of Arkansas (PCCUA),
Southeast Arkansas College (SEARK) and Pulaski Technical College (PTC). The
alliance is led by a minority-serving institution and includes both minority
(Historically Black Colleges and Universities) and non-minority-serving
institutions. The project will be implemented in an Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jurisdiction to enhance STEM research
and educational capability and capacity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ARK-LSAMP
SPRA project proposes to increase the number of community college transfer
students to STEM four-year programs and to increase the number of STEM B. S.
degrees to the targeted populations. The main emphasis of the project is to
study eight variables related to persistence at the undergraduate level and
entry into STEM graduate studies. As a means of testing the impact of college
readiness and co-curricular interventions on the recruitment, retention,
graduation and graduate school entry of ARK-LSAMP, the research study is guided
by the following research questions:&lt;br/&gt;1. Which pre-college readiness
experiences best predict the enrollment of URM in STEM academic
disciplines?&lt;br/&gt;2. Which co-curricular interventions best predict
persistence and graduation for URM students in STEM majors?&lt;br/&gt;3. Which
co-curricular interventions best predict entry into graduate STEM education
programs?&lt;br/&gt;4. Which academic co-curricular interventions best predict
entry into post-baccalaureate&lt;br/&gt;employment in a STEM
field?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruitment and retention strategies to be employed
by ARK-LSAMP include continuing its Pre-First Year Summer Institute,
undergraduate research experiences, mentoring and advising, and STEM
professional development activities that include student conference attendance
and research presentation nationally and abroad. The alliance has placed an
emphasis on increasing male and Hispanic participation in STEM in the region
during this project period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed-methods process and
impact evaluation will be conducted during the project period. Broad sharing of
project findings from implementation, research and evaluation will be conducted
through institutional websites, social media, brochures, newsletters.
Dissemination to non-academic sectors, such the Arkansas Economic Development
community, is also planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.