* 1911860
* Assessing the Malleability of Trait-Based Face Judgments
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Kaowei Chua, Chua, Kaowei
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Social
Psychology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jonathan Freeman at New York University,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the malleability of trait attributions from faces. People are able
to quickly and automatically abstract information from faces, including broad
trait information such as whether a face seems trustworthy or not. This process
has long assumed to be due to some innate mechanisms, with developmental
evidence showing that there is strong consensus about whether a face looks
trustworthy or dominant from a very young age. These judgments of
trustworthiness have potentially serious downstream consequences, such as hiring
decisions, electoral success, and the assignment of the death penalty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on exploring the extent to which
our trait judgments, specifically centered around trustworthiness, could be
acquired and affected by implicit associations between face information and
positive and negatively valenced behaviors. The primary aim of this research is
to test the malleability of trait impressions from faces in response to
information involving associated positive and negative behaviors. To address
this research question, this project aims to 1) Examine whether an arbitrary
face feature can be associated with positive or negative behaviors, resulting in
a subsequent shift in evaluation of faces that contain that feature. Across a
number of different measures such as payment in an economic trust game, implicit
priming measures, and mousetracking, this project aims to test the extent to
which newly learned features and their associations are integrated with the
natural trustworthiness of faces to affect evaluations of trustworthiness; 2)
Test whether a similar implicit learning paradigm could impact propotypical
representations of trustworthy and untrustworthy faces. In this aim, people will
participate in a training wherein faces that have features typically denoted as
trustworthy associated with negative behaviors and faces that are typically
demed as untrustworthy are predominantly associated with positive behaviors; 3)
Determine whether implicit learning mechanisms can result in the formation of
stereotypes for completely novel categories of faces. This project takes an
integrative approach that incorporates the findings from the perceptual learning
literature about implicit learning and maximizing the efficacy of associative
learning into the realm of social face perception and the effects of conceptual
knowledge on perception. This research potentially provides a novel
understanding of the malleability of trait impressions and might elucidate the
cognitive mechanisms behind the formation of stereotypes. This approach would
test the current understanding of trait impressions and the notion that they
might be innate, fixed, and do not require experience or a social learning
component. The results of this research, particularly the line of research
investigating the effects of counterstereotyping on our pre-existing conceptions
of trustworthiness, could be used to inform interventions targeted on reducing
implicit race and gender bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.