* 1911653
* Disentangling language and social interaction in language-delayed deaf children
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Sara Goico, Goico, Sara A
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Professor Tanya
Stivers at the University of California, Los Angeles, this postdoctoral
fellowship award supports an early career scientist examining the relationship
between language delay and social interaction. Ninety to ninety-five percent of
deaf children are born to hearing parents, and thus do not have access to the
language of their homes, only acquiring a sign language when entering school or
even later. This leads the majority of deaf children to experience language
delays. Existing research has assumed that the critical problem of language
delay is a lack of language input, giving a marginal or non-existent role to the
interactional process by which individuals gain access to language. This
research explores the relationship between interactional development and
language delay, and in doing so will provide a more nuanced picture on the role
of language in human development, as well as deepen our understanding of the
effects of language delay on deaf children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
addresses the question: In what ways are the interactions of deaf children with
language delay, who are entering school for the first time, distinct from the
interactions of their deaf peers who have acquired a sign language natively? To
answer this question, the proposed project utilizes the methods and theory of
Conversation Analysis (CA) to compare the interactional development of deaf
preschoolers born to deaf parents, who have acquired American Sign Language
(ASL) from birth, and deaf preschoolers of hearing parents, who are acquiring
ASL in school for the first time. There is considerable evidence from the field
of CA that demonstrates that there are structures of interaction that are
independent of language. These include a basic turn-taking organization in which
interlocutors speak one at a time with minimal overlap or gap between turns and
a system of repair to resolve trouble in understanding. Yet, it is also clear
that the development of interactional structures is influenced by the use of
language. This suggests that researchers should not assume that deaf children
with language delay do not also have interactional dysfluencies and that it is
possible to isolate the variable of language input. The research takes on two
objectives: to compare deaf children with and without language delay in terms of
1) turn-timing and 2) repair. Data for the project comes from video recordings
in classrooms of deaf preschoolers that utilize ASL as the language of
instruction. Deaf individuals with language delays provide a rare opportunity to
investigate human development when there is limited to no access to a shared
established language. This study calls into question the reliance on the notion
of language input without considering the mechanism for language input. If
differences in interactional structures are identified between deaf native and
language-delayed preschoolers, it would suggest that increased attention needs
to be dedicated to social interaction as the foundation upon which language
operates, and the role of social interaction in other areas of human
development. The proposed project also addresses an important area of social
inequality in today's society. In the United States and around the world, the
majority of deaf children suffer from language delay, which negatively effects
their linguistic, cognitive, and social development. In better understanding
these delays, this research can contribute to existing efforts by medical
practitioners, educators, and deaf communities to find interventions to meet the
needs of deaf populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.