* 1911615
* GP-EXTRA: Lab Camp: An inclusive, accessible alternative to field-based geoscience capstone courses
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Douglas Clark, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,506.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of work on diversity, equity and inclusion
(DEI) at the national level, the geosciences remain the least diverse of STEM
fields. Welcoming geoscientists with diverse backgrounds and abilities into this
field requires multi-directional action by all members of geology departments.
The Geology Department at Western Washington University (WWU) seeks to develop
its capacity to address issues of DEI through several targeted interventions. In
order to build a more inclusive Geology Department at WWU, we will create a
comprehensive&lt;br/&gt;program consisting of five components: 1) Development of
a new Lab Camp capstone course option in addition to traditional Field Camp; 2)
Ongoing renovation of the Field Camp capstone to make the course more
accessible; 3) Workshops for graduate student Teaching
Assistants&lt;br/&gt;focused on inclusive teaching practices; 4) Professional
development opportunities for WWU Geology faculty focused on DEI; and 5)
Department seminar speakers who focus on topics related to DEI. This program
emphasizes the development of a new Lab Camp because doing&lt;br/&gt;so will
create a more accessible alternative to the traditional Field Camp model and it
will provide students with opportunities to develop high-impact lab-based
research skills that are increasingly valuable in geoscience professions.
Creating a more inclusive and accessible department will result in the
recruitment and retention of a more diverse population of undergraduate and
graduate students. Once implemented, this model for change can be adapted and
transferred to other geology programs nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;Field Camp is the most common form of capstone course offered in
undergraduate geoscience programs in the United States. About half of all
geoscience students participate in some version of field camp while earning
their bachelor's degree, and those who do not are often encouraged to
participate in other types of field experiences. Most undergraduate geoscience
programs also emphasize learning in the field by including a range of field
experiences in regular coursework. However, little research has been conducted
on the learning benefits of field-based geoscience capstone courses. This
project will examine the learning benefits of field camp capstone
courses&lt;br/&gt;by (1) characterizing the educational impact of field-based
and lab-based courses and (2) comparing the two experiences. To evaluate this,
we will use pre- and post-course assessments of learning gains. The research
team will also measure accessibility and inclusion in field and lab camp courses
by leading students in ongoing qualitative analysis activities. Focus groups and
interviews will be used to evaluate the impact of the program on faculty and
graduate student instructors? views on accessibility and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.