* 1911514
* GP-EXTRA: GEOTeams: Summer Research Pathways to Geoscience Using a Novel Multilevel Team Approach
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* J Bennington, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 364,782.00

Part 1 - As students are prepared for global change, there's an obligation to
educate them in the significance of human impacts on Earth systems through the
study of geoscience. The growing geoscience job market will present exciting new
opportunities to contribute to the sustainability and well being of society;
however, for a variety of reasons, students are not being made aware of these
opportunities. The problem is particularly acute among underrepresented minority
(URM, or Black, Hispanic, American Indian/Alaskan Native) students. This program
applies a novel multi-level approach of engaging students at different stages in
their education in a five week summer research project related to the challenges
of living sustainably on Long Island. Four teams each year made up of an
undergraduate science major, a high school student, and a future science teacher
will perform hands on research closely mentored by expert faculty. The ultimate
goal is to increase the number of students (particularly those underrepresented
in the STEM pipeline) pursuing geoscience related degrees and planning on
entering geoscience professions. In addition, the program seeks to strengthen
the ability of future teachers to inspire students and influence their future
STEM learning and interest in STEM careers, and to raise awareness among
teachers of the research opportunities in the geosciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2 - During an intensive 5 week program, GEOTeam
members will engage in collaborative, authentic, scientific inquiry on projects
that focus on hydrogeology, sedimentology, geohazards, climate, and
biogeochemistry. Weekly seminars and workshops will introduce students to
research processes, safety training, and career development through interaction
with geoscience professionals from local governments and businesses. GEOTeams
will present their work and results in professional settings such as science
fairs, conferences, and public meetings. The project capitalizes on several
outstanding Hofstra programs, including the Summer Science Research Program; a
STEM Collaboratorium; established connections with area public schools,
particularly high need schools; the STEP and CSTEP collegiate preparatory
programs for underrepresented students; and the Noyce Scholars Program. The
project provides new insights on engaging students raised in a developed
environment with limited exposure to geology a significant topic which has not
yet received adequate attention. It adds to the knowledge base on how the
strategic use of team?\based learning rooted in a collaborative process can
impact the performance of students, particularly underrepresented students, in
geoscience. It enhances the infrastructure for science teacher education by
improving science teachers' ability to advance student learning through
authentic research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores how universities
can directly engage high school students in explorations of geoscience early in
their studies before they lose interest. Finally, project findings should
contribute to [best practices] in STEM instruction for underserved minority
students and increase their self\efficacy and performance in mathematics and
science, thus expanding their opportunities for STEM careers. The students'
engagement in authentic, career\relevant geoscience experiences will give them a
concrete understanding of key knowledge and skills in the field and the
importance of geoscience in solving real world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.