* 1911770
* Semantic memory guides and is shaped by value-based decisions
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Daphna Shohamy, Shehzad, Zarrar
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Cognitive Neuroscience program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Daphna Shohamy at Columbia University, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist examining how
semantic memory guides and is shaped by value-based decisions. Through everyday
experiences, people learn facts about the world (e.g., learning about what
fruits are ripe) and then use this knowledge to guide decisions (e.g., choosing
ripe fruits to eat). This proposal aims to advance our understanding of how such
world knowledge guides decisions and the neural mechanisms involved. The results
will have important implications for education, which would benefit from a focus
not just on teaching facts through single exposure but on acquiring abstract
knowledge across multiple exposures of varying content. This abstract knowledge
is especially useful since it can be generalized to novel situations outside the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It may seem obvious that decisions are guided
by semantic memory, but, remarkably, there has been no empirical work addressing
the question of how this happens. The proposed two experiments will start to
fill this gap by integrating behavior, computational modeling, and functional
imaging (fMRI) to investigate the neural mechanisms by which semantic memory and
value-based decisions interact to produce adaptive behavior. The first study
tests the hypothesis that the value of choices depends on abstract knowledge
accrued across multiple experiences with a semantic category. Participants will
learn the average value across multiple items of a category to test if this
average value is used to determine individual item value and guide decisions.
The second study tests the hypothesis that the defining features of a semantic
category are learned by making value-based decisions across multiple instances
of the category. Participants will associate higher values to stimuli with
features by doing a combined categorization and value learning task to test if
feature value influences categorization. We hypothesize that semantic and value
information are represented in distinct brain regions within the anterior
temporal lobe (ATL) and ventral medial pre-frontal cortex (vmPFC), respectively.
Category learning models will be used to quantify trial-by-trial variation in
semantic information while reinforcement learning models will be used to
quantify trial-by-trial variation in value information. This project predicts
that semantic information from the ATL serves as input to value computation in
the vmPFC while value information from the vmPFC shapes features of semantic
representation in the ATL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.