* 1911762
* Language acquisition and joint attention
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Caroline Rowland, Skilton, Amalia
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Documenting Endangered Languages program. The goal of the SPRF program is to
prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers
in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Patience Epps at the
University of Texas at Austin, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist studying how young children develop the ability to direct
others' attention. While the development of joint attention behaviors in U.S.
children learning English is well understood, joint attention development in
other cultures has gone almost unstudied. This gap leaves a key question
unanswered: do children learn joint attention behaviors from adults, or are they
innate? Adult joint attention behaviors, such as pointing and use of
demonstrative words like "this" and "that", vary massively across cultures. If
children's joint attention behaviors are learned, they should reflect this
diversity. If they are innate, they should be uniform, even between children
living in radically different cultures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will test these competing theoretical predictions through a comprehensive study
of language and joint attention development in children who belong to the Ticuna
ethnic group. The research team will combine observational and experimental
methods, including (1) collecting daylong audio recordings of children, made
with wearable devices; (2) gathering video recordings of task-oriented
communication between children and of child-caregiver interaction; and (3)
conducting eye-tracking experiments. Through analyses of this data, the project
will transform knowledge of language development in indigenous communities both
directly, by producing documentation and analysis of children's acquisition of
Ticuna, and at a disciplinary level, by creating new methods for integrating
first language acquisition research into general language documentation
projects. The researchers also anticipate broader impacts in education. In other
NSF-funded research, U.S. language revitalization practitioners have identified
an urgent need for studies of first language acquisition in indigenous settings.
Results of this project may therefore inform the design and evaluation of
programs which aim to create new first language speakers of Native American
languages in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.