* 1911619
* OPUS:  MCS The imprint of developmental bias on morphological diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Kim Hoke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2022
* USD 278,988.00

Evolution depends on the possible outcomes of developmental processes, yet
scientists lack a formal mathematical structure to incorporate developmental
biases into evolutionary theory. One challenge in developing a general modeling
framework is that developmental biases are unique to the structure and species
in question. This research will incorporate models of cartilage and bone growth
into an evolutionary framework. The researchers will build on recent comparisons
of ear structures among toads; many toad species have impaired ear development
and lack structures commonly important for hearing. The project will bring
together researchers and students with mechanical engineers to create a
mathematical model that predicts ear structures based on developmental
parameters. The model will examine evolutionary changes that can switch whether
or not toad species develop ears. This framework will form a general foundation
that can be applied to other structures to understand how developmental
processes limit possible outcomes of mutations. The increased collaboration
between engineers and biologists will provide key educational opportunities for
all participants. The project includes developing courses and activities that
will help undergraduates, graduate students, and professors learn evolutionary
modeling methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish these goals, the PI has
recruited three mentors to model the effects of developmental biases on
morphological diversity: an engineer who models biological processes, a leading
evolutionary developmental biologist who studies neural crest and cartilage
development in amphibians, and an expert in phylogenetically based models of
evolution. The scientist and the engineer will work together in cross-
disciplinary courses to gain complementary expertise and train CSU students.
They will adapt models of cartilage growth to explore the extent to which cell
size, density, and local chemical environments influence ear development and
also which cell-cell or cell-environment interactions could alter morphology.
These models will generate testable predictions that will guide experiments in
collaboration with the evolutionary developmental biologist and will be
incorporated into an explicit evolutionary framework under the guidance of the
phylogenetic modeler. In addition to the educational opportunities for the PI
and graduate students, another outcome of this work will be a publicly available
module to better teach evolutionary biology in large introductory biology
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.