* 1911462
* The contribution of maternal language input and statistical learning to brain and vocabulary development among children from low SES backgrounds
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Roberta Golinkoff, Schneider, Julie Marie
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). The goal of the SPRF program
is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific
careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards
involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists
and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to
promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific
community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its research
programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Zhenghan Qi
at the University of Delaware, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating whether superior statistical learning
abilities serve as a protective factor against the detrimental effects coming
from a low socioeconomic (SES) background can have upon language development.
Coming from a low SES home negatively affects language and brain development. As
children progress through school, this "achievement gap" between low and higher
SES children is exacerbated. While this may be attributed to early environmental
factors, such as poor quality and quantity of parental inputs early on, there is
substantial heterogeneity in the vocabulary outcomes of children from low SES
families. This heterogeneity in vocabulary outcomes suggests language success is
not fully accounted for by quantity and quality of maternal input. In fact, in
infants, both the child-directed input and the child's ability to process that
input account for the majority of variance seen in vocabulary skills at two
years of age. This ability to extract and process incoming input in the
environment, also known as statistical learning (SL), is often considered a core
supporting mechanism of first language development. The current proposal
therefore seeks to clarify how both maternal input and the processing of this
input via statistical learning (SL) at the neurological level, account for
variability in vocabulary among low SES children. This research is driven by the
critical need to identify protective factors for children from low SES families,
given the pervasiveness of the vocabulary gap. Additionally, no research to date
has addressed the substantial heterogeneity within a low SES population, which
holds important insights for understanding why some children from low SES homes
perform better than others on measures of vocabulary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research utilizes a multimodal, cross-disciplinary approach to studying
the heterogeneity of vocabulary knowledge among children from socioeconomically
adverse environments. This research will recruit sixty children from low SES
households to examine the contribution that SL ability and quality and quantity
of mother-child conversations have upon vocabulary variability within a low SES
sample. Within this same sample, the current study will compare patterns of
neural engagement using fMRI during statistical learning between good and poor
learners and identify whether these patterns predict vocabulary size. The
current study launches an investigation into the contribution of environmental
factors, cognition, and brain activation on vocabulary variability within a low
SES sample to isolate which factors are most influential for language success in
this socioeconomically at-risk population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.