* 1911398
* Contexts of Adolescent Ethnic-Racial Identity Development: A Mixed Methods Approach
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Michael Sladek, Sladek, Michael R
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Adriana
Uma?a-Taylor at Harvard University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports
an early career scientist examining everyday contextual influences that inform
adolescent ethnic-racial identity (ERI) development. Based on recent
projections, no single majority ethnic-racial group will exist in the U.S. by
2044 (Colby &amp; Ortman, 2014). More than half of U.S. public school students
are currently from ethnic-racial minority groups (NCES, 2018). These rapid
demographic changes will continue to prompt more frequent daily interactions
between youth who are different from one another with respect to race and ethnic
heritage. Better understanding how diverse youth explore and gain a sense of
clarity about ethnicity and race in the context of U.S. society is vital to
broaden participation for underrepresented groups. Exploring and achieving
clarity regarding one?s ERI is a normative developmental process that positively
contributes to adolescents? academic and psychosocial adjustment (Uma?a-Taylor
et al., 2014), and serves protective functions for minority youth as a buffer
against the negative consequences of discrimination (Yip et al., 2019). Most
available research on adolescent ERI has used traditional survey methods,
limiting a more integrated understanding of how everyday contextual influences
in adolescents? daily lives inform ERI development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project, Contexts of Adolescent Ethnic-Racial Identity
Development: A Mixed Methods Approach, is to advance a mixed methods approach to
culturally-informed developmental science by offering unique insights into
diverse adolescents? routine ethnic-race-related interactions with teachers,
peers, and family in daily life. This two-part multi-method study focuses on (1)
exploring contextual factors that inform ERI development by learning from group
discussions with adolescents of different ethnic-racial backgrounds, and (2)
testing how these contextual factors may modify the effectiveness of an ERI-
focused school-based intervention program (the Identity Project; Uma?a-Taylor et
al., 2018). Secondary analyses of previously collected qualitative data
(Uma?a-Taylor &amp; Douglass, 2017) will involve coding ERI-related focus group
discussions between adolescents of the same ethnic-racial group, including
Asian, Black, Latinx, and White youth. Primary data collection will include
twice weekly daily diary surveys as a novel contribution to an ongoing
randomized controlled trial of the Identity Project intervention, with the goal
of more closely examining daily interactions between students and their
teachers, peers, and family as they experience and engage with the intervention
content. The study will inform understanding of how such daily experiences can
enhance and/or hinder existing and future interventions. Exploring for whom and
under what conditions interventions work best is of vital importance to tailor
intervention strategies for youth who need it most in the diversifying U.S.
school system. In turn, including school-based structured supports for ERI
development during the developmental period of adolescence will contribute to
broadening participation for historically underrepresented groups in the social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.