* 1911041
* CHS: Small: Towards Accommodating Gender Differences in Virtual Reality Sickness
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eelke Folmer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,785.00

Virtual reality (VR) holds significant promise to transform the way we interact
with computers, but adoption of VR is currently hindered by VR sickness (also
referred as Cybersickness), a condition experienced by some users of head
mounted displays (HMDs) in VR applications. A plausible theory suggests that VR
sickness occurs as a result of conflicting sensory and motor information about
the body's movement through the environment. For example, VR users will often
experience visual movement only, with no corresponding physical movement, such
that visual and physical cues to movement are conflicting. In daily life, the
nervous system estimates self-motion based on a number of sensory and motor
signals that typically agree with one another. VR-induced disagreement between
these signals can lead to sickness, with symptoms including drowsiness,
disorientation, nausea and even vomiting. While up to 67% of adults experience
mild to severe symptoms of VR sickness, there is substantial evidence that women
are more likely to experience it than men, which has led to a low adoption rate
of VR technology among women. This gender difference in susceptibility to VR
sickness offers a unique opportunity to develop a better understanding of the
underlying causes of VR sickness more generally. Physiological differences in
sensory processing between men and women are often subtle, but if these
differences can be shown to correlate with incidence of VR sickness, it will
improve our understanding of the relationship between sensory processes and VR
sickness. Better understanding of what causes VR sickness has the potential to
make VR more accessible and remove one of the most significant barriers to mass
market consumer adoption of VR. If successful, this will lead to better adoption
of VR systems and applications by women in computing. Also, with VR entering
into enterprise space for training and planning, women may be at a disadvantage
if they cannot use VR because of the sickness issue, so this project's success
may have a positive impact on women in the modern workforce
too.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages in cutting-edge human-computer
interaction research by expanding disciplinary boundaries and integrating
insights from the field of cognitive neuroscience. Prior studies have identified
gender differences in visual perception, multisensory integration, and spatial
orientation. These differences could be linked to gender differences in VR
sickness, but our current understanding of the underlying mechanisms of VR
sickness is limited. Hence, the project seeks to investigate whether gender
differences in sensory and cognitive processing are linked to a higher incidence
of VR sickness and low adoption rate of VR among women. Exploration of gender
differences has led to scientific insights and breakthroughs in medicine, so
there is significant potential to similarly advance our understanding of VR
sickness. Empirical user studies will specifically investigate: (1) eye
movements, (2) visual sensitivity, and (3) multisensory integration, and how
these are related to both gender and susceptibility to VR sickness. This project
aims to make contributions to both computer science and neuroscience through:
(1) development of eye tracking metrics for VR sickness, (2) development of
locomotion interfaces that minimize VR sickness; and (3) an advanced
understanding of visual and vestibular sensory processing and their relation to
VR sickness. The end goal is to improve VR accessibility through development of
a holistic understanding of VR sickness and its
causes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Cyber-Human
Systems and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.