* 1911245
* AF: Small: Toward A Unified Model of Parallelism And Locality
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Nodari Sitchinava, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 208,000.00

The project will study the challenges and limitations of combining parallelism
and locality in algorithm design for modern many-core architectures. With data
transfer being one of the primary bottlenecks in modern high-performance
computing (HPC), parallel algorithms with better locality will result in more
efficient utilization of the HPC resources, resulting in faster and more energy-
efficient implementations. The applied aspect of the project will produce a
collection of software libraries that can be used by modern HPC practitioners.
The techniques discovered and developed during this project will be incorporated
into the CS courses at the University of Hawaii, to educate future generation of
students in more efficient techniques for modern parallel
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current large number of parallel,
distributed and I/O-efficient models of computation, which capture the
challenges of utilizing parallelism and locality, is confusing for both
theoreticians and practitioners alike. This project will investigate the
relationship between all of these models and the possibility of using the
Parallel External Memory (PEM) model as a unifying model combining parallelism
and locality. The results of this research will expand our collective
understanding of the power and limitation of various existing models, answering
the question why some fundamental problems are easy in some models, yet are hard
in others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a number of fully-
scalable PEM algorithms, while identifying problems that don't admit full
scalability. It will produce a number of new algorithmic techniques for
combining parallelism and locality. The experimental aspect of the project will
validate the performance and scalability of the produced algorithms by
implementing them as software libraries. These libraries will be made publicly
available in the form of open-source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.