* 1911638
* Bidirectionality in Teacher Discourse Strategies among Preschool Dual Language Learners
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Natalia Rojas, Rojas, Natalia Margarita
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Laurie
Brotman at New York University School of Medicine, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating relationship between
teachers' use of discourse strategies and dual language learners (DLL)
vocabulary and social competence development throughout the early childhood
education (ECE) year - a time of, particularly rapid growth. The findings will
further the fields' understanding of the complex relationship between DLL
children's vocabulary and social competence skills and teachers' discourse
strategies specifically from a bilingual rather than monolingual perspective.
The long-term implication of this work is to reduce inequitable ECE experiences
by improving the quality of teachers' practices that support DLLs unique
developmental trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DLLs, children who are
acquiring their home language as they also learn English as a second language,
are the fastest-growing segment of the child population in the United States,
and their developmental skills have historically lagged behind monolingual
English-speaking peers. Very little is known about whether teachers of DLLs are
enhancing their discourse strategies (one of the more proximal determinants of
children's development) to meet the unique linguistic and developmental needs of
DLLs. Discourse processes may be bidirectional; with teachers' discourse
strategies shaping as well as being shaped by the DLL children's developmental
(vocabulary and social competence) characteristics. Yet, our understanding of
the ways that teachers are adapting their discourse strategies with DLL children
and how their discourse strategies with DLLs may shift throughout the ECE year,
as DLL children improve in their vocabulary and social competence skills, is
scarce. Using data from a larger study taking place in New York City, the
present study will evaluate the simultaneous and bidirectional relationship
between teachers' use of discourse strategies and its associations with DLLs'
vocabulary and social competence development across three time points during an
ECE year. By exploring the dynamic nature of teachers' use of discourse
strategies and DLL children's skills development, the present work expands from
the focus of the field on classroom practices, to try to unpack the complex
relationship between language, practices, and learning, which is only partially
understood. This study addresses methodological limitations of observational
tools through the use of a novel child-level observational tool, which applies a
developmental perspective to quality measurement that is sorely lacking for this
growing population. Finally, elucidating the trajectory of discourse strategies
and children's vocabulary and social competence development across multiple time
points will provide a more nuanced understanding that can bear evidence for
future research and interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.