* 1911374
* I-Corps: MedsForAll - I-Corps Winter Cohort Customer Discovery Training Program
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Andreas Stergachis, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps Project is to conduct
customer discovery interviews to identify initial customers that can support a
universal medication autoinjector platform technology that can democratize
accessibility to medications. A direct ampule autoinjector system can leverage
the existing global medical infrastructure of the ampule-based medication
cartridge while expanding accessibility of medications. From a cost
effectiveness and cost minimization perspective, an equally safe and efficacious
drug delivery platform technology will require complex advancements in the
scientific and technological understanding of injection systems that can deliver
a consistent dose of medication free of particulate contamination, air bubbles,
and is also user intuitive with little to no technical training. The potential
societal impact of this technology can save many lives since having wider access
to this technology can prevent death or disability that can arise if patients
undergoing medical situations are not treated quickly. This platform technology
can also protect emergency responders, civilians and military personnel exposed
to biological or chemical threats. The potential commercial impact of the
project can disrupt the multi-billion-dollar health care market, democratize
health care access, while being capable of expanding into global markets.

This I-Corps project will further the development and commercialization of
direct ampule-based autoinjector technology through customer discovery.
Technical results of the feasibility of the technology under development have
been proven through the development of a proof of concept that can consistently
deliver a volume of medication. These results have been further refined to the
publication of a patent undergoing review. The NSF sponsored customer discovery
program will help the team develop the framework for conducting customer
discovery interviews in a structured format while incorporating interview
responses and data into a commercialization strategy for product to market
execution. The intellectual merits of the proposed activity will help the team
identify how current needs are being addressed regarding the administration of
medications while more importantly identifying if those needs are truly met and
or if there are other needs that can be met which currently are not met. The
I-Corps customer discovery training program can help the project team identify
stakeholders, key opinion leaders and develop a customer segmentation profile
that can more accurately identify actual customers and payers in the health care
medical device ecosystem while seeking avenues for collaboration in the
healthcare industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.