* 1911269
* Collaborative research: Using the structure of verbal complexes to assess linguistic relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* David Peterson, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 101,329.00

Understanding natural processes of change that human languages undergo is
challenging in the absence of long-term written records. While there are
centuries of such records for Indo-European languages like English, this is not
the case for all languages. The study of language change informs, confirms, or
disputes theories of population movement and contacts--that is, it provides
insights into prehistory. Its study also contributes to our appreciation of how
language change proceeds more generally. Tibeto-Burman, along with the Sinitic
or Chinese languages, constitutes the larger Sino-Tibetan family, including
hundreds of languages stretching from Pakistan to the Pacific. Most of these
languages have no written record. This award will investigate as many as six
Tibeto-Burman languages spoken in Chin State, Myanmar, which up to now have only
been recorded in fragmentary wordlists. This project will expand our
understanding of: development of tone and other aspects of tonal phenomena;
sound changes and the position of these languages in the larger Tibeto-Burman
language family; the grammatical behavior of nouns and verbs. Broader impacts
include the mentoring of a junior faculty member and a graduate student at a
Hispanic-Serving Institution; undergraduate training; capacity-building in
linguistics and language documentation in Myanmar, and materials support for
community language preservation and revitalization goals. This project has the
potential to strengthen U.S.-Myanmar engagement and empowering local
communities, both of which are important U.S. State Department objectives.
Materials collected under the project will be archived with the Pacific and
Regional Archive for Digital Sources in Endangered
Cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By careful investigation and analysis
of the structure of verbal complexes (verbs plus specific meaningful elements
associated with them) for the languages in question, the investigators will test
the extent to which understanding these structures contributes to a proper
classification of languages with respect to related languages. Previous attempts
to classify languages are based primarily on developments of specific sounds in
individual words, a method which often fails to provide unambiguous
classification; the current project will place greater emphasis on the
consideration of specific grammatical phenomena for purposes of classification.
Access to Chin State has been highly restricted for the last several decades,
preventing fuller data collection which would illuminate the languages' history.
Currently, there is a window of opportunity for access to the region by foreign
scholars. This collaborative project pairs a PI with extensive experience
running language documentation projects in neighboring countries and a PI
originally from the area and thus a cultural insider; both PIs are established
specialists in the languages of Chin State and the adjacent areas of Myanmar,
Bangladesh, and India.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.