* 1911959
* Molecular Lattice Clock for Precision Measurements and Ultracold Chemistry
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Tanya Zelevinsky, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 895,182.00

The connection between the science of atoms and molecules and the big questions
relating to the fundamental laws of nature is growing. Atoms and molecules obey
the rules of quantum physics and thus have discrete energy states. The new
techniques of controlling these quantum states are leading to a new generation
of table-top experiments that can offer a glimpse of new physics over an
extensive range of possible energies and types of fundamental interactions. The
unprecedented reach of these experiments arises from an immaculate control of
atomic and molecular quantum states as well as of any undesirable environmental
influences. The fundamental insights gained from experiments in atomic and
molecular physics include the tight constraints on processes that do not appear
the same if viewed backwards in time; measurements of several fundamental
constants of nature and tests of whether they are truly constant; searches for
dark energy and dark matter that are not yet understood but are hypothesized to
contain most of the energy of the universe; tests of Einstein's general
relativity; and searches for possible new physical forces. Among many types of
such experimental approaches, atomic clocks play a special role as extremely
precise measurement tools, contributing to diverse scientific questions. On the
other hand, molecules possess significantly more types of internal motions and
quantum states than atoms, - for example, vibrations of the molecular
constituents relative to each other. A clock based on molecular vibrations as
its central mechanism can access new fundamental measurements that are out of
reach for atomic clocks. Significant progress has recently taken place in
molecular cooling and quantum state control. This makes possible state-of-the-
art molecular clocks that utilize molecules cooled toward absolute zero, where
motional degradation of precision and accuracy is nearly eliminated. In this
project, a vibrational molecular lattice clock and its first scientific
applications, including tests of Newtonian gravity at nanometer length scales,
will be developed. Furthermore, this work makes broad connections between the
fields of metrology, chemistry at ultracold temperatures, and fundamental
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tightly trapping neutral molecules in an optical
lattice affords measurements with a large signal-to-noise ratio while
eliminating motional effects that lead to rapid decoherence of the molecular
state superpositions. Recent work by the recipients of this grant resulted in
the development of a molecular clock based on vibrational dynamics, with a
quality factor Q of nearly a trillion, matching the best atomic clocks of just
over a decade ago. Realizing molecular state-insensitive, trapping is a key to
this success. This starting point makes the clock already applicable to a new
class of high-precision measurements. The primary scientific application is for
an ultraprecise measurement of an interatomic force. Combined with state-of-the-
art quantum chemistry theory developed concurrently, this clock-based
measurement should lead to the best limit on non-Newtonian gravity at the
nanometer scale, while providing tests of molecular quantum electrodynamics. The
molecular clock will also yield a model-independent measurement of the temporal
stability of the electron-to-proton mass ratio. Further improvement in Q is
contingent on understanding two-photon molecular photodissociation processes,
which intellectually connects the molecular clock with the field of ultracold
chemistry. The long coherence times between molecular states that will be
achieved in this project are highly relevant to quantum-information and many-
body experiments with molecular qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.