* 1911347
* GP-IMPACT: Improving Geoscience Education for Rural and First-Generation College Students through a Shared-Instruments Collaboration
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Gay Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 306,036.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The West Virginia University's (WVU) Davis College of
Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Design, Eberly College of Arts and Sciences
Department of Geology and Geography, College of Education and Human Services and
Center for Excellence in STEM Education are working together to develop
regionally-relevant classroom activities and community-based participatory
research projects to bridge the high school (HS) to college divide while
creating the HS teachers needed to sustain such work past funding through
WVUteach, WVU's HS STEM teacher preparation program. The researchers will create
a new teacher licensure in Earth and Space Science (ESS) to increase the number
of qualified geoscience teachers in West Virginia (WV) schools. The project
brings together a leadership team with expertise in supervising undergraduate
research and teaching in the geosciences, research on recruitment and retention
to Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) majors and careers, and
science teacher preparation provides a rich opportunity to develop a model of
geoscience teacher development that can significantly change the way geoscience
is taught in HS. The proposed evidence-based model assumes that students are
more likely to engage in the geosciences if they have meaningful opportunities
to engage with real-world problems using modern instruments incorporated into
project-based instruction (PBI). If the model proves efficacious, the project
team's close connections with UTeach leadership will allow dissemination
throughout the 45 UTeach universities which currently enroll over 6,000 future
STEM teachers, engaging this community in a potential long-term research project
to study the impact on what is taught in geoscience classrooms and how that
impacts students' choice of geoscience majors and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;In 2017, over 50% of
geoscientists at all degree levels (69% doctoral) reported having taken a HS
geoscience course, demonstrating the importance of offering such courses at the
HS level to participation in the field at the university level and beyond. The
WV Department of Education adapted the Next Generation Science Standards and
restructured the HS science curriculum to include an ESS class for all WV 9th
graders. WVDE policy allows any teacher with science certification to teach ESS
courses, as pathways to obtain ESS certification are limited. Yet teachers from
other disciplines are unlikely to be able to expose students to geosciences
career possibilities, and the largest producers of teachers in WV (including
WVU) do not have an ESS Certification pathway. There is also a lack of direct
access to analytical instruments that can connect PBI and 'real' science, in
both HS and undergraduate courses. In a step toward solving this problem, this
project will provide the WV teaching workforce with the ideal expertise to
engage HS students in solving community-based problems through research projects
using modern instruments incorporated into PBI to create a deeper sense of
learning. These teachers' preparation will include utilizing PBI to engage HS
students in conducting community-based research. Pre-service teachers will be
prepared in undergraduate research, research methods and teaching methods
courses to conduct in-situ geochemical analyses using portable X-ray
fluorescence (pXRF) instruments to engage students in answering scientific
questions, skills that they will bring to the classroom as pre-service and
later, in-service teachers. Thus, teachers and students will be provided with
access to easy-to-use, transportable devices to provide data relevant to many
scientific questions of interest to students in the region. These devices will
be shared in courses that prepare future geoscientists and STEM teachers and by
teacher graduates, strengthening the geosciences pathway across HS and college.
The proposed project will increase the number of HS students who arrive at
college aware of geosciences majors and career opportunities by providing them
with ESS teachers who can educate students about the nature of geoscience
research and research methods. By integrating pXRF instruments into the proposed
undergraduate research, research methods and teaching methods courses and into
WV HS classrooms and creating a sense of place-based science, we will create a
pipeline to encourage students to enter the geosciences. The project will enrich
classrooms for mentor HS teachers who host participating preservice student
teachers, providing these teachers professional development and exposing their
students to enhanced community-based research projects using modern instruments,
further increasing impact. This will be sustained after the project's conclusion
as it will be embedded in the WVUteach program, producing licensed teachers
prepared to engage their students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.