* 1911334
* OPUS:CRS:  Global Change and California Birds and Mammals Across Centuries - The Grinnell Resurvey Project
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Steven Beissinger, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2022
* USD 361,874.00

Most studies of the effects of 20th century environmental change on animals
focus on shifts in the timing of their activities, such as breeding and
migration, or develop forecasts of the future distribution of species using
models based on the climate that species currently occupy. Few studies have
directly measured the long-term impacts of environmental and land use change on
the occurrences of species. This research will produce a synthesis with two
important objectives: (1) Bring together the results of 28 core articles from
different published studies into a book that synthesizes the entirety of
Grinnell Resurvey Project for the general public, land managers, scientific
colleagues, and "students of the future" who will resurvey these places again in
25-30 years after much greater levels of environmental change; and (2) Produce a
statewide portrait of change over the past century for California's birds. Using
the species-specific estimates of local colonization and extinction derived from
multispecies occupancy models in conjunction with projections of climate and
land-use change, the research will forecast future avian distributions, in order
to evaluate species and regions of concern and the degree to which bird
communities will change, which will be communicated to the public through
outreach publications as well as to natural resource agencies through a
workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Grinnell Resurvey Project has been
reconstructing a historic baseline of bird and mammal diversity in California
from surveys done by Joseph Grinnell and colleagues in the early 1900's before
anthropogenic climate change began. Their records include &gt;100,000 specimens,
74,000 pages of field notes with bird count and mammal trapping data, and 10,000
images. Since 2004, members of the Grinnell Resurvey Project have been walking
in Grinnell's footsteps throughout California - from the lowest point in the
contiguous US in Death Valley to near its highest on Mt. Whitney - and
conducting resurveys to document directly the effects of a century of
environmental change on birds and mammals. The project has now retraced enough
of Grinnell's footsteps throughout California's diverse environments and
developed appropriate methods for working with these data to produce a credible
synthesis. Measures of change in the occupancy of species, derived directly from
resurveys at the same historic locations, will be linked to measures of climate,
land-use and other global changes, and used to forecast future impacts on
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.