* 1911926
* Towards the quantum noise limit in semiconductor microwave amplifiers: a study of hot electron noise
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Austin Minnich, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 443,963.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductor microwave amplifiers are widely
used in science and technology. They are widely used, ranging from fundamental
science such as the detection of dark matter to applications such as the
identification of hazardous chemicals. As they operate at the beginning of the
detection circuit, amplifiers are often the main factor limiting the sensitivity
of these technologies. The PI will investigate the sources of quantum noise in
microwave amplifiers by experiment and theory. Predictions of how noise can be
decreased will be experimentally tested through design and characterization of
custom devices. The aim of this work is a transformative advance towards
reducing noise in microwave amplifiers to the ultimate
limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the precise microscopic origins of electronic noise in high electron
mobility transistors using advances in numerical tools and characterization of
custom devices. Electron noise in semiconductor devices, arising from
fluctuations due to scattering and other mechanisms, must be mitigated for
semiconductor amplifiers to approach the quantum noise limit but the microscopic
details at the level of individual electronic and vibrational states have been
inaccessible. Investigators will employ theoretical and numerical descriptions
of carrier transport at such scales to quantitatively identify the contributions
of diverse transport processes to noise and how they may be mitigated.
Predictions of how noise can be decreased by modifications of device
architecture obtained from such studies will be directly experimentally tested
using characterization of custom devices. This project will also train students
in the microwave electronic technology that is presently in high demand for
engineering of quantum hardware such as quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.