* 1911104
* CNS Core: Small: Designing Efficient Cloud Datacenter Network Fabrics
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alex Snoeren, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Cloud datacenter networks are tasked with providing connectivity between an
ever-increasing number of end hosts whose link rates improve by orders of
magnitude every few years. What network operators would ideally like is a
single, full-bandwidth switch that could connect every endpoint at full rate.
Such an idealized network would enable them to place jobs and data where it is
convenient, without worrying about bandwidth bottlenecks, hotspots, and other
network-induced limitations. Unfortunately, preserving this ``big-switch''
illusion of a single network with full bandwidth is increasingly cost
prohibitive and likely soon infeasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore an alternative method of constructing datacenter network fabrics based
upon a provably optimal topological construct, an expander graph. If successful,
the project will result in network fabrics that are more flexible, capable, and
scalable than existing state-of-the-art approaches. This project will develop a
family of cloud datacenter network topologies based on expander graphs that
eliminate the capacity bottlenecks inherent in hierarchical Clos-based
topologies while minimizing the bandwidth tax incurred due to indirect routing.
A single, large expander-graph network topology can be constructed out of
multiple, disjoint expander graphs; this project will show how judicious tenant
placement can then provide both isolation and dynamic capacity while minimizing
the bandwidth tax. Moreover, by employing reconfigurable network components
(i.e., circuit switches), it is even possible to evolve the set of constituent
expander graphs over various time scales, allowing cloud datacenter operators to
better suit the needs of their current tenants. Indeed, if the timescales are
sufficiently small (e.g., 100s of milliseconds) tenants may then choose to
buffer traffic until a particularly favorable (set of) path(s) is available,
further decreasing the overall bandwidth inefficiency or "tax". If the network
topology evolves at a rapid rate, it is possible to choose, on a per-packet
basis, whether to either (1) immediately send a packet over whatever static
expander is currently instantiated, incurring a modest tax on this small
fraction of traffic, or (2) buffer the packet and wait until a direct link is
established to the ultimate destination, eliminating the bandwidth tax on the
vast majority of bytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage graduate
and undergraduate students through structured courses, intense mentorship, and
hands-on research activities through participation in the NSF-funded UC San
Diego Early Research Scholars Program (ERSP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.