* 1911656
* A Computational Framework for Assessing the Integration of Category Knowledge in Episodic Memory in Early Childhood
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Elizabeth Bonawitz, Persaud                 Kimele
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Elizabeth
Bonawitz at Rutgers University - Newark, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating the role of prior category
knowledge, a mechanism that can reduce uncertainty in recalled information, in
the encoding, storage, and retrieval of information from developing (i.e.
children) episodic memory systems. Converging evidence suggests that individuals
with well-developed memory systems (i.e. young adults) possess prior category
knowledge and expectations that are well-calibrated to the statistical
regularities of the environment and that they use this information optimally to
reduce uncertainty and to fill-in noisy and incomplete episodic representations
when reconstructing events from memory. However, in early memory development,
category knowledge and expectations might not be as well established, and
episodic representations might be severely impoverished. Thus, understanding if
and how children integrate these noisy, less defined pieces of information to
reconstruct events from memory is critical. To this end, the current project
amalgamates computational approaches with experimental methods to elucidate the
role of category knowledge in event memory reconstruction in early development.
The empirical goal of this project is to investigate the interplay between
category information and noisy episodic memories in early childhood, providing a
unique opportunity to assess the goals and behavior of the developing memory
system when semantic knowledge and episodic traces are lacking. The
computational goal of this research program is to evaluate whether the
integrative process is employed to reduce uncertainty in reconstructed events
early in memory development and understand the tradeoffs of using category
knowledge and episodic memories, given the noise in both.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a series of experiments, this project will first,
empirically quantify the prior category knowledge that younger and older
children bring to the task of remembering, and evaluate episodic memory to
elucidate the role of prior knowledge. After this project will employ
probabilistic modeling to assess the weighting of category and episodic
information in reconstructed events, and to compare this integrative model
against several alternatives. It will also evaluate individual and group
differences to reveal potential developmental shifts in the integration of
category and episodic information in recall. Taken together, this project will
1) increase our understanding of the cognitive mechanisms early learners use
(e.g. category knowledge) to cope with noisy and incomplete episodic
representations when trying to recall events from memory, 2) shed light on how
the use of this mechanism changes across memory development, and 3) proffer a
comprehensive computational framework to flexibly characterize episodic memory
from early childhood into adulthood. The development of such a computational
paradigm will enhance theories and methodologies for assessing episodic memory
in children. Exploring this critical period of memory development can reveal
whether developmental changes in episodic memory performance are marked by the
ability to efficiently integrate category knowledge and noisy episodic
representations. Importantly, understanding the goals and development of
episodic memory creates an opportunity to exploit its natural operation and
constraints to inform interventions for improving memory performance across the
lifespan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.