* 1911590
* GP-IMPACT: GeoCAT Workshop: Geoscience Careers Ambassador Training Workshop: Manhattan, KS -Summer 2020
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Pamela Kempton, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 154,217.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The emphasis on recruiting and supporting underrepresented
students in to major in geosciences is important to building a strong
geosciences workforce in the future, particularly in Kansas, with industries
that depend heavily on the existence and effective management of water, energy
and other natural resources. The long-term economic health of Kansas depends on
strengthening the knowledge of STEM careers and successfully integrating
minority students into the STEM workforce. This project proposes to increase
participation in geosciences by creating a Geosciences Career Ambassador
Training (GeoCAT) Workshop for educators from minority serving high schools and
community colleges in Kansas as well as Kansas 4-H Youth Development (YD)
educators and volunteers. The workshop will establish institutional
collaborations that provide sustainable mechanisms for facilitating transitions
of students from high schools and community colleges to a four-year geology
undergraduate program. With involvement of Kansas 4-H YD educators, the
collaborations are beyond institutional limits and involves communities across
all one hundred and five counties of Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to create a strong collaborative network of
educators and community volunteers, as GeoCAT ambassadors, with common interests
in geoscience diversity and the expertise needed to tackle the challenge of
increasing participation in geoscience. PIs will create and refine a model,
using a workshop format, for improving recruitment of students from
traditionally underrepresented groups. The GeoCAT workshop will last five days
during the summer each year for 3 years and include 30 participants as well as
numerous geoscience professionals as role models and mentors. Design elements of
the workshop are: (1) targeted recruitment of participants from minority serving
institutions and Kansas 4-H YD volunteers, (2) mentee-mentor relationships, (3)
regular evaluation, and (4) outreach. &lt;br/&gt;Participants and mentors will
work together during the workshops to produce geoscience career related
materials to use in their curriculum or during after school programs at their
home institutions and and local communities to introduce identities of
geoscientists to youth and students and help them gain the skills needed to be
proactive forces in their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.