* 1911900
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Roll-to-Roll Atomic Layer Deposition of Selenium-based Battery Cathodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dibakar Datta, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2023
* USD 194,626.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
supports fundamental scientific research across multiple length-scales ranging
from atomic to macro-scale for manufacturing of industrial-scale selenium-based
battery electrodes. The most commonly used lithium-ion batteries are not
sufficient to meet the ever-increasing energy demand of our society. Lithium-
selenium batteries are a viable replacement for lithium-ion batteries. However,
the lack of basic knowledge that controls the processing-structure-performance
relations is hindering the progress of manufacturing lithium-selenium batteries
at industrial scale. This project addresses these issues and creates
transformative new insights into roll-to-roll atomic layer deposition, which is
a novel and largely unexplored manufacturing process for selenium battery
electrode manufacturing. The roll-to-roll technology is an important
manufacturing platform for mass-production of many film-type products. It is
seen as a potential 'game-changer' for the U.S. economy. Atomic layer deposition
is a layer-by-layer process that results in the deposition of thin films one
atomic layer at a time. This research enables broad penetration of high-power
batteries into applications where conventional batteries are not suitable,
leading to major energy savings and carbon dioxide reduction. The GOALI
partnership facilitates in translating laboratory knowledge into manufacturing
technology and provides an opportunity for students to combine academic
experience with industrial research and development. The award provides
opportunities for U.S. Military Veterans, elementary to high-school students,
and STEM teachers to engage in activities in both academic and industrial
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-selenium batteries have the potential to
store twice the energy as state-of-the-art lithium-ion batteries and potentially
be employed for high power applications. This research elucidates key aspects
that control the processing-structure-performance relations in nanolayered
selenium-based electrodes manufactured by roll-to-roll (R2R) atomic layer
deposition (ALD). The computational plan focuses on molecular dynamics (MD),
density functional theory (DFT), DFT with finite element solvers (DFT-FE), and
ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations for electrode development. The
experimental plan focuses on the study of industrial-scale R2R modeled on
laboratory-scale R2R, electrochemical analysis, and analytical characterization
of ALD coating/Se/2D carbon electrode (cathode) architectures. The GOALI partner
is involved in translating the laboratory ALD results into R2R ALD small-scale
manufacturing runs and packaging the materials into commercial-scale pouch
cells. The effort combines state-of-the-art pilot-line R2R manufacturing of both
electrodes and the ALD coatings with advanced microstructural characterization
employing techniques such as TEM and surface science XPS. Electroanalytical
testing of electrodes is performed at multiscale, from laboratory 2032 (22 mm
diameter x 3.2 mm height) button cells to commercial pouch cells. The academia-
industry partnership that is at the core of this research brings a unique
intellectual advantage to the approach, allowing a broad spectrum of learning
starting at fundamental mechanistic insight to fabricating industrial-scale
electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.