* 1911019
* SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Transform-to-Perform: Languages, Algorithms, and Solvers for Nonlocal Operators
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Andreas Kloeckner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 319,581.00

Computer simulations based on partial differential equations (PDEs) are
ubiquitous in science and engineering, underpinning weather forecasts, car and
airplane design processes, and tsunami predictions, among other use cases. They
are based on mathematical derivatives and thus only consider "local"
descriptions of physical principles and interactions. Local models fail to
capture certain natural processes (like anomalous diffusion), so computational
scientists are increasingly considering "nonlocal" models. These include
integral equation formulations and models involving more general interactions
such as fractional derivatives. While effective numerical methods for nonlocal
methods are known and the subject of ongoing active research, software support
is far less mature than for local operators. Support for coupling these two
approaches, while very important, is basically nonexistent. In this project, the
researchers are combining expertise in numerical methods and software tools for
both local and nonlocal operators to extend the Firedrake project
(https://www.firedrakeproject.org), a high-level PDE tool set, to serve this
important need. This extension spans all aspects of the corresponding software,
ranging from the computer language used for problem description to algorithms
and efficient implementation. These tools will provide an enabling technology
for scientists and engineers to reliably and efficiently address a much broader
range of models than currently available. All software being developed under
this project will be freely distributed under open-source licenses, and
knowledge gained will be disseminated through conference presentations,
publications, and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will leverage and
build upon the researchers' work on developing a suite of representations at
each layer of abstraction (operators, algorithms, loop nests, etc.) and tools to
transform these abstractions downward towards machine code. The investigators
will map out and extend the landscape of finite element algorithms to include
new nonlocal algorithm; provide a unifying framework for reasoning about these
algorithms, design language and compiler foundations that allow the complete
specification of matrix assembly and operator application tasks; and deploy
automated non-local operators in a toolkit that already includes classical
finite element methods and is capable of architecture-specific
targeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.