* 1911470
* A Community-Based Re-Analysis of Narratives in Jicarilla Apache, a Native American Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Melissa Axelrod, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2022
* USD 220,218.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990,
recognizes the unique status and value of Native American languages. The
Jicarilla Apache language, a Native American language of the Southwestern U.S.,
is known to be endangered. With the loss of their heritage language, the
community's customs and traditional practices are equally endangered. This
project is designed to address both linguistic and cultural knowledge by
developing new transcriptions and translations of Jicarilla Apache texts
gathered in the 1890s to 1930s by James R. Mooney, Pliny A. Goddard, and others.
A team of native-speaking Jicarilla Apache elders will undertake the process of
examining the texts, retranscribing them into accurate Jicarilla Apache, and
then translating them, both in English and Apache. Scientific understanding,
based on materials collected in earlier decades by Western academics from
indigenous language speakers underwent changes. Translations and interpretations
were unduly influenced by Western perspectives and prioritizing academic
audiences; this process of essentially multiple "translations" did not always
capture accurately the intent of fluent speakers in Jicarilla Apache and other
indigenous languages. Misunderstandings may also have been introduced through
imperfect translation into English. Revisiting this challenge, project
activities will achieve greater linguistic and cultural accuracy for a key set
of texts and associated traditional knowledge. The community-based efforts for
documentation of the Jicarilla language are designed to foster inclusion and
training of both learners and fluent speakers. Community youth will receive an
introduction to the Jicarilla language and to the study of anthropological
linguistics, in addition to an introduction to the computational methods
involved in archiving and preserving language data. Broader impacts also include
increased participation by Native Americans in fields where they are
underrepresented: linguistics, computer science, and other STEM fields of study
at the university. This project also received funds from the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These
historical Jicarilla Apache narratives contain a wealth of information about the
material culture, history, and traditional practices within the Jicarilla
community. This project will produce a new body of literature, increasing
indigenous language literacy opportunities for community members and others. The
project will use the early texts as a basis for this body of Jicarilla
literature, but enhance these retranslations with new information on culture and
history. The aim is to focus on the broader meanings and socio-cultural import
of Jicarilla discourse; this represents a top-down approach to language
revitalization, looking at discourse first, rather than a bottom-up approach,
from grammatical pieces to sentence structure. The goal of this project is to
use community-driven perspectives to lead to a re-analysis and reinterpretation
of the narrative record. The project is designed to maximize collaboration
within the community by inviting Tribal leaders and community members to
participate in the work sessions and comment on the process and the products.
This project will also be of great benefit to the community of academic scholars
who work on Dene (Athabaskan) languages, as it will provide transcriptions and
recordings relevant to the analysis of phonology, lexicon, and grammar of this
particular Apachean language. Additionally, for other communities with
endangered heritage languages, it can provide a model for the reclamation of
archival material and for the development of new and effective pedagogical
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.