* 1911086
* Haze formation on Pluto in the context of the solar cycle
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Lawrence Wasserman, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 07/31/2023
* USD 456,191.00

Pluto's atmosphere varies in its extent by a factor of ten. The PI proposed to
investigate whether, in particular, haze in Pluto's atmosphere is caused by the
solar cycle. The team will use the techniques of stellar occultations by Pluto
to probe the extent of Pluto's atmospheric haze at different points in the solar
cycle. (Occultations occur when a planet or minor body, such as Pluto, passes in
front of a star.) The star's light does not go away immediately, and astronomers
can interpret precise data showing the way the light fades to study the object?s
atmosphere. The team will use small portable telescopes and data acquisition
systems to observe occultations of bright stars by Pluto. They will enlist the
help of amateur astronomers and undergraduate students, thus introducing many
non-scientists to STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of haze
formation processes is significant on several fronts. The team will investigate
the inventory of molecules that form in Pluto?s atmosphere. Haze distributions
may be important in cooling the upper atmosphere and inhibiting Jeans escape. By
combining FISM-P, Planet CARMA and KINETICS, the team will perform three key
tasks:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Run models to quantify how Pluto's haze
distribution responds to variations in solar UV flux. In addition, they will use
the models to address the question of flares (does a short-term exposure to
solar energy translate efficiently to haze formation) and non-linear
dependencies on solar UV output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Compare model vs. data:
do the models produce haze distributions that are consistent with the variation
in haze optical depths derived from the 20-yr timespan of stellar
occultations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Test whether Pluto's haze distribution
should vary with solar flux, and then predict&lt;br/&gt;the haze distribution
that is expected during bright stellar occultations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.