* 1911577
* GP-EXTRA: Geoscience Education through Authentic Research
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* John Farver, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,388.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;In order to broaden student participation in geosciences,
Geoscience Education through Authentic Research will focus on the engagement of
high school and undergraduate students in relevant geoscience research. Because
students have limited exposure to geoscience in high school, they are unlikely
to choose it as a major course of study in college. This project will provide an
opportunity for underrepresented high school students and non-Geology majors in
an introductory Geology course to plan and execute real geoscience research. It
will advance knowledge on the role that participation in undergraduate research
has in choosing and maintaining a course of study in the geosciences. The
project will also advance knowledge on how this type of experience can impact
underrepresented students and their decision to go to college and to choose a
geoscience major and career. It seeks to create a pathway for students to pursue
a career in geoscience who may not have otherwise considered one. The project
will also create an awareness of geoscience issues, their relevance to the
community and region, and research avenues to address these issues. The ultimate
goal is for both groups of students to see relevant study and career options in
the geosciences through conducting authentic geoscience research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;Through Geoscience Education through
Authentic Research both high school (particularly those from underrepresented
populations) and undergraduate students will do research focused on legacy heavy
metal contamination in urban community gardens and residential soils. Students
will work directly with community gardeners in Toledo, OH, and personnel from
the Toledo GROWs organization, which oversees over 125 gardens. BGSU
undergraduates will participate in this project through a laboratory component
of an introductory Geology class, Geology 1010. Students from Toledo Public
Schools' Natural Science and Technology Center (NSTC) will work with BGSU
students to determine sample sites and to collect and characterize the samples
using GLOBE and other protocols. The groups of students will work in BGSU labs
to learn how to prepare and analyze samples. The students will share results
using virtual means of communication and develop joint presentations. In just
the first year, over 130 students will participate in the project. The redesign
of Geology 1010 and proposed addition to the BG Perspective (general education)
curriculum will allow up to 300 undergraduates a year to be enrolled in the
course and therefore, would provide a pathway into geosciences for a large
student population. In addition, the project will generate a large database on
heavy metals concentrations and distribution in urban community gardens. The
participating students will disseminate their results to gardeners and other
community members in order to alert them to potential issues and advise them on
best practices for minimizing their exposures. These results will be not only be
relevant to the Toledo, OH area but also to other urban centers of similar size
and age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.