* 1911168
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Rank Aggregation with Heterogeneous Information Sources: Efficient Algorithms and Fundamental Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Quanquan Gu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

While advances in the ability to collect and store data have made large data
sets commonplace, these data sets increasingly consist of information obtained
from different sources with various data types and properties that impede the
ability to extract knowledge and make decisions. This project focuses on
inferring the ranking of a set of objects from heterogeneous datasets with
arbitrary noise, which is also known as rank aggregation with heterogeneous
information sources. The developed algorithms will be made publicly available as
open source software tools, and will significantly expand the applicability of
rank aggregation to real-world problems, such as data fusion, information
retrieval, crowd-sourcing, recommendation systems, as well as social choice and
voting. This project will also provide educational and training opportunities
and exposure to sophisticated statistical tools, rigorous theoretical analysis,
and the empirical work of extracting knowledge from large heterogeneous data
sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, based on statistical models of
data, efficient and scalable rank aggregation algorithms for various settings
will be developed along with performance guarantees and fundamental limits, in
three complementary research thrusts. First, it will develop rank aggregation
algorithms based on flexible latent probabilistic models that exploit side
information and allow both ordinal and numerical data types. It will also
provide information-theoretic lower bounds on the performance of such
algorithms. Second, it will design robust algorithms for latent probabilistic
models in which the unknown parameters are a superposition of many structured
parameters, and models in which data can be corrupted by arbitrary noise.
Finally, the problem of inferring a ranking through interactive bandit
algorithms will be studied. This project aims to push the frontier of rank
aggregation research, and can potentially advance research in machine learning,
nonconvex optimization and information theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.