* 1911855
* Device-DS as a window into mechanisms of speech production: An investigation of adults and children
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Katharine Graf Estes, Cohn, Michelle Dana
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Zhou Yu, Dr.
Georgia Zellou, and Dr. Katharine Graf Estes at the University of California,
Davis, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
exploring how individuals adjust their speech when talking to voice-activated
artificially intelligent (voice-AI) devices, such as Amazon's Alexa or Apple's
Siri, which are becoming ubiquitous features of everyday life. This project
investigates the ways in which adults and children engage with voice-AI;
currently little is known about how people adjust their speech when talking to
these smart devices. Studying human-device interaction is important to examine
the changing relationship between humans and technology; as digital devices
become more prevalent, it is critical to understand their impact on our
communicative and social behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
the ways in which adults and children adapt their speech when talking to voice-
activated digital assistants (e.g., Amazon's Alexa), compared to adult human
interlocutors. This line of work provides a way to test differing theoretical
predictions as to the extent that speech-register adjustments are driven by
functional motives (e.g., intelligibility) and social factors (e.g., gender).
For instance, this research explores whether the same functional motivations
that apply when correcting comprehension errors to human interlocutors apply in
device-directed speech (DS), such as in manipulating the phonological nature of
errors, to carefully control the level of intelligibility-related pressures in
communication. At the same time, this project explores how social factors may
impact speech adaptation strategies, such as by interlocutor type, speaker age,
or device gender. This project additionally involves important methodological
innovations in programming and running experiments directly through a digital
device platform. Overall, this project aims to fill a gap in our knowledge in
the acoustic-phonetic adjustments humans make when talking to voice-AI devices,
and can ultimately reveal the underlying mechanisms in speech production by
different speakers (e.g., based on age, gender, device experience), contributing
to basic science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.