* 1911267
* A Reactive Approach to Model Zeolite Synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Roland Faller, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 348,253.00

Zeolites are materials with pore sizes that can accommodate small molecules, and
they are important materials for catalytic processes and molecular separations.
Zeolites display a wide variety of chemistries and morphologies, so the rational
design of these materials is crucial to create and optimize new zeolite
structures. Structure directing agents are molecules that guide the zeolite
synthesis process towards well-defined structures. This research project will
develop a methodology for the rational design of sol-gel synthesized zeolites
prepared under the influence of structure directing molecules. The researchers
will investigate using reactive molecular modeling to study sol-gel processes in
silica- and alumina-based systems, with and without structure directing agents.
The project also includes some collaborative activities with research groups in
Germany. The research project serves as a training ground for graduate and
undergraduate students to perform cutting edge research. The researchers will
also develop a new freshman seminar on "Cyber Engineering New Materials: What is
it and what do I need it for?" This seminar course will introduce undergraduate
students to modern computational materials design. The researchers also will
offer a summer school / workshop on novel simulation methods to benefit more
advanced students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will focus on two
types of zeolites, ZSM-5 and LTA, and several structure directing agents (e.g.,
tetraalkylammonium ions and sodium hydroxide). The goals of this work are to :
(1) model building and bulk simulations of zeolite precursors/precursor mixtures
to validate and optimize the reactive model and enable studies of the morphology
of early zeolite structures; (2) perform simulations of precursors and their
reactions in structure directing agent-like confinement. The influence of
structure directing agents on morphology formation will be studied and compared
to existing experimental data. The interplay of structure directing agent
structure arrangement and reactivity will be elucidated; and (3) simulate
structure directing agent molecules in zeolite-like structures. Preformed
zeolite structures will be simulated and their interactions with structure
directing agents will be analyzed. These simulations will be particularly
relevant for understanding the calcination step in which the structure directing
agent is removed from the final zeolite structure. The thermal and hydrothermal
stability of zeolite frameworks will be studied too. Finally, researchers will
perform simulations of the complete system, consisting of precursor / structure
directing agent / solvent mixtures, to study all stages of the zeolite formation
process. Ultimately, the research project will provide insights into the
formation conditions of zeolites and obtain a well-tested methodology that can
be generalized to describe the formation of other catalytically active
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.