* 1911216
* AF: Small: Geometric Inequalities, Clustering Hardness, and Social Choice
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Steven Heilman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 90,294.00

This project seeks to answer the following related questions: (1) "What is the
best way to cluster data on a computer?" (2) "How can we design voting systems
whose outcomes are robust in the face of inaccuracies in counting?" Question (1)
arises, for instance, when a content provider wants to cluster consumers with
similar interests into separate groups. Question (2) arises when designing
voting systems that are resilient to attempted interference by third parties.
Questions (1) and (2) can be reformulated as isoperimetric problems. One example
of an isoperimetric problem asks for the shape of a fence of fixed length that
encloses the most area (the answer being a circular fence, which has been known
since ancient times). Investigations in theoretical computer science in the last
two decades have given renewed interest for Questions (1) and (2). Generally
speaking, theoretical computer science finds ways for computers to solve
problems as quickly and as efficiently as possible. The overarching goal of this
project is to prove that some important computational problems cannot possibly
be solved better than by some well-known efficient
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project continues the investigator's
application of calculus of variations techniques to prove isoperimetric
inequalities. These inequalities then imply computational-hardness results in
theoretical computer science and optimality statements in social-choice theory.
Several recent isoperimetric problems in theoretical computer science such as
(1) and (2) ask for the Euclidean sets of smallest Gaussian surface area and
fixed Gaussian volume. Since a landmark result of Colding and Minicozzi in 2012,
it has become apparent that calculus of variations techniques can solve these
isoperimetric problems, where other methods are not successful. The principal
investigator will continue to apply the methods of Colding and Minicozzi in
order to ultimately prove that certain semidefinite programming algorithms are
the best possible approximation algorithms for several problems of interest,
assuming Khot's Unique Games Conjecture. Expected project outcomes include sharp
computational hardness results for: the MAX-m-CUT problem, a kernel-clustering
problem from machine learning, and certain cases of the Unique Games
Conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.