* 1911763
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating nanoparticle-plant leaf interactions for designing foliar-applied agrochemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Juan Giraldo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

There is a critical need to improve the resiliency of U.S. agriculture against
stress and disease in an environmentally responsible manner. The emerging field
of plant nanobiotechnology can help to mitigate plant stress and make
agriculture more resilient and efficient. Similar to drug delivery in humans,
delivering nano-sized agrochemicals to plants will require better understanding
of how the nanomaterial's properties influence its uptake into the leaves, and
its movement through the leaf and plant. This project will determine how to tune
nanomaterial properties to allow them to cross the leaf surface, enter leaf
tissues, and co-locate with selected target locations in the leaf. The ability
to deliver nanomaterials into plants at the required rate, location, and dose
for mitigating crop stresses will lead to a paradigm shift in the way society
manages agriculture to sustainably meet the demands of a growing population. The
project will train one post-doctoral researcher and two PhD students, and will
provide research experiences for six undergraduate researchers. The
investigators will build an international community of plant nanobiotechnology
researchers and enable students to provide much-needed innovation in
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project converges ideas
from several scientific disciplines (polymer- and nano-chemistry,
nanotechnology, and plant biology) to elucidate how the properties of engineered
nanomaterials affect plant leaf-nanoparticle interactions, nd promote delivery
of nanoparticles into the plant vasculature (phloem) and leaf photosynthetic
organelles. The PIs will enable visualization of uptake of fluorescent metal
doped Carbon-dots with tunable size and surface chemistry into wheat and cotton
leaves at ultra-high spatial and temporal resolution. Using a unique suite of
high-resolution synchrotron X-ray fluorescence microscopy and novel confocal
fluorescence microscopy approaches, the PIs will elucidate transport pathways
and associations of these nanomaterials with phloem and chloroplasts. The PIs
will use targeting peptide sequences to guide these nanoparticles to
chloroplasts and phloem in two contrasting leaf anatomies; monocots and dicots.
This will generate unprecedented data sets that are used to develop novel
n-dimensional leaf-nanoparticle interaction models to predict the uptake and
translocation behavior for nanoparticles based on their structural and surface
chemistry properties including charge, size, coating hydrophobicity, and
targeting peptide sequences. These models will enable the design and synthesis
of novel, scalable, and biocompatible, foliar delivery platforms for delivering
nano-enabled nutrients and antioxidant therapeutics to specific locations in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.