* 1911284
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Wisconsin LSAMP (WiscAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Markus Brauer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,199,146.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations (African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high quality degree programs in STEM. The program also supports research in
broadening participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wisconsin Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (WiscAMP) is a consortium of 13
public 4-year institutions, 4 private institutions (1 of which is a Hispanic
Serving Institution), and one technical college. The STEM Pathways and Research
Alliance will pursue the dual goals of 1) broadening participation in advanced
STEM degree career pathways and 2) transforming WiscAMP institutions to support
and sustain diversity across and throughout our alliance. Specifically, the
alliance will increase the number of students completing their baccalaureate
degrees in STEM by 75% by ensuring direct support for underrepresented
ethnic/racial minority (URM) students to engage in STEM faculty-mentored
research at all 18 alliance institutions and connect students with innovation
and entrepreneurship experiences during the project period. A major research and
evaluation component undertakes a series of studies to develop and test
interventions to reduce gaps in retention and academic performance between URM
and Non-URM STEM majors. The proposed research will establish what form of
intervention matters (instructor focused, resilience focused, or peer-focused)
with respect to URM student persistence and academic performance in STEM
courses. Successful strategies will be widely disseminated throughout the
alliance and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed WiscAMP program and
evaluation activities are based on established theories of institutional change,
social capital, social psychology, and adult learning. The proposed series of
studies will provide new and compelling evidence about what type of intervention
can have a significant impact on disparities between URM and non-URM students in
STEM courses. The research design capitalizes on the size, diversity, and
engagement of the alliance institutions. The interventions will be easily
disseminated and adapted to other institutions. As a STEM Pathways and Research
Alliance, WiscAMP will make important contributions to the STEM workforce and
the science of broadening participation. The proposed programs will
significantly increase the number of URM students graduating with baccalaureate
degrees in STEM and prepared to engage in STEM innovation and entrepreneurship,
pursue graduate training, and transform the national and state workforce. The
proposed research will provide easy to implement, adapt, and disseminate
strategies thus helping institutions to support student success in STEM and
transform the cultures of STEM disciplines to be more inclusive of the diversity
that drives innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.