* 1911166
* CIF: Small: Optimal Coded Modulation When Asymmetric Signaling Achieves Capacity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Richard Wesel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2023
* USD 264,776.00

This project develops the theoretical framework necessary to achieve, on certain
data communication channels, the highest possible reliable data rate while still
using low-complexity practical decoders. Applications include satellites
communicating using either free-space optical communication or radio-frequency
communication. Practically all data is communicated by sending a sequence of
symbols transmitted as a waveform over a physical channel. These symbols often
determine the amplitudes and/or phases of the waveform and are typically drawn
from a discrete alphabet of possible values. Traditionally, symbol alphabets are
symmetric. For example, if there is a symbol with an amplitude of +5 volts there
will also be a symbol with an amplitude of -5 volts. For symmetric alphabets,
there are a variety of existing coded modulation techniques that achieve high
data rates using practical decoders. However, for important channels including
common satellite channels, the best alphabets turn out not to be symmetric. This
significantly complicates the design both of the coded modulation to achieve the
highest rates and of the associated decoding algorithms. This project develops
techniques that identify the optimal placement of alphabet symbols without
requiring symmetry and introduces a new form of coded modulation, known as
probabilistic permutation shaping, that achieves the highest possible data rates
while still allowing practical decoders to use the optimal asymmetric alphabets.
The practical impact from a successful outcome of this research will lead to
high-speed satellite links for both earth-space and vice-
versa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes probabilistic permutation
shaping, which approaches channel capacity using a practical low-density parity
check (LDPC) decoder even when the optimal input distribution is asymmetric.
This approach avoids the complexity and error propagation of multi-layer coding
with multi-stage decoding. It also avoids the latency and performance loss
associated with joint de-mapping and decoding. The project also develops a
family of new optimization techniques utilizing a modification of the Blahut-
Arimoto algorithm that dynamically re-assigns the positions of mass points.
Dynamic-assignment Blahut-Arimoto characterizes not only point solutions at a
specific signal-to-noise ratio, but the entire evolution of the minimal
cardinality optimal finite-support distributions as the channel capacity
increases over the entire range of interest. In the context of these families of
finite-support distributions, which are inherently asymmetric, probabilistic
permutation shaping builds on the existing framework of probabilistic amplitude
shaping to provide flexible and practical coded modulation solutions that
support entire families of non-uniform distributions that would have previously
been considered exotic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.