* 1911952
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR--Airglow Imaging of Gravity Wave and Instability Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* James Hecht, Aerospace Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 232,999.00

Turbulent structuring processes occur throughout the atmosphere, oceans, and
other geophysical plasmas and fluids. Their effects range from transport and
dissipation of energy to formation of visually striking structures similar to
those formed when ocean waves break. This work will address a long-standing
problem of atmospheric turbulence by exploring high-resolution imaging
observations of atmospheric structures. Atmospheric instability processes are
thought to be responsible for formation and breaking of atmospheric structures
observed as faint optical emissions emitted by atoms and molecules in the
mesosphere-lower-thermosphere (MLT) region during the night called airglow. This
project will utilize the new state-of-the-art Aerospace Infrared Camera 2 (AIC2)
imager at the Andes Lidar Observatory (ALO) in Chile complemented by the
Mesosphere Temperature Mapper (MTM), the Na lidar, and meteor radar at ALO. This
project will develop better understanding of the atmospheric instability
processes that are thought to be responsible for formation of turbulent
structures. These structures play a major role in vertical transports of energy
and momentum. This research will provide new datasets to the community and
improve the ability to observe small-scale processes in the critical MLT region.
This project will also promote education by supporting a graduate student and
contribute to broadening participation by supporting female scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the research are (1) to obtain AIC2 imaging
of atmospheric structures down to pixel size of 30 m to characterize instability
evolution, (2) to obtain correlative measurements by the MTM airglow temperature
imager at two altitudes to determine wave and instability features, (3) to
utilize the Na lidar and meteor radar measurements to characterize background
atmospheric conditions. The work will involve (1) combining data from AIC2, MTM,
Na lidar, and meteor radar, (2) identification of events that exhibit small-
scale transient responses, and (3) analysis of the identified events to estimate
instability scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.