* 1911530
* Outwardly Expanding Premixed Flames in Turbulent Media
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Moshe Matalon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Combustion of fossil fuels remains the primary energy source in power generating
plants, vehicle engines, furnaces, and boilers. It is a complex process that
involves the inter-diffusion of a large number of chemical species and
substantial heat release generated from the chemical reactions. In most
applications the burning takes place within a turbulent flow that adds a
fluctuating, time-dependent, three-dimensional aspect to the system. The
objective of this project is to develop predictive tools that account for the
relevant physics and chemistry. The focus is on the evolution of an outwardly
expanding flame initiated from a small ignition source. The flame, which appears
initially smooth and spherical, becomes highly corrugated due to instabilities
inherent to the combustion process and to the turbulence. The increase in flame
surface area results in enhanced fuel consumption and propagation speed, a
process that may potentially transition to an explosion and/or detonation.
Fundamental understanding of the mechanisms responsible for these complex flame
properties will improve predictability of combustion systems and increase their
safe and efficient operation. The proposed research has also a significant
pedagogical value; the advocated physics-based approach will be used in the
classroom and in outreach programs intended to extend the human-resources base
of science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex dynamics of
spherically expanding flames resulting from flame instabilities and turbulence
will be investigated within the framework of the hydrodynamic theory, derived
systematically from the general conservation laws using a multi-scale asymptotic
approach. The flame, treated as a surface of density discontinuity, propagates
into the fresh mixture in accordance to the procured flame speed relation which,
in conjunction with the conditions across the flame front, mimic the influences
of diffusion and chemical reaction occurring within the flame zone. The model is
free of tuning parameters and ad-hoc sub-grid models that plague commonly used
turbulent combustion models. Its numerical implementation uses an embedded
manifold approach, wherein the flame surface is represented implicitly as the
zeroth level set of a scalar field. Since the flame surface is determined
unambiguously, all pertinent information to its propagation will be directly
contained in the flame topology and in the flow field at the same location. The
acquired knowledge on flame instabilities and flame-turbulence interactions will
serve to guide the experimental studies in this area and improve large-scale
computational efforts, by replacing ad-hoc lumped parameters with prototypical
flame configurations that are fundamentally sound and based on physical first
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.