* 1911482
* GP-IMPACT: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrating Geoscience to Engage Majors with Mathematics: iGEM2
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Griffith, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 192,541.00

Part I&lt;br/&gt;Entry level math courses in college often form a roadblock for
STEM-intended students, particularly when students do not test directly into
Calculus when they enter college. This is certainly true at The University of
Texas at Arlington (UTA), an access-oriented university, and remains a challenge
faced by universities across the country. Calculus is the first mathematics
course in all natural science degree plans at UTA; however, Algebra or
Precalculus are common mathematics entry points for STEM-intended majors
especially those who begin their major through nontraditional pathways. In
spring of 2018, 48% of all UTA undergraduate students entered UTA as transfer
students, and 42% of all UTA undergraduates were first generation students.
Given these statistics, and the fact that the proposed work will directly affect
~1000 students per semester at UTA taking College Algebra and Precalculus, this
project will have an enormous impact on a diverse population of at-risk students
who aspire to graduate with a STEM degree, but are also largely unaware of
opportunities in the geosciences. We will recast College Algebra concepts in the
context of societally relevant Earth Science themes without changing the content
of the current course. In this way, we will empower beginning STEM students by
placing abstract mathematical concepts in a scientific context at a critical
transition which constitutes statistically a major stumbling block for many of
STEM-intended majors. This is a new strategic partnership, as the geosciences
incorporate research methods from across all of STEM and are therefore likely to
be relatable to a broad range of STEM-intended students. At the same time, it
will expose students early in their college experience to geoscience as a
potential major or career. Success of the project will be determined by
monitoring D-F-W rates of this course, evaluate students? perceptions of the
geosciences and confidence in mathematics, and tracking students through
declaration of their major and beyond. We will test the transferability of this
model by implementing it in the Precalculus course at UTA during the second year
of this continuing project and using the College Algebra redesign in the
equivalent course at Tarrant County College in Fort Worth, Texas to gauge its
effectiveness and transferability across institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
II&lt;br/&gt;At The University of Texas at Arlington (UTA), mathematics courses
leading to Calculus constitute a major obstruction to success for alarming
numbers of STEM-intended majors. This fact reflects a challenge faced by
universities across the country. Our goals are to (1) improve success of
intended STEM majors at UTA in mathematics courses that lead to Calculus,
courses taken primarily by STEM-intended majors, but yielding D-F-Withdraw rates
&gt;60%, and (2) introduce first and second year students to the geosciences and
related career pathways before they decide on a major, thereby increasing the
number and diversity of students who choose to major in the geosciences. We will
do this by first modifying College Algebra by integrating geoscience concepts
into the mathematics curriculum and lab components, reaching approximately 1,000
students per semester at UTA. Video presentations featuring current research of
faculty, students, and geoscientists in industry and related fields will
motivate a societally relevant Earth Science theme and delineate how a
particular algebraic skill is essential for his/her research or job. Concepts
introduced in these videos will be developed and incorporated into homework
assignments, challenge problems, and lab exercises involving problem-solving
activities that synthesize mathematical concepts and apply the concepts to
problems related to the Earth Science theme. In this way, the mathematical
abstraction will be connected with geoscience content crossing the fields of
geophysics, environmental geochemistry, hydrogeology and oceanography. This is a
strategic partnership, as the geosciences incorporate research methods from
across all of STEM and are therefore likely to be relatable to a broad range of
STEM-intended students. This collaboration will empower beginning STEM students
by placing abstract mathematical concepts in a scientific context at a critical
transition, which constitutes statistically a major stumbling block for many
STEM-intended majors. At the same time, it will expose students early in their
college experience to geoscience as a potential major or career. This project is
possible by building upon a new partnership between the School of Earth Science
at The Ohio State University and Mathematics at UTA. Success of the project will
be determined by monitoring D-F-W rates of this course, evaluate students?
perceptions of the geosciences and confidence in mathematics, and tracking
students through declaration of their major and beyond. We will test the
transferability of this model by implementing it in the Precalculus course at
UTA during the second year of this continuing project and using the College
Algebra redesign in the equivalent course at Tarrant County College in Fort
Worth, Texas to gauge its effectiveness and transferability across
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.