* 1911732
* EAGER: Investigating the Use of Spiral Cracking Pattern in Fracture Characterization of Soft Adhesive Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Behzad Behnia, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2022
* USD 179,356.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
investigate a novel method of fracture characterization of soft adhesive
materials through spiral cracking patterns that can form on these materials when
they are attached to a stiff substrate. Application of traditional fracture
testing methods in fracture assessment of soft materials is quite challenging
due to poor repeatability as well as large creep deformations that occurs during
the test. The research outcome of this project could enable a paradigm shift in
fracture behavior characterization of soft adhesive materials. Moreover, the
research will provide understanding of cracking in film/substrate systems, which
is essential in designing crack-resistant coatings. Knowledge created through
this research will empower researchers to precisely interpret cracking patterns
in important applications areas, such as thermal barrier coatings, reflective
coatings in optical applications, modern high-performance ceramics (e.g. turbine
blades in jet engines), micro-electro-mechanical systems (MEMS), and medicine.
Other potential benefits to the US economy and society include manufacturing of
durable and high-performance fracture resistant materials, such as paint,
epoxies, and hydrocarbon polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of this EAGER project is to effectively utilize spiral cracking pattern as a
powerful diagnostic tool to obtain valuable information about the composition
and fracture behavior of soft adhesive materials. An innovative integrated
approach coupling acoustic emissions (AE) technique with Digital Image Analysis
(DIA) will be explored: (1) to determine the precise 3D geometry of spiral
cracks; (2) to find the best mathematical model to represent the cracking
patterns; and (3) to measure the AE-based fracture energy of the material.
Multi-sensor AE source-location approach will be used to provide real-time
accurate visualization of the 3D geometry of fracture process zone along the
spiral crack path. Finally, quantitative assessment of mud (channeling) cracking
patterns, morphology of cracks, and statistical analysis of shape and size of
fragmentation will be explored. The relationship between fracture energies from
spiral and mud crackings will be thoroughly investigated to predict the mud
cracking patterns in thin films using the spiral cracking-based fracture energy
of the material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.