* 1911659
* Exploring Spin-Orbital Coupling Effects: 3D to 2D Perovskite Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Bin Hu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 06/30/2022
* USD 398,086.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Organic-inorganic halide perovskites have shown promise
for solar cells with performance approaching that of commercially available
devices. These devices could transform the solar energy landscape, given the
promise for low-cost manufacturing of flexible devices. Further advances require
a deeper understanding of structure-property relationships. This project plans
to study the fundamental properties of perovskites. The focus will be on spin-
orbit coupling, which connects optical, electrical, and magnetic properties.
These studies will combine materials processing, device engineering, and dynamic
measurements. The goal is to achieve a deeper understanding of these materials
and advance the performance of perovskite solar cells. The project will impact
graduate and undergraduate students through outreach and new curriculum. The PI
will also recruit and involve students from underrepresented groups in science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will experimentally investigate spin-orbital coupling (SOC) effects in organic-
inorganic hybrid halide perovskite solar cells ranging from 3D to 2D designs.
The recent success of perovskite solar cells stems from the high absorption
coefficient, efficient dissociation of excited states, and superior carrier
transport that simultaneously occur within spin-orbital coupling framework.
However, in-depth fundamental studies are timely needed to further advance the
research and development of perovskite solar cells by revealing deeper
structure-property relationships in both excited state and carrier dynamics. The
objective of this project is to understand the SOC effects under doping,
structural ordering, and external stimuli. The goal of this research is to
reveal the underlying mechanisms to tune SOC effects, Rashba effects, and spin
mixing towards providing innovative mechanisms to further advance photovoltaic
functionalities in organic-inorganic hybrid halide perovskites. This project
plans to achieve three critical goals: (i) reveal innovative mechanisms of
doping-tunable SOC, (ii) explore SOC effects on direct/indirect band transitions
through Rashba effect, and (iii) elucidate SOC effects on spin mixing between
dark and bright states, in hybrid halide perovskites ranging from 3D to 2D
designs. The proposed research will be performed by integrating three major
interdisciplinary efforts from materials processing, device engineering, and
experimental measurements, to explore SOC effects. The materials processing
effort will prepare both 3D and 2D perovskites with different polarizations and
structural symmetries/asymmetries to provide a fundamental platform to explore
SOC effects. The device engineering effort will prepare state-of-the-art
perovskite solar cells from 3D to 2D structures. The experimental measurements
will include magnetic field effects, light polarization-modulated
photocurrent/photoluminescence, time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy,
and pump-probe transient absorption to reveal underlying mechanisms towards
controlling SOC effects in hybrid halide perovskites ranging from 3D to 2D
designs upon introducing doping, structural ordering, and external stimuli.
Overall, the project will elucidate the key factors of controlling SOC effects,
Rashba effects, and spin mixing towards fundamentally advancing perovskite
photovoltaic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.