* 1911280
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: Fundamental Investigation of Zinc-Coating of Advanced High Strength Steels Directed by Multiscale Modeling and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 89,292.00

New-generation advanced high strength steels need to be coated with a thin layer
of zinc that provides corrosion protection to the substrate. Thus, zinc coating
is a critical component that enables steels to maintain structural integrity for
prolonged service times. Prediction and control of the coating process requires
better understanding of interfacial reactions between zinc and steel substrate,
which are very complex. This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering (CDS&amp;E) collaborative research award supports fundamental
research that combines cutting-edge experimental techniques and multi-scale
computer simulations to study the interfacial microstructures that develop
during coating. The outcomes of this research will provide guidelines for
improved coating of advanced high strength steel sheets which enable production
of lighter and safer vehicles, and ultimately contribute to reducing emissions
of green-house gases. This project also provides an opportunity to educate
engineering students with cross-discipline computational and experimental
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The zinc-steel interfacial structures determine the
success or failure of forming, welding, and corrosion protection capabilities of
advanced high strength steels. There is a lack of fundamental knowledge
regarding the process-microstructure-property relationships in zinc-coated
steels produced by galvanizing and galvannealing, due to the fact that complex
metallurgical reactions occur in a region less than 100 nanometers. The research
team will utilize focused ion beam to prepare specimens for transmission
electron microscopy analyses to resolve complicated, fine-scale interfacial
microstructures and to reveal the chemistry of the interfacial entities. The
data will be used to calibrate and validate cross-length scale models, spanning
from the electronic to mesoscale. Density functional theory calculations will be
performed to determine structures and properties of oxides and intermetallics.
The obtained data will be used to develop multicomponent interatomic potentials
based on the modified embedded-atom method. These potentials will be employed in
large-scale atomistic simulations to determine energetics data for the formation
of oxides and intermetallics. The experimental and atomistic modeling data will
be fed to unprecedented multicomponent, multi-phase field models to simulate
formation and evolution of microstructures of internal/external oxidation,
inhibition layer, and intermetallics. The iterations between experiments and
models will provide a unique approach to facilitate the discovery of new coating
processes for advanced high strength steels.