* 1911678
* EAGER: DREAM-B: Collaborative Research: Moldable and Wave Tunable Materials for Complex Freeform Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Stefano Gonella, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2022
* USD 70,000.00

Natural disasters, such as hurricanes, tornados, and earthquakes, pose a
continuous threat in the United States, which can result in economic losses as
well as loss of life. Unpredictable weather patterns have led to more severe and
frequent natural disasters and, therefore, mitigating the impact of hazards on
building structures is important for continuity in national welfare and
prosperity following a disaster. Aside from building structures that can sustain
various extreme events, modern and future architecture has shifted towards
complex freeform structures, beyond simple geometries, to achieve aesthetically
pleasing structures and to make efficient use of space. A solution that
simultaneously addresses all the above issues will require redefining some of
the conventional paradigms in construction material design and deployment. This
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will investigate a new
construction material approach for building skins and facades that are moldable
to various complex geometries and, at the same, have the ability to manipulate
waves imparted to the buildings and dissipate energy from high velocity winds.
The moldability will be achieved by relief cutting solid panels made of wood and
metals with certain microstructural patterns, which is a low-cost process and
hence suitable for the building industry. While relief cutting promotes flexible
surfaces, this approach generally reduces the load carrying ability of the
panels, which may not be desirable. This study will provide a means to
potentially turn the disadvantage of the cutting method into an advantage, i.e.,
utilizing the cut patterns for tuning the dynamic properties to better resist
hazard loadings. Because of the architected nature, the cut surfaces are
expected to display a wide range of wave and vibration control and energy
dissipation mechanisms. Equipping buildings with the ability to redirect,
localize, trap, and dissipate energy, instead of merely resisting the impacted
forces, can lead to a more efficient hazard mitigation strategy. This research
can advance structural engineering by pushing complex freeform shapes to a
standard practice that intertwines aesthetic arguments, building performance
requirements, and material design considerations. To a greater impact, freeform
complex shapes can provide buildings with additional functionalities beyond
their default load bearing and shelter capabilities. This project will provide
undergraduate and graduate students with interdisciplinary professional and
research training opportunities. Project data will be archived and made publicly
available in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to provide fundamental knowledge
regarding the interplay between complex freeform geometries, microstructural
morphologies, constituent properties (viscoelastic and inelastic deformations),
and mechanisms of wave propagation and energy dissipation in architectural
materials. A technique known as relief cutting (or kerfing) will be used to
endow thin material sheets with prescribed curved shapes and surface patterns.
The objective of such patterning is two-fold. First, it will allow molding flat
plates into a nearly endless array of complex freeform shapes to fulfill a
variety of functional and aesthetic architectural needs. Second, it will induce
a microstructural geometry and property modulation that can help manipulate a
wide range of wave and vibration events, through energy absorption and
dissipation mechanisms. After a simulation-based design stage exploring the
design space available via kerfing, freeform components will be fabricated,
molded into shape, and tested. In the design and testing of laboratory
specimens, excitations that mimic the dynamic loads of high velocity winds will
be accounted for to realize stress and deformation fields similar to those
observed in realistic freeform structures used in actual architectural
structures. This research is high risk and high reward as it will be a
significant departure from traditional construction methodologies: 1) it will
lead to a paradigm shift in building design, in which freeform complex shapes
will be demonstrated to offer better resistance to dynamic loadings; 2) it will
introduce a new and bold modular fabrication philosophy for freeform shapes that
will generate minimal material waste, eliminate the need for mold casting, and
simplify the logistics of material transportation; and 3) it harmoniously will
blend dynamic performance and architectural constraints - two requirements that
are often perceived to be mutually exclusive - by taking advantage of the
intrinsic mechanical and aesthetic attributes of complex shapes and
microstructural patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.