* 1911580
* GP-IMPACT: The Community College Compass - Mapping a Guided Pathway into Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Luo Cassie Xu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 415,354.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The Community College Compass project will advance efforts in
the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program by forming a
consortium of partners to develop and implement a guided pathway into the
Geosciences that will engage students across community colleges within the City
University of New York (CUNY) system. Guided pathways in community colleges are
a set of strategies that offer students highly structured learning experiences
in which they are provided with clear academic and professional goals, cohesive
academic programs, and aligned support services to assist them along program
paths. Community colleges in the CUNY system have been chosen as the focal point
because while they offer strong potential for diversifying our STEM workforce,
low persistence in degree completion/transfer rates to 4-year institutions
remains a challenge. For the Geosciences, the diversity challenge is magnified
even further, creating a critical need to not only recognize this disparity, but
to engage in conversations and activities that strengthen the multiple pathways
into the Geosciences, including those from community colleges. Community college
students who are not retained in the Geosciences represent a loss of talent and
investment. The consortium has an opportunity to demonstrate that these well-
connected networks have an important role to play in bringing diversity into our
research communities and promoting inclusive excellence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project will use a
collective impact framework and follow the guided pathway model to community
college education. The PIs intend to study how a collective group can design and
implement guided pathways into the Geosciences for community college students
and strengthen awareness, interest, and ultimately recruitment and matriculation
into geoscience majors at four-year institutions within CUNY. PIs hypothesize
that by creating a consortium around a common goal, bringing together key
representatives from community colleges, and introducing components of guided
pathways specifically for the Geosciences, students will begin to better
understand the field, but more importantly, how they can navigate their way
through the multiple pathways into it. Rather than create a one-size-fits-all
guided pathway in the Geosciences across CUNY's community colleges, the project
aims to design elements (i.e. course sequences and maps, learning outcomes, and
transfer procedures) of guided pathways, which can be integrated over time into
existing programs and departments. The work of the consortium will provide
evidence for how a set of research-based design principles and strategies to
support students, particularly for the Geosciences, can yield stronger outcomes
for recruiting students into the field and ultimately the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.