* 1911639
* Children's Learning from STEM Books Prior to School Entry
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Hilary Miller, Miller, Hilary
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 07/31/2020
* USD 69,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Science of Learning program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Patricia J. Bauer at Emory
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating how young children learn STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math) information prior to entering kindergarten. By the start
of Kindergarten, there are already large individual variations in young
children's STEM knowledge, with these early variations impacting both school
readiness and later academic achievement. It is thus essential to find ways of
promoting STEM knowledge on a large scale prior to Kindergarten entry. The
research under this award examines the effectiveness of learning STEM
information from shared book reading (i.e., reading books with caregivers).
Shared book reading is a common practice in homes and there are many children's
books that teach STEM information. However, to date it is unknown whether STEM
children's books are designed in optimal ways to promote early STEM learning and
how children learn from STEM books during shared book reading practices. This
research will have broad implications for promoting early STEM learning through
capitalizing on an already common practice of shared book reading and examining
how this practice can be made more effective by identifying and promoting the
availability of high-quality STEM books.

Shared book reading may be a simple and effective means of supporting STEM
knowledge acquisition early in childhood. However, there is currently limited
understanding of whether and how shared book reading promotes STEM-related
knowledge acquisition prior to formal education. This research under this
fellowship bridges this gap by investigating whether shared book reading is a
fruitful means of acquiring STEM-related semantic knowledge prior to formal
schooling and investigates ways of enhancing its efficacy. In Study 1, the
research will identify whether STEM-related children's books align with basic
learning principles in containing textual features that promote learning.
Specially, the fellow will conduct textual analyses to assess the extent to
which the books provide support for encoding and demand for actively processing
semantic STEM-related information. The fellow will conduct two textual analyses
that supplement each other: one using human coding to analyze high-level meaning
structures; and one using computerized natural language processing (NLP) to
investigate low-level features. In Studies 2 and 3, the research investigates
how support and demand for learning STEM facts in picture books and maternal
shared book reading styles interact to facilitate young children's STEM learning
prior to formal education. Study 2 is a naturalistic study assessing how
mother's typical shared book reading styles interact with the supportive and
demanding textual features of STEM books to affect children's STEM-learning.
Study 3 is a controlled examination of how these textual features impact
children's STEM-learning. The research will make four primary contributions.
First, it will provide insights into the unexplored area of shared book reading
as a means of promoting early STEM knowledge. Second, it will complement
research that is focused on caregiver book reading styles with attention to the
dual interaction of both the books themselves and caregiver's styles on
children's early knowledge acquisition. Third, it will provide a more
encompassed understanding of processes involved in early STEM knowledge
acquisition by combining research from multiple theoretical traditions
(cognitive science and socio-cultural theories). Fourth, it will move research
to more centrally considering how the availability of cultural tools in the
environment (e.g., books) and the use of such tools (shared book reading)
influence cognition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.