* 1911346
* Multiscale Mechanobiology of Growth and Remodeling During Wound Healing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Sarah Calve, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2023
* USD 415,885.00

During wound healing, a series of growth and remodeling processes transform an
initial fibrin clot into a scar primarily made out of collagen, which usually
has inferior mechanical properties compared with normal skin. While progress has
been made towards understanding how the mechanical properties of the tissue
change during wound healing, much less is known about how local remodeling of
the extracellular matrix (ECM) at the cell level during would healing leads to
the new mechanical properties at the tissue level. The objective of this project
is to understand how the extracellular matrix (ECM) is remodeled at the
microscale by fibroblasts, and how these changes of the ECM lead to the observed
changes at the tissue (macro) scale. This will be tackled through a combination
of experimental and computational modeling efforts. The framework will increase
knowledge about how the way in which cells sense and respond to their mechanical
environment at the microscale is linked to tissue level growth and remodeling.
By advancing understanding in this area, it may be possible to translate the
knowledge to improved interventions to support wound healing - a key problem in
medicine. In order to further broaden the impact of the award, the open-source
software developed through this research will be made available to the community
through Github. In addition, the researchers will organize a workshop at a
national conference focused on multiscale modeling of biological systems in
order to train the next generation of scientists. The work will further be
complemented with educational and mentoring activities aimed at increasing
representation of minorities by continuing to participate in the Purdue?s Summer
Undergraduate Research Fellowship and Pathways to the Faculty Programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to elucidate how the
underlying cellular events at the microscale are connected to the macroscale
mechanics during would healing. It is hypothesized that growth and remodeling at
the macroscale can be predicted with a multiscale model based on microscale ECM
remodeling. This process is expected to be dependent on fiber degradation, fiber
deposition, and cell-driven contraction. In Objective 1, the project will
connect a finite element tissue level model to a detailed microscale model where
a fiber network is remodeled by a fibroblast population represented as agents.
In Objective 2, the growth and remodeling of fibrin and collagen gels seeded
with fibroblasts subjected to an initial deformation and controlled cytokine
concentration will be tracked for days to weeks. These measurements will be used
to calibrate the computational model. The model will be further validated in
Objective 3 by experimentally perturbing the system to alter collagen
deposition, fiber degradation, and cell contractility. Finally, the project will
create an in vitro wound model consisting of a fibrin domain inside a collagen
gel and compare changes in geometry with the computational model's
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.