* 1911813
* Traditional subsistence and the oral microbiome of indigenous communities in southeast Alaska
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Rosita Worl, Bader                   Alyssa
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2022
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Biological Anthropology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Rosita Worl at the Sealaska
Heritage Institute, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating to what degree consuming traditional foods and
participating in subsistence harvesting activities can help Indigenous
communities in southeast Alaska maintain a healthy oral microbiome. The
community of bacterial species and other microbes living in the mouth (the oral
microbiome) play a critical role in supporting human health, both within and
beyond the mouth. Dietary intake can impact the composition and function of the
microbes living in the oral microenvironment. While previous research has
compared communities with different subsistence methods and different population
histories, this project will provide a more contextualized and fine-scaled
analysis of how the oral microbiome responds to dietary variation by working in
collaboration with Tsimshian, Haida, and Tlingit communities of southeast
Alaska. The project addresses existing limitations in understanding the
relationship between diet and the oral microbiome by analyzing how variation in
the types and amounts of traditional foods consumed drives intra-/inter-
individual variation in the oral microbiome. This research will illustrate to
what extent maintaining elements of the traditional hunter-fisher-gatherer diet
can support a healthy, diverse oral microbiome in these Alaska Native
communities, with implications for understanding the evolution of the human oral
microbiome more broadly as well as the impact of industrialized foods on human
health and biological function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project
will be achieved through community-collaborative research with Indigenous
communities in southeast Alaska. The researcher will engage in archival research
and facilitate community focus groups to identify the various social, economic,
environmental, and political factors shaping Alaska Native subsistence practices
in southeast Alaska. This contextualizing data will be paired with survey data
from four Alaska Native communities, two rural and two urban, to assess to what
extent individuals participate in traditional subsistence activities and consume
traditional foods. Finally, oral microbiome samples will be collected via oral
gumline swabs to examine how the oral microbiome in these communities is shaped
by the consumption of traditional foods. The community-collaborative research
methods employed in the study will provide a more nuanced understanding of how
and when the oral microbiome shifts in response to dietary changes. Importantly,
this research will combat the existing ascertainment bias in the field of human
microbiome studies, where Indigenous communities are underrepresented, and
provide new insight into the factors shaping how or why Indigenous communities
choose to participate in genomic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.