* 1911781
* Defining the molecular basis of microbial syntrophy using synthetic communities
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Robert Gunsalus, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 879,756.00

This research project addresses the study of a group of poorly understood
microorganisms called syntrophic bacteria and their methanogenic archaea
partners that play essential roles in the anaerobic recycling of all naturally
occurring biomass. They function as members of microbial communities that
consume decaying plant and animal material and convert it back into the starting
materials needed for photosynthesis by plants and algae. The syntrophic bacteria
first break down and recycle small organic molecules such as fats, amino acids
and small aromatic compounds. The resulting waste products (vinegar, water and
hydrogen gas) are then used by a second group of microbes called methanogens to
generate more water plus carbon dioxide and methane. Methane can be harvested
and used as a renewable energy supply. Through this cooperation, both microbes
obtain energy to survive and grow in environments where neither could alone. A
combination of molecular and biochemical tools is used to study the previously
undescribed metabolism in each microbe and to understand how they cooperate with
one another to optimally recycle waste materials in nature. The enzymes used in
substrate conversion will be identified and characterized; and how cells
accomplish the exchange of metabolites will be examined. The new knowledge will
assist in modeling and predicting how carbon is recycled in different
environments, as well as how these processes affect the normal maintenance of
the earth's biosphere. Furthermore, it will improve our ability to recycle
unwanted waste materials into renewable energy supplies. In outreach activities,
web-based learning materials will be generated and used to enhance undergraduate
microbiology instruction at both institutions. In addition, the PIs will perform
outreach activities in several under-developed countries to facilitate the
development of locally sustainable applications for waste treatment and energy
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Syntrophic metabolism is essential in nearly
all anaerobic ecosystems, yet very little is understood about the molecular,
biochemical, or physiological events that drive the associated ecological
transformations. Here, microbial communities composed of distinct species of
bacteria and archaea operate in metabolic balance to drive global carbon cycling
and ecosystem functioning. The PIs hypothesize that specialized biochemical and
adaptive systems are used by the syntrophic partners to accomplish their
community-driven metabolism. To examine this, the model Syntrophomonas
wolfei/Methanosprillum hungatei co-culture system will be employed to elucidate
basic principles governing formation and maintenance of the syntrophic
partnership. A combination of high-throughput technologies, including genome-
wide proteomic profiling and genetic two hybrid screens, will be employed to
identify the metabolic and regulatory networks involved in fatty acid
catabolism. This will be followed by the biochemical characterization of key
proteins needed for carbon oxidation and electron flow down to the formation of
H2 and CO2 which is a thermodynamically difficult process. The molecular events
required to establish and maintain a related but distinct co-culture
partnership, that between S. wolfei and Methanobrevibacter ruminantium will also
be examined. The resulting information will provide a foundation to model and
predict related processes by other multispecies microbial communities. The new
knowledge will be used to develop innovative solutions for waste treatment and
energy production and to engineer bio-methanation and microbial fuel systems to
provide locally sustainable applications for wastewater treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the Cellular Dynamics and
Function and the Systems and Synthetic Biology Programs in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.