* 1911271
* Louis Stokes New STEM Pathways Implementation-Only Alliance: Promotion of Underrepresented Minorities in Academic STEM (PUMA-STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Eve Mellgren, Elmhurst University
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,748,109.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the STEM workforce through their
efforts at significantly increasing the numbers of students successfully
completing high quality degree programs in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
STEM education through innovative recruitment and retention strategies and
experiences in support of groups historically under-represented in STEM
disciplines: African-Americans, Alaskan Natives, American Indians, Hispanic
Americans, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. The Promotion of
Underrepresented Minorities in Academic STEM (PUMA-STEM) alliance, under the
leadership of Elmhurst College, is a STEM Pathways and Implementation-Only
(SPIO) alliance in partnership with Benedictine University, Concordia University
Chicago, Dominican University, Lewis University, North Central College, Saint
Xavier University and the College of DuPage. Participating institutions are also
Hispanic-Serving or emerging Hispanic-Serving. All institutions are
predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs). It is hypothesized that an
alliance of small PUIs can successfully increase recruitment and retention of
underrepresented minority students in STEM fields by developing a committed
regional network of institutions working together to develop support programs
and build communities thus becoming a model for replication to other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the alliance is to double the
number of historically underrepresented minority students completing
baccalaureate degrees in STEM fields. To achieve its goals, the alliance will
implement interventions such as faculty and peer mentoring, high-quality
research experiences (including opportunities for community college students
transferring to four year schools) and programs to promote inclusive experiences
and a sense of belonging in STEM fields. Project results will be disseminated to
other colleges and universities, including community colleges, especially those
with largely commuter, Hispanic or other underrepresented minority student
populations. Effective dissemination will be aided via collaboration with the
Louis Stokes Midwest Regional Center of Excellence (LSMRCE), which offers annual
meetings attended by other alliances as well as dissemination through the
alliance website, scholarly publications and professional conferences on
teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.