* 1911199
* WoU-MMA: Prompt and Afterglow Radio Signals from Neutron Star Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Gregg Hallinan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 528,321.00

The merger of two ultra-compact stars, or neutron stars (NS), created the
gravitational wave event, GW 170817. Investigation of the radio wave emission
from the afterglow of GW170817 has provided key insights into the environment of
the merger as well as the energy and morphology of the associated outflows. The
late time confirmation of apparent superluminal motion has proved decisive in
verifying the launch of a relativistic jet from the merger, as well as improving
the use of mergers as "standard sirens" to constrain the Hubble constant of
cosmology. With improved sensitivity of the gravitational wave detectors LIGO
and Virgo, the next few years will begin an era when neutron star mergers will
be routinely detected in the local universe. A research program at the
California Institute of Technology (Caltech) will facilitate the discovery,
follow up and interpretation of the radio afterglows from these mergers,
produced by synchrotron light emission. The investigators will make use of
awarded observing time on the NSF's Karl G. Jansky Very Large Array (VLA) and an
approved program utilizing very long baseline interferometry (VLBI).
Simultaneously, this program will support new efforts to search for prompt low-
frequency counterparts to these same events. In addition, the investigators will
develop a multi-faceted program involving student education spanning K-12 and
undergraduate students. Three undergraduates will complete summer fellowships
over the course of the project. The principal investigator (PI) will mentor six
high school students from the Pasadena Unified School District to produce
science fair projects themed on gravitational wave and multi-messenger
astronomy. Finally, the PI will deliver three public lectures on gravitational
wave sources to a broad audience via the Caltech Astronomy Stargazing and Public
Lecture Series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LIGO and Virgo will uncover a new
population of nearby NS mergers. A comprehensive census of radio afterglow
emission from these mergers will give insights into the physics of central
engines, ejecta morphology and local environments of the merger. VLBI
observations will be crucial for constraining the geometry of the mergers and
hence for enabling precise measurements of the Hubble constant that can
potentially resolve the tension between the Planck/CMB-Type Ia supernova
discrepancy. Radio observations may provide the only means to detect an
electromagnetic counterpart for a significant fraction of the mergers (30% or
more; especially NS-black hole mergers). The results from the proposed research
will also help in addressing key open questions in broader astronomy, including
binary star evolution and compact binary merger history of the universe.
Finally, this research facilitates sensitive searches for prompt low-frequency
radio counterparts of mergers, which, while theoretically speculative, offers an
exciting prospect - a prompt or precursor counterpart to LIGO/Virgo detected
events. This project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.