* 1911571
* Structural and areal challenges to models of language change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Lise Dobrin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2023
* USD 309,874.00

While linguists are aware of how language shift (the process by which a
community of speakers changes from one language to another) plays a role in the
demise of a language, significant questions remain, including how social and
cognitive constraints shape language structure and how cognitive, social, and
historical factors interact to result in language shift. A related issue is that
what linguists do know comes primarily from Indo-European languages like English
or Latin, which restricts the possible data set in two ways: by the linguistic
structures these languages lack and by the smaller set of social situations
where language shift has occurred. In order to augment the typology of shift
situations and linguistic structure, this project will investigate language
change through a unique set of field notes and recordings of two endangered
languages of northeastern Uganda collected from 1967-1971, and from new
fieldwork with the remaining speakers. Because the target languages in this
study diverge typologically from much of the existing sample of structural
changes as languages cease to be spoken, they offer a control against the
possible hypothesis that observed structural similarities across shifting
languages are attributable to historically contingent interference rather than a
universal markedness hierarchy of particular grammatical structures. Broader
impacts of the project include advancing the training of a post-doctoral scholar
and creating learning opportunities for undergraduate linguistics students to
participate in and contribute to cutting-edge research. The project will ensure
the Nyangi and Soo communities also get copies of the materials in this
collection, as well as providing access to the broader community of scientific
researchers. Finally, the project will promote international collaboration
between scholars at American and Ugandan institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of situations in which an ancestral language is replaced by a non-
European language are poorly understood. In part, analyses of language shift in
languages shifting to non-European languages have been hard to come by because
such languages often lack documentation from before the time that they started
to shift. This means that there is no reference point to compare current
linguistic forms to: linguists have ending points for the types of change
undergone by languages, but not starting points. This project addresses this
problem by making data accessible from Nyangi (nyp) and Soo (teu), two languages
that are now being replaced by African languages. The data to be digitized and
archived in this project includes approximately 26 hours of audio recordings on
cassette tapes and reel-to-reel tapes and approximately 3,000 pages of hand-
written field notes. The resulting collection of digitized recordings will be
translated into English and into the language of broader communication used by
the Nyangi and Soo. A selection of its contents will be analyzed and richly
annotated in consultation with the Soo and Nyangi communities. Analyses of the
typological and areal motivations for the changes observed in Soo and Nyang'i in
the 50 years since the recordings in this collection were made will be
permanently archived in a secure and accessible location, shared and discussed
at scholarly conferences, and published in linguistics
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.