* 1911095
* FET: Small: Brain-Inspired Hyperdimensional Computing for IoT Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Tajana Rosing, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 06/30/2023
* USD 515,999.00

In today's world, technological advances are continually creating more data than
what we can cope with. Much of data processing will need to run at least partly
on devices at the edge of the internet, such as sensors and smart phones.
However, running existing machine learning algorithms on these devices would
drain their batteries and be also too slow. Hyper-Dimensional (HD) computing is
a class of learning algorithms that is motivated by the observation that the
human brain operates on a lot of simple data in parallel. In contrast to today's
Deep Neural Networks and other similar algorithms, systems that use HD computing
to learn will be able to run at least thousand times more efficiently, can be
implemented directly in non-volatile memory, and are natively more secure as
they use a large number of bits (~10,000) to encode and process data in
parallel. Most importantly, such systems can explain how they made decisions,
resulting in sensors and phones that can learn directly from the data they
obtain without the need for the cloud at minimum impact to their battery
lifetime. This project will develop HD computing software and hardware
infrastructure, so that engineers can easily provide HD computing capabilities
in their products, and thus benefit from their speed and energy efficiency. The
project will support underrepresented minority students including K-12 outreach
activities, and disseminate its outcomes and code through open-source
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop: i) novel algorithms
supporting key cognitive computations in high-dimensional space including
classification, clustering and regression; and ii) novel systems for efficient
HD computing on sensors and mobile devices, which cover hardware accelerators
such as GPUs, FPGAs and Processor in Memory (PIM), along with software
infrastructure to support it. Prototypes will be built and tested in smart
homes, and in a large scale sensor network called HPWREN, used for many
applications including firefighting, covering 20,000 sq. miles in San Diego
area. These demonstrations will show both the quality of the proposed HD
algorithms and the efficiency of system designs to address the real-world
learning problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.