* 1911476
* GP-EXTRA: Establishing high-impact curriculum to attract and retain students in a new environmental geology program
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Michael Savarese, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 162,981.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This IUSE:GEOPATHS pilot project consist of a linked summer
field course experience and subsequent fall research-based course to help
attract and retain students into a new Environmental Geology B.S. program at
Florida Gulf Coast University (FGCU). The summer field experiences and research-
based course are linked through content and employ high-impact practices.
Diversity will be addressed by targeting Hispanic and female students during
recruitment. This will help to increase traditionally underrepresented students
in geology majors. The field course will help overcome the physiographic
limitations of the Florida Coastal Plain, by bringing students to the Bahamas.
The field course is intended to strengthening students' interest in geology and
their connections to a cohort. This pilot project will help increase knowledge
which deals with the benefits of field experiences attracting and retaining
students into geology majors. It will also test the knowledge that suggests
exposing and engaging undergraduates in research attracts, retains, and sustains
students in STEM majors. The evaluation of this grant will be conducted by the
FGCU Whitaker Center for STEM Education. The evaluation will help achieve the
goals of this proposal through formative and summative
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This IUSE: GEOPATHS pilot
project consist of a linked summer field course experience and subsequent fall
research-based course. The summer field course experience will consist of lower-
level learning that builds towards higher-level learning through field-based
research experiences. Learning will continue into the fall research-based course
by engaging the students in several, short course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs) that build off of the field course content. This project
targets female and Hispanic students recruited from general education geology
courses. The specific goals of the field course experience and the following
research-based upper division courses are to: 1) attract students to the new
Environmental Geology B.S. major; 2) create a diverse student population in this
new major; 3) retain and graduate students from this Environmental Geology
major; 4) increase student self-confidence and learning; and 5) provide much
needed assessment to measure the effectiveness of both field courses and course-
based undergraduate research experiences. This pilot project has the ability to
create a diverse pipeline of geoscience graduates who can fill the geoscience
workforce needs in the coming years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.