* 1911776
* Target template and subsequent search misses: The underlying mechanism of multiple-target search errors.
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Mark Neider, Adamo, Stephen
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and the
Perception, Action, and Cognition program. The goal of the SPRF program is to
prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers
in academia, industry or private sector, andgovernment. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Joseph Schmidt and Dr. Mark
Neider at the University of Central Florida, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating subsequent search misses
(SSMs). SSMs are a pitfall in visual search when observers look for multiple
targets in their visual environment. Defined as a decrease in additional target
accuracy after detecting a prior target in a visual search, SSMs underlie both
real-world search errors (e.g., a radiologist is more likely to miss a smaller
tumor if a larger tumor was previously detected) and more simplified, lab-based
search errors (e.g., an observer is more likely to miss a target 'T' if a target
'L' was previously detected). Unfortunately, SSMs can account for one-third of
radiological errors under certain conditions and little is known about its
cognitive underpinnings. This project will investigate an expected cause of SSMs
by using simplified and simulated radiological search displays in order to help
translate the findings from basic research within visual cognition to cancer
detection within radiology. Because SSMs are a real threat within radiology, a
better understanding of their cause and ways to mitigate them can save
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate if SSMs occur because
a detected, first target is maintained as a target template-an active
representation of what the observer is searching for. Within the visual
cognition literature, a target template is known to bias observers to find
targets that are similar, and consequently, miss targets that are dissimilar to
the target template. If a detected target is maintained as a target template,
SSMs may occur because critical cognitive processes, necessary for target
detection, are processing the first target as a target template, resulting in a
failure to detect additional targets. Furthermore, the target template may bias
observers to search for targets similar to a first target, consequently making
them more likely to miss targets that are dissimilar. Through the use of
electroencephalogram (EEG) and eye tracking, the proposed projects will
investigate the neural responses associated with detecting a first target,
determine if maintenance of a first target as a template causes SSMs, and
explore how eye movements towards perceptually similar- and dissimilar-second
targets are affected. The proposed projects will then extend these findings back
to radiological search displays to determine whether radiologists also show a
similar pattern in search performance and eye movements when searching for
similar and dissimilar signs of cancer in mammograms (x-ray images of breast
tissue). Ultimately, the proposed projects will bridge visual cognition and
radiology to elucidate the underlying neural mechanism(s) of
SSMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.