* 1911928
* Targeted Infusion Project: Mathematical Engagement for the Marine, Biological, and Environmental Realms of Science (MEMBERS)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Shawn Dash, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The MEMBERS program at Hampton University
will enhance mathematical reasoning in the Departments of Biology and Marine and
Environmental Sciences. The interdisciplinary programs, seminars, workshop
experiences and novel activities will be leveraged to recruit, train and prepare
underrepresented minority students as the next generation of integrative
scientist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the MEMBERS program is to develop
the foundation of discipline-specific quantitative skills to facilitate students
in the Marine, Biological, and Environmental sciences to become well-rounded
members of the scientific community. Emphasis will be placed on the application
of major-specific mathematics, graphical, and computer programming skills in
existing courses, create new upper-level research-based course offerings, and
support experiential learning opportunities for students via the support of
undergraduate internships. Additionally, the program will provide support in the
development of written and oral communication skills and financial literacy in
the sciences, as these skills are essential to the communication of science to
professional and public audiences, and for planning and managing STEM careers.
New courses will be incorporated into the departments? curricula; new teaching
and learning infrastructure will be used to modernize existing courses; and
inquiry-based senior projects and theses will benefit from enhanced facility
with quantitative, graphical, and programming techniques. These strategies will
extend the impact of this project beyond the lifetime of the funding
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.