* 1911584
* GP-EXTRA Urban-Wide Advanced Transdisciplinary Environmental Research (Urban-WATER) program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ruby Broadway, Dillard University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 315,792.00

Part 1 - The Urban-WATER project will create a unique interdisciplinary
extracurricular certificate program at Dillard University that will enhance
diversity and community problem-solving in the geosciences, particularly related
to urban water issues. The purpose of this program is to train students in real
world water-related environmental issues within an urban setting in order to
grow the next generation of scientists and an urban water workforce. The
intransigent environmental issues in the city of New Orleans touch on a building
crisis for our nation amidst urban growth, the removal of watersheds and
accelerating climate change. Thus, this program targets a central problem of
critical national importance for economic prosperity and human
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;The program will be based at Dillard University, a
historically black university and college In New Orleans Louisiana, and a key
training pipeline for African American students and females in science. In light
of the results of Hurricane Katrina and other recent weather events, New Orleans
is an ideal a test bed to engage and interest students toward a key scientific
and urban/economic problem. Notably, in 2005, there were over 50 failures of the
levees and flood walls protecting New Orleans, exemplifying the tremendous
vulnerability of urban homes and businesses to rising water, with other major
cities across the U.S. facing similar challenges. Utilizing the Gulf Coast as a
backdrop, this project will center on experiential approaches to environmental
teaching and research, infusing GIS mapping, economic analyses, and community
participation, to improve and advance undergraduate STEM education pathways into
the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2 - Twenty advanced students per year
in their final two years of studies at Dillard University will be selected to
participate in the Urban-WATER certificate program. These students will form a
social/academic cohort and will pursue activities in the biological sciences,
computer sciences, urban studies and economics to build a new community at
Dillard for developing interest, awareness and competencies in key environmental
issues affecting New Orleans. Topics will include: urban water geoscience, urban
hydrogeology, the science of runoff, water usage, water management, and
protection as well as the political and economic issues involved in urban water
systems. In sum, this certificate program will interweave the study of
geographic information systems (GIS), geography, cartography, spatial analysis,
and fields such as geo-visualization, geodesy, geo-computation, modeling, and
computer science to establish a new transdisciplinary field in urban water
studies. This skill set will be brought to bear on the long-standing problem of
urban water in New Orleans as a port city facing another potential catastrophic
water-related event within this century. Dillard faculty will mentor students to
develop independent research topics for the capstone course of the certificate
with their research activities including water toxicology, flood assessment, GIS
applications and other topics.&lt;br/&gt;Partners involved in this project
include Dillard's School of STEM, the Department of Urban Studies, and the
College of Business. In addition recruitment will also leverage and engage
students from the NSF-funded Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for Minority
Participation (LS-LAMP), an alliance of 12 institutions across Louisiana.
Methods involve a transdisciplinary team-based approach to courses/activities as
well as a place-based approach through a unique certificate program that will
draw community interest in geosciences across the university and in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.