* 1911225
* Revealing Supernova Progenitors with Las Cumbres Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dale Howell, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 567,199.00

A team of researchers working at the Las Cumbres Observatory (LCO) will leverage
the observing capability of this network of telescopes to probe several new
frontiers of research in explosive astrophysical transient objects. The research
team will: (1) obtain the first well-observed sample of mysterious and recently
discovered Fast Rising Luminous Transients; (2) develop the first large sample
of a certain type of exploding star or supernova (Type Ia) for which the nature
of the pre-explosion progenitor is inferred from observations of the explosion
ejecta being shocked by hitting a companion star, and (3) study late-stage
stellar mass loss from the progenitors of a different type of supernova, called
a core-collapse supernova. The LCO consists of a network of 22 robotic
telescopes spaced around the globe, which are capable of rapid initial
observations followed by continuing SNe observations for hundreds of days. This
project will help to fund the Global Supernova Project, which pools discoveries
from every major local universe supernova search program, screens hundreds of
potential candidates, and triggers prompt and long-term monitoring of the most
interesting targets across the electromagnetic spectrum. The research project
will also foster education by giving students in the LCO schools program
opportunities to observe SNe with the network, obtain real science data, and
learn from provided curricula. The investigators will engage in public outreach
including public talks, radio, TV, print, and YouTube appearances and
interviews. Finally, supporting a successful public-private partnership through
the LCO should encourage more private funding of
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observing program has an aim of
answering the following questions. (1) What are Fast Rising Luminous Transients?
Proposed answers range from the shock breakout of a supernova, a failed blue
supergiant supernova, an electron capture supernova, fallback onto a shrouded
central engine with jets, the merger of white dwarfs to become a magnetar, and
the tidal disruption of a star by an intermediate mass black hole. Are these
more than 80 poorly observed transients (only AT2018cow has been well observed)
even the same phenomena? (2) Are there two classes of SN Ia progenitors as is
currently thought? For the single compact object progenitors, what is the
distribution of inferred companion radii? Do these SNe share traits in terms of
host galaxy properties, line velocities, composition, or subtype, which would
allow us to separate them into a new class or identify them by other means? (3)
What fraction of supernovae have flash ionized features from circumstellar
material lost by the progenitor in the weeks before the SN and how does this
correlate with the luminosity function and other properties? What are the radii
and structure of core-collapse progenitors as determined from shock
cooling?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.