* 1911138
* Using Velocity Fields to Improve Gravitational Lensing Mass Measurements of Galaxies and Galaxy Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* David Wittman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 07/31/2022
* USD 212,369.00

The mass content of galaxies and clusters of galaxies is difficult to measure if
the matter is not emitting light. One way of measuring this mass is by looking
at distortions in the shapes of more distant galaxies as their light is
deflected by the gravitational influence of the mass in the galaxy or cluster of
interest. This project will test to see if looking for distortions in the
velocities of the stars in the distant galaxies can help improve these
measurements. The project will use simulations to see what improvements can be
made using the new technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current weak lensing surveys
require large numbers of lensed galaxies to be averaged in order to beat down
the noise in measurements of lensing mass. This project will look at the
benefits of including measurements of the velocity field of the lensed galaxies.
This should reduce the number of galaxies needed to obtain the same signal-to-
noise, and therefore increase the angular resolution of the mass distributions
that can be measured using weak lensing. The project will use cosmological
simulations to assess the efficacy of this technique and identify ways to
maximize the return on observational investment in weak lensing
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.