* 1911565
* GP-IMPACT: ICE-AGE: Integrating Continuous Experiential Activities for Geoscience Education
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Chonika Coleman-King, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 351,411.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Recruiting undergraduate students to geoscience majors
in&lt;br/&gt;Tennessee is severely hampered by the fact that most Tennessee high
schools do not offer&lt;br/&gt;a geoscience class. As a result, students tend to
graduate high school and enter college&lt;br/&gt;with no real idea that
geoscience is a potential major. Project ICE-AGE will engage with&lt;br/&gt;high
school students by exposing them to the geosciences in the context of core
science&lt;br/&gt;classes. First, a series of "Lessons-In-A-Box" will be
designed to meet state&lt;br/&gt;educational standards in the core sciences of
biology, chemistry, and physics, but drawn&lt;br/&gt;explicitly from
interdisciplinary geoscience fields. These lessons will be tested
with&lt;br/&gt;visiting school groups at a campus museum, introduced to area
teachers through&lt;br/&gt;workshops and educational conferences, and circulated
by the Knox County Public&lt;br/&gt;Library System. Second, the PIs will
collaborate with three groups of high school students,&lt;br/&gt;including two
that consist primarily of underrepresented minorities, on
authentic&lt;br/&gt;scientific research. This work expands a project with one
high school that has resulted in&lt;br/&gt;participation of students in writing
a peer-reviewed paper, and four student-led&lt;br/&gt;presentations at regional
and national scientific meetings. Finally, PIs will create two
new&lt;br/&gt;classes for future teachers in culturally responsive geoscience
education and research&lt;br/&gt;methods in science. Taken together, PIs expect
to introduce area high school students and&lt;br/&gt;future teachers to the
geosciences in such a way as to enhance their required
learning&lt;br/&gt;objectives and expose them to the potential for further study
and employment in geology&lt;br/&gt;and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes to develop
and deploy an integrated set of&lt;br/&gt;programs that will engage high school
students along a spectrum from one-day lessons&lt;br/&gt;that will contact large
numbers of students, to intensive, year-long research projects
that&lt;br/&gt;will involve a smaller number of students. PIs will also train
pre-service STEM teachers&lt;br/&gt;in the use of active learning techniques
using geological concepts. PIs will specifically&lt;br/&gt;work with high school
populations that are enriched in underrepresented minorities, in&lt;br/&gt;order
to address the low diversity of current geoscience students and practitioners.
PIs&lt;br/&gt;will actively promote these programs to teachers around the
country via teachers'&lt;br/&gt;workshops, STEM education conferences, and
professional geoscience conferences.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project will
produce scholarship in the fields of education and geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;PIs
expect that these efforts will expose ~165 high school students to
authentic&lt;br/&gt;geoscience research and at least 1000 students to Lessons-
In-A-Box. The project will also help to&lt;br/&gt;train ~90 pre-service
teachers, 6 graduate students, and 1 undergraduate in
teaching&lt;br/&gt;geoscience and generating culturally responsive lesson plans.
This project will also lead&lt;br/&gt;to closer collaboration between faculty in
the University of Tennessee's Departments of&lt;br/&gt;Theory and Practice in
Teacher Education, and Earth and Planetary Sciences. In the long&lt;br/&gt;term
these collaborations will help EPS faculty to improve teaching techniques
for&lt;br/&gt;undergraduates and to train more pre-service teachers in
geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.