* 1911322
* OPUS:  CRS Integrating data and theory to understand the evolution of gene expression
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Patricia Wittkopp, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2023
* USD 315,466.00

Advances in biology are often the result of synthesizing findings from two
different disciplines of research. This project combines 20 years of research in
two areas: how genetic material is expressed to build organisms and how
mutational changes in DNA sequence lead to changes in specific traits over time.
The project combines data from experimental yeast populations measuring the
effects of new mutations on gene expression with theory in evolutionary and
quantitative genetics. The synthesis of this work will provide a more complete
understanding of how differences in gene expression arise and persist over
evolutionary time. This synthesis will be presented in a scholarly review paper
expected to have a major influence on the field. It will also form the basis of
a computational model that will enable new areas of interdisciplinary work.
Finally, the importance of mutation as the origin of differences within and
between species will be presented to the general public in an interactive museum
exhibit developed in collaboration with the University of Michigan's Natural
History Museum. Ultimately, this research provides insight into the general
rules of life regarding how regulatory variation arises and persists, with
potential insights into diverse problems in agriculture, medicine and other
areas of societal interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene expression is controlled
by both cis- and trans-regulatory sequences. Variation in both types contributes
to expression differences seen within and between species. As for all traits,
this variation in gene expression reflects both the introduction of phenotypic
variation by mutation (the "arrival of the fittest") as well as filtering of
this variation by natural selection (the "survival of the fittest"). This
project will take advantage of data produced by the laboratory's systematic
study of properties of new regulatory mutations and comparisons with the
properties of regulatory variants found in natural populations. These
comparisons reveal both what can happen and what has happened in terms of
regulatory evolution. More specifically, the relative frequency, effects,
dominance, plasticity, gene-by-environment interactions, pleiotropy, and
epistasis of cis- and trans-regulatory mutations affecting expression of a focal
gene (the Saccharomyces cerevisiae TDH3 gene) have all been measured
empirically. In addition, the fitness effects of changing TDH3 expression have
also been determined in multiple environments, and cis- and trans-regulatory
variation among strains of S. cerevisiae recently isolated from the wild have
been characterized. Synthesizing these data and integrating them with
evolutionary theory will result in a more complete picture of the evolutionary
process than available for any other quantitative
trait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.