* 1911375
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Texas A&amp;M System LSAMP-RA
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Frank Pezold, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 02/29/2024
* USD 4,000,000.00

Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Texas A&amp;M System LSAMP-
RA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Texas A&amp;M System LSAMP Research Alliance (TAMUS
LSAMP-RA) is comprised of the original members, Texas A&amp;M University at
College Station, Prairie View A&amp;M University (a Historically Black College
or University [HBCU]), and Texas A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi (a Hispanic
Serving Institution [HSI]), plus a new member, Texas A&amp;M International
University (HSI). TAMUS LSAMP-RA will 1) implement programmatic initiatives to
increase engagement and enhance the success of underrepresented minority (URM)
students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and 2)
conduct research to explore the impact of research mentoring, grit, and
persistence on URM student success in STEM. A research team will investigate the
impact of various factors, including the quality of research mentoring
relationships on URM students' grit, persistence in STEM, and likelihood of
pursuing graduate study. Research results will inform evidence-based practices
in design and implementation of strong mentoring of URMs in undergraduate
research. Broad dissemination of results will ensure that lessons learned and
best practices will be communicated to provide URM students the information they
need to succeed and to aid colleges and universities in more effectively
engaging and mentoring URM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Programmatic
initiatives will include the following: a robust academic-year undergraduate
research program; international research experiences, including an introduction-
to-research learning community for first-year students and a short-term team-
based international research experiences for third-year students; community
building and professional development activities; and a multi-pronged mentoring
strategy. This project builds on a 26-year track record of success by TAMUS
LSAMP, and will continue the program's role as a central resource for broadening
participation across the Alliance through extensive collaborations with
externally funded programs as well as with institutionalized
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.