* 1911087
* RI: Small: Pose and Trajectory Optimization with Pervasive Contact
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kris Hauser, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Robots traditionally avoid making contact with objects, except during deliberate
and careful motions. This stands in stark contrast with how humans and other
organisms treat contact as a fact of life. A big reason for this gap is that
robots lack adequate mathematical and computational methods for decision-making
while touching. The goal of this project is to help close this gap by
investigating new mathematical models and software algorithms for robots to
reason about contact forces, geometry, and motion. The new capabilities enabled
by this research will help multi-fingered robots manipulate complex objects,
legged robots to use all parts of their body to move about in rough terrain and
human environments, and soft robots that can slide through tight spaces. The
project will also release open-source software to help disseminate research
results to the broader research community and accelerate the pace of robotics
research. Other impacts include contributions to undergraduate education in
robotics, and involvement of students from underrepresented groups as part of
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to
investigate numerically-stable and computationally efficient models for
pervasive, intimate contact between multiple objects through interactions such
as stacking, sliding, rolling, and jamming. The approaches under study have the
potential to overcome longstanding limitations in several fields including
robotics, animation, computer-aided design, virtual reality, and operations
research, which in the current state of practice view contact as a complicating
factor to be avoided whenever possible. Specific aims include 1) to expand
contact-implicit optimization methods to use scalable and numerically-stable
semi-infinite constraints, 2) to develop fast robust stability prediction
methods under geometric and friction uncertainty, and 3) to integrate knowledge
of contact physics with data in order to perform probabilistic inference more
accurately than physics or data alone. These methods will be tested on several
realistic scenarios, including legged robot trajectory planning, simulation of
object piles for bin-packing problems, and estimation of contact state from
manipulation observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.