* 1911950
* Protein-engineered nanostructures to illuminate protein delivery and cellular processing
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Wilfred Chen, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 482,692.00

Cells can ingest nanoparticles (NPs) that have distinct shapes. This project
will create NPs using therapeutic proteins as building blocks. The proteins will
be designed so that they can spontaneously form flexible, elongated particles.
The proteins will incorporate clusters of molecules that will bind strongly and
specifically to diseased cells. Controlling the size, shape, and chemistry of
the NPs will determine where they accumulate in the human body after injection.
If successful, this project could lead to new methods for targeted protein
delivery in cancer and other diseases. Engagement of high school students in
summer research opportunities, combined with extended research opportunities for
undergraduate students will help develop a STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objective is to design a protein nanostructure
platform capable of targeted intracellular delivery of proteins. A critical
challenge is that the physical and chemical characteristics necessary for
circulation are distinct from those necessary for cell uptake. Nanoscale
dimensions and "stealth" chemistries are best for circulation whereas molecular-
scale patterns of cell-binding ligands are best for cell uptake. The project
will involve multiple steps. Modular protein engineering approaches will be
applied to construct nanostructures with well-defined physical properties, using
active enzymes as building blocks. Nanostructures with defined ligand clustering
as well as ligand anisotropy will be created using unnatural amino acid (UAA)
modification of protein oligomers. The physicochemical properties of these
nanostructures that define important intracellular delivery outcomes will be
characterized. Ultimately, the project will offer new fundamental insights into
the design, construction, and growth of protein oligomers that assemble into
specific nanoarchitectures. The expectation is that this will lead to new
capabilities to design ?protein materials? that can address prohibitive barriers
in systemic administration and delivery of intracellular
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.