* 1911722
* Bicultural Identity and Competence Development
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Maria Safa Pernett, Safa, Maria Dalal
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Adriana
Umana-Taylor at Harvard University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports
an early career scientist investigating the antecedents and consequents of
biculturalism. Given the continued racial, ethnic, and cultural diversification
of the United States (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018), developmental research on
biculturalism is needed. Importantly, learning to be a member of two cultural
groups - to become bicultural - represents a normative developmental task of
minority individuals, including immigrants and individuals who are members of
ethnic-racial minority groups. For example, approximately 43 million immigrants
live in the U.S. and 40% of the U.S. population belongs to an ethnic-racial
group other than White, non-Hispanic (Migration Policy Institute, 2018). For
these individuals, attaining some degree of proficiency in each culture (i.e.,
some degree of bicultural competence) is an important indicator of adjustment
with implications for other developmental competencies. It is expected that
individuals who are members of two cultural groups (e.g., Latino and American,
Chinese and American) will first develop bicultural identities through the
processes of exploring their ethnic-racial and American identities and resolving
and integrating them. These processes are theorized to promote positive
development in the form of bicultural competence and psychosocial adjustment.
The mechanisms by which individuals develop bicultural identities and
competencies, however, are not well understood. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the project, entitled Bicultural Identity and Competence
Development, is to develop and advance scientific knowledge of culture and
development, specifically relative to the mechanisms by which minority
adolescents develop bicultural identities and competencies, and the associations
among bicultural identity formation processes, bicultural competence
development, and psychosocial adjustment. This research project employs a mixed-
method approach organized in two phases. Phase 1 involves a qualitative
investigation aimed at identifying and providing adolescents with opportunities
and tools to engage in bicultural identity processes and to develop bicultural
competence. Phase 2 involves a pilot test of the tools and strategies developed
in Phase 1, which will be integrated into an existing ethnic-racial identity
intervention. Specifically, two additional intervention sessions designed to
promote bicultural identity exploration, resolution, and integration will be
developed and pilot tested. The pilot test will enable examining feasibility of
implementation and preliminary data regarding effect sizes for the associations
between increases in bicultural identity development and increases in bicultural
competence and psychosocial adjustment over time. This research advances
scientific knowledge that can support the well-being of minority individuals.
Notably, it can benefit society by informing promotion efforts focused on the
achievement of key developmental competencies. Promoting bicultural identities
and competencies can increase positive mutual attitudes among individuals from
diverse ethnic-racial groups and strengthen individuals' sense of attachment to
the American society at large. This work, therefore, can contribute to the
development of a better society for all Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.