* 1911242
* RUI: Bridging the Spatial Gap in Local Seyfert Galaxies: Characterizing Active Galactic Nuclei Feeding and Feedback on Scales of Tens to Hundreds of Parsecs
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Erin Hicks, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 148,149.00

While astronomers now understand that supermassive black holes play a
fundamental role in the formation and growth of galaxies, the basis for the
relationship between a black hole and its galaxy remains a mystery. In order to
discover how a supermassive black hole interacts with its galaxy, astronomers
must peer into the very center of those galaxies in which the black hole is
actively growing. By observing those "active" galaxies nearest to us we can now
view the region around their black holes in enough detail to advance our
understanding of the nature of this relationship. This project will achieve this
through a comprehensive analysis of 40 local galaxies undergoing black hole
growth. The observational data from this survey will measure the location and
motion of gas over a wide range in temperatures, as well as the stars, in the
central regions of each of these galaxies. The survey will be complemented by
previously measured galaxies available in data archives, increasing the sample
size to more than 90 local galaxies. This large sample will support the first
meaningful investigation of the relationship between the environment near the
supermassive black hole with galaxy properties well outside of the central
region, which will provide essential clues to how supermassive black holes and
their galaxies interact. The observed inflow and outflow of gas within the
vicinity of the supermassive black holes will also complete our picture of
galaxies experiencing black hole growth by measuring the gas flow on scales from
beyond where the galaxies with black hole growth appear indistinguishable from
those with no growth, to scales where current observations are beginning to
probe structures associated with supermassive black hole growth. This research
will include substantial involvement by undergraduate students, particularly
those from traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences, throughout the
duration of the project. The general public and youth groups will also be
engaged through the development of a new planetarium show and a complementary
hands-on activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it is acknowledged that
supermassive black holes play a fundamental role in the evolution of galaxies,
the nature of the relationship between these black holes and the galaxies in
which they live has yet to be established. Models attempt to reproduce the
observed relationship, but due to a lack of observational measurements these
models must make broad assumptions about the physical processes responsible. It
is only the nearest galaxies in which the black hole is actively growing that
offer adequate spatial resolution to investigate the central regions relevant to
black hole growth. This program aims to provide the crucially needed
observational measurements of the processes governing the growth of black holes
and their galaxies. This will be achieved through a comprehensive analysis of
the central regions of 40 local galaxies undergoing black hole growth. The
observational data from this survey will measure the distribution and motions of
the gas over a wide range in temperatures, as well as the stars, in the central
500 pc of each galaxy. The survey sample will be complemented by previously
measured galaxies available in data archives, increasing the sample size to more
than 90 local galaxies. This statistically significant sample will support the
first robust investigation of trends between the central supermassive black hole
environment on scales of hundreds down to tens of parsecs with fundamental
galaxy properties, and will thus provide must needed observational constraints
for galaxy evolution models. The observed inflow and outflow of gas within the
vicinity of the supermassive black holes will also complete our picture of
galaxies experiencing black hole growth, by measuring the gas flow on scales
from beyond the central kiloparsec where galaxies with black hole growth appear
indistinguishable from those with no growth, to scales of ten of parsecs or less
where current observations are beginning to probe structures associated with
supermassive black hole growth. This research will include substantial
involvement by undergraduate students, particularly those from traditionally
underrepresented groups, throughout the duration of the project. The general
public and youth groups will also be engaged through the development of a new
planetarium show and a complimentary hands-on activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by NSF/MPS/AST and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.