* 1911505
* 2019 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference (MTSM)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Charles Sing, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This grant is to provide partial support for the 2019 Midwest Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference to be held on the campus of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign on June 2-4, 2019. The MTSM
Conference has historically provided a forum for researchers working on
theoretical and experimental aspects of Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics
to come together, present their work and exchange ideas. Most participants will
be from chemical engineering and chemistry departments, although students and
faculty from physics, materials science, mechanical engineering, and computer
science departments have also participated in this conference in the past. A
distinctive feature of The MTSM Conference is its focus on researchers in the
early stages of their academic careers, such as undergraduate and graduate
students, postdocs, and junior faculty. Because the meetings are regional and
organization costs are kept to a minimum, faculty members are often able to
travel with their entire group to the meeting.

Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics are an important area of research that
has a wide spectrum of applications in chemical, biological and natural systems.
The MTSM Conference series was started in 1988 and attracts participants from
academic institutions, industry and national laboratories. Most attendees are
from institutions located in the Midwest region of the US, which has a large
concentration of researchers working in the field of Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics. The MTSM Conference is distinguished by a focus on
students, postdoctoral researchers, and junior faculty, providing an opportunity
to discuss results in an informal yet focused setting. Experimental,
theoretical, and computational work is all well represented, with applications
ranging from energy conversion and storage, environmental protection, materials
design and synthesis of polymers and nanostructures, and investigation of
biomolecules for drug delivery. The conference participants supported by this
grant will be about 120 undergraduate students, graduate students, and
postdoctoral associates including members of underrepresented minorities in STEM
fields. The participants will have the opportunity to network with peers from
other institutions and exchange ideas about the current status and future
directions in research and education in the field of Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.