* 1911298
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Edward Witten, Institute For Advanced Study
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,194,300.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Edward Witten and a group
of postdoctoral researchers at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is devoted to the study of
elementary particle physics, including its connections to other areas of study
ranging from astrophysics and cosmology to condensed-matter physics and
geometry. Current and planned work of the researchers supported by this grant
covers a very wide range of topics, including the connections between gauge
theory (the modern language of the physics governing the elementary particles),
string theory (a speculative proposal for unifying the fundamental forces of
nature), and geometry. These researchers will also study the possibilities for
new models of particle physics that might be relevant at current and future
particle-physics experiments; new methods of computing and studying the ways in
which elementary particles scatter off each other; new experimental hints of the
cosmic dark matter which makes up most of the matter in the universe; and more.
Research in these areas thus advances the national interest by promoting the
progress of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. This project will also have significant
broader impacts. The postdoctoral fellows supported by this project will also
gain experience working at a high level on these exciting scientific problems,
which have all attracted great interest nationally and internationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Edward Witten's most recent work has
concerned the random-matrix approach to two-dimensional gravity and
supergravity, and its relation to volumes of moduli spaces. Witten also recently
worked with astronomers on a model of dark matter. The postdoctoral fellows
supported by this project have a wide range of interests and work with each
other on frontier topics in theoretical high-energy physics as well as with
Professor Witten and other local faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.