* 1911835
* Cognitive mechanisms underlying the spread of conventions in communities
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Robert Hawkins, Hawkins, Robert
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is an important level
of professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow
must address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Thomas Griffiths and Adele
Goldberg at Princeton University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist investigating how linguistic conventions spread through
communities. To successfully communicate using language, speakers must share
consistent conventions about the meanings of words. As modern communication
media has revealed, however, these linguistic conventions are often in flux:
novel meanings rapidly spread across social networks and become widely adopted.
At the same time, speakers across different sub-communities may vary
substantially in which conventions they find meaningful (e.g. the acronyms
filling scientific journals). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates
the adaptive cognitive mechanisms that allow speakers to navigate this complex
landscape of meaning, and how these mechanisms may in turn explain how
conventions spread within and across communities. The proposed model of how
social expectations are represented and generalized lays the groundwork for
applying formal models to calibrate interventions on social norms and
conventions more broadly. These interventions hold promise as solutions to
large-scale social problems ranging from public health concerns like smoking
cigarettes to participation in collective actions like voting. Additionally,
this work could contribute to understanding how linguistic conventions vary
across ethnic or SES-based communities. Using a series of large-scale behavioral
studies of referential communication on social networks and state-of-the-art
computational cognitive models of language use, the proposed work tests a novel
hypothesis about how speakers rationally update and deploy their mental
representations of linguistic conventions in different contexts. This hypothesis
is made formally precise in a hierarchical Bayesian model and rigorously
compared against previous models using new behavioral data. First, the project
will examine the mechanisms of generalization supporting the spread of new
linguistic conventions within a community. Second, the project will investigate
how speakers learn and flexibly switch between different sets of conventions in
different communities. Third, the hierarchical model will be extended using a
deep neural network architecture to produce finer-grained predictions about
natural language descriptions, thus enabling further theory development. This
project uses ideas from computational cognitive science to make new connections
between two interdisciplinary traditions (psycholinguistics and cultural
evolution) that deepen our understanding of how large groups of people
coordinate their beliefs to better understand one
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.