* 1911869
* Promoting Early Mathematics Interest Through Playful Learning Experiences
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Barbara Sarnecka, Scalise, Nicole Rose
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Barbara
Sarnecka at the University of California, Irvine, this postdoctoral fellowship
award supports an early career scientist investigating young children's interest
in mathematics. Many students from minority groups and low-income households do
not pursue STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) coursework and
careers. One way to help underrepresented students persist in STEM fields is to
boost their interest in STEM fields. Students' interest in math can be measured
as early as preschool and relates to their later interest and achievement.
Although the vast majority of young children ultimately learn the basics of
counting and numbers, many children never develop interest in and other positive
beliefs about math. However, little is known about how to support children's
interest in math. This project will provide important insights to the fields of
mathematical cognition and STEM motivation by testing whether playing math-
related card games can help to boost low-income preschoolers' interest in math.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although much attention has been paid to supporting the
early mathematical skills of children from underrepresented groups, less
research has targeted children's early math interest. This study addresses three
aims: 1) whether experience with a playful math activity can improve children's
math interest; 2) whether experience with a playful math activity can improve
children's math skills relative to a non-playful math activity; and 3) whether
children's initial math interest moderates their learning from math activities.
Head Start preschool children will be randomly assigned to either play a
mathematical card game or complete a parallel mathematical worksheet across
several sessions. Children's math interest and skills will be assessed before
and after the intervention. Theories of interest development suggest that early
engaging experiences lay the foundation for more stable interest in subject
areas, and accordingly, this study will provide children with repeated engaging
experiences to spark their situational interest. As the fields of developmental
and educational psychology move towards the study of individual differences and
subgroup analyses, this study will also help researchers better understand the
effects of playful learning for students with varying levels of math interest.
Based on previous research, the playful learning experience is expected to
significantly improve children's numerical skills and promote children's
situational math interest, fostering positive associations with math that could
develop over time into a more sustained individual interest. The playful
numerical card game is an efficient, low-cost tool that can be used to improve
early math outcomes for young children, and the results of the study will be
disseminated broadly to researchers, educators, and parents. Finally, this study
focuses on children from groups that are underrepresented in STEM: children from
low-SES households, racial/ethnic minorities, who may be particularly at risk
for lower math achievement and motivation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.