* 1911796
* WOU-MMA: Shedding New Light on Buried Cosmic Accelerators with Gravitational Waves and High-Energy Neutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Imre Bartos, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 179,200.00

This award supports research in data analysis from gravitational wave detections
and neutrino observations and it addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows
on the Universe" Big Idea. After 100 years of development since Einstein first
predicted their existence, gravitational waves are now regularly discovered by
the LIGO and Virgo observatories. These waves, carried by the changing curvature
of space-time, inform us of violent collisions of black holes and ultracompact
dead stars, called neutron stars, in the distant cosmos. Studying these distant
collisions enables us to probe the fundamental laws of physics, the evolution of
the universe, and the origin of our Galaxy or even our Solar System. This
research will address a fundamental aspect of cosmic collisions: their ability
to accelerate particles to extremely high energies, about a billion times higher
than what has been achieved on Earth. The work will search for the neutrino
signature of extreme acceleration from collisions detected by gravitational
waves. In particular it will elucidate the currently unknown mechanisms by which
black holes can eject energetic particles while swallowing matter from the
debris of the collision. Additionally, the observation of multiple cosmic
messengers from colliding black holes and neutron stars will be developed and
used as an education tool to train students in physics and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major theme of the project is the multi-
messenger observation of gravitational waves and high-energy neutrinos from
compact binary mergers and core-collapse supernovae. Data will be analyzed from
the LIGO and Virgo gravitational wave observatories and the IceCube neutrino
observatory. The main goal of the work is to find and understand multi-messenger
sources that are electromagnetically dark due to dense gas, stellar envelope, or
ejecta between the source and the observer. The work will investigate a state-
of-the-art search technique to help LIGO achieve its full potential by bringing
closer the detection of the last missing puzzle piece from multi-messenger
astrophysics: the joint observation of gravitational waves and
neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.