* 1911213
* SHF: Small: Collaborative research: Language-Integrated Verification for Determininistic Parallelism
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Ranjit Jhala, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Formal verification promises to deliver software that works precisely according
to a given mathematical specification. The last decade has seen several
impressive formally verified software artifacts that are provably free of large
classes of defects. However, these artifacts required Herculean feats of
engineering, using specialized proof assistants that are separated, by a wide
chasm, from the legacy languages and libraries that are used to engineer
efficient parallel software. This project's novelties are in new techniques to
enable the development of efficient parallel computing systems with formal
assurances about correctness and reliability. This project's impacts will be to
make formal verification a part of mainstream software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on two approaches
discovered by the investigators. The first is refinement reflection, which turns
existing programming languages into theorem provers, where the proofs are merely
programs in that same language. Second, the investigators have introduced
lattice variables, scheduling algorithms and a new linear type system to
simplify the construction of efficient parallel software with well-defined
behavior. This project will combine the above ideas into a framework wherein
engineers can develop and verify parallel software, simply by writing programs
in their host language, thereby economically integrating formal proofs within
existing software development cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.