* 1911349
* OPUS:  CRS:  Phytoplankton whispering- Unraveling dynamics of the phytoplankton secret garden against the backdrop of a nutrient-rich, rapidly changing world
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Patricia Glibert, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 10/31/2022
* USD 231,396.00

Phytoplankton are the engines of the Earth. They form the base of most aquatic
food webs and, although microscopic, they produce most of the oxygen in the air.
Many of our ideas of how these cells function were developed decades ago. Lakes
and oceans, however, are changing, and so too are phytoplankton. Nutrient
pollution is a major problem worldwide. The climate is also changing, altering
temperature, CO2 and the oceans physical and chemical characteristics. All of
these factors control which species of phytoplankton may grow well at any
particular time or place. While algae grow in all types of aquatic ecosystems,
not all algae are favorable for the production of fish and other food resources.
The prevalence of harmful algal blooms (HABs) has increased, often leading to
environmental and public health risks. This research will improve understanding
of how phytoplankton communities change as the environment changes. In addition,
this work will convey to researchers, students and managers how critical this
information is for effective prevention and management of algal blooms. There
has not yet been a synthetic summary that unravels the mysteries of
phytoplankton in a modern world. This project aims to provide such a resource.
In addition, this research will give a graduate student the chance to
participate in synthetic writing, which will have a positive impact on their
career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental changes have dramatically
altered the nutrient content and stoichiometry of the ocean, changing our
understanding of what is limiting and where. Moreover, we now understand that
many phytoplankton are not necessarily autotrophs all the time; mixotrophy is
now understood to play an important role in the growth of many taxa. This OPUS
synthesis builds on decades of research by the PI, following a path that has
shown the oceans as shifting from oligotrophic to eutrophic, and phytoplankton
physiological nutrition as shifting from autotrophic to osmotrophic and
mixotrophic, in a world that is increasingly warmer and experiencing other
climate-related changes. The PI will produce a book synthesizing this work, and
updating it to incorporate the impact of rapid environmental changes on
phytoplankton dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.