* 1911428
* Collaborative Research: Perspective Taking and Reported Speech in an Evidentially-Rich Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Wilson Silva, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 97,861.00

Storytelling and conversation often require that speakers share something that
has been said by someone else, known as "reported speech." Tremendous variation
occurs cross-linguistically in terms of the different linguistic means by which
speakers convey their own perspective on a segment of reported speech, including
the extent to which speakers agree or disagree with it in content or tone. The
notion of "perspective shift" is not only an area of linguistic significance,
but is also important to theories of cognition, but considerable gaps in our
knowledge of these processes exist. This project seeks to addresses some of
those gaps to advance a better understanding of perspective in linguistic theory
and cognition through analysis of an endangered language of Ecuador, A'ingae,
which employs a typologically unique mechanism to signal perspective shift by
producing a word that is unusually or unnaturally high, known as falsetto. The
project will create a diverse collection of narratives useful for future
scientific and cultural endeavors, as well as innovative methodological advances
like digital animation and interactive board games to examine language use in
context. Broader impacts also include the training of undergraduate and graduate
students from underrepresented groups at two US universities in scientific
research methods, technical skills like digital animation, as well as hands-on
experience working with diverse groups of stakeholders in an international
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of perspective shift within
discourse and sentences is one of the most important areas of semantics and
pragmatics research, and it is one where the study of indigenous and endangered
languages has proven especially crucial. This project explores these issues
through the documentation of an understudied language whose grammar allows for
the explicit expression of perspective shift of a sort which is implicit in
English and other more well-studied languages. The perspective-shifting use of
falsetto in A'ingae (CON), a linguistic isolate of Ecuador, can co-occur with
other reported speech devices in the language including lexical verbs like "say"
and "tell", as well as reportative and quotative clitics. To understand more
precisely the kind of perspective shift that falsetto in A'ingae encodes, the
project will analyze the broader domain of reported speech and perspective-
taking through the collaborative creation of an annotated digital corpus of
naturalistic speech and careful consideration of how these devices impact
deictic and other perspective-sensitive elements with which they co-occur.
Specifically, speakers produce a single syllable of falsetto in order to
indicate shifts between different perspectives in discourse, a shift that is
largely or entirely implicit in other languages, thereby shedding light on
perspective-taking processes which are often quite difficult to observe in other
languages. This project, in addition to creating important documentary materials
and linguistic training opportunities, will provide important insights on the
rich techniques that speakers use to signal perspective taking and perspective
shifting. The issues impact many areas of semantics and pragmatics and this
theoretical focus dove-tails naturally with broad coverage language
documentation, as perspective-taking can be studied only in rich and diverse
discourse contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.