* 1911666
* Novel phases of electronic insulators and quantum Hall systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Senthil Todadri, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on interesting new kinds of insulating phases of
electronic solids. The electronic properties of most solids are understood
within a quantum mechanical description that accounts for a large number of
interacting electrons moving in the background of the charged atomic cores of
the elements that comprise the solid. In simple solids the physics can be
understood within an approximation that treats the electrons as quantum
mechanical particles that move independently of one another. A major theme of
modern materials research is on materials in which this approximation fails and
the motion of different electrons is in fact correlated. Fascinating phenomena
emerge in such materials; examples include high-temperature superconductivity,
and other novel phenomena where the electrons appear to break apart inside the
solid. An important recent experimental advance is the observation of such
strong correlation of electronic motion in a particularly simple and tunable
system, namely in atomically thin layers of graphene. The PI will develop new
concepts and methods to deal with such electronic systems in diverse contexts.
He will apply the lessons learnt from one platform, such as the graphene system
mentioned before, to other known platforms that have long resisted
understanding, and vice versa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, such
fundamental research on electronic materials has generated many of the concepts
that underlie modern electronic technology. The proposed research will
contribute to the continuum of scientific and technological knowledge that will
enable future technology that harvests the quantum mechanical behaviors of
systems with many degrees of freedom in fundamental ways. The research project
will engage graduate students in cutting-edge research, and when appropriate and
possible, undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education on
studying correlated electronic insulators in certain moire graphene structures,
commonalities with quantum Hall systems, and of disordered frustrated quantum
magnets. The emphasis will be on general development of new theoretical concepts
and field-theoretic methods. When possible, these will be placed in the context
of either experiments on specific materials, or of numerical work on specific
microscopic models. The proposed projects in this broad area include: i) a study
of microscopic models for the Moire superlattice in ABC-stacked trilayer
graphene and related systems through a combination of analytical and numerical
methods, ii) a microscopic Lowest Landau Level theory of a particular non-
abelian quantum Hall state, seeking to establish analytically a theory that
captures both topological and non-universal properties, iii) several general
questions on disorder effects in 2D frustrated quantum magnets. The project will
provide key insights and methods that will be useful in interpreting the results
from experiments on Moire graphene systems, quantum magnets, and possible future
cold-atom realizations of bosonic quantum Hall states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI will continue his efforts to design lectures to expose graduate students to
experimental methods and the phenomenology of modern correlated materials.
Undergraduates will be involved in the research when possible. He will also
continue his engagement with the high-energy community to aid advances in both
condensed matter and high-energy physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.