* 1911673
* Supporting Indigenous scholars as data stewards and leaders in STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Stephanie Carroll, David-Chavez, Dominique Mariflor
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2021
* USD 142,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. This award is also
funded by the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
program (AGEP), which targets increasing the number of historically
underrepresented minority faculty in STEM and STEM education research
disciplines. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early career
doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the primary sponsorship of Dr. Stephanie Russo Carroll (Rainie) at
the University of Arizona Native Nations Institute, and affiliate sponsorship
from Colorado State University's Department of Forest and Rangeland Stewardship,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist with the
opportunity to lead a national assessment of ethical standards for research
conduct in relation to Indigenous communities and knowledge systems. We
currently lack comprehensive institutional standards for responsible practices
regarding science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) research that
engages Indigenous knowledge systems and communities. Through studying existing
ethics protocols and practices guiding U.S. tribal and federal agency science
research and identifying Indigenous community-defined priorities regarding
ethical research practice, this research aims to provide the groundwork for
developing formal policies and research guidelines to fill this gap.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entitled, Supporting Indigenous Scholars As
Data Stewards and Leaders in STEM, serves to advance knowledge in the sciences
by identifying factors that support or inhibit effective ethical research
engagement with Indigenous communities and diverse knowledge systems in
scientific research. Through the following objectives and research questions
this project supports a shift from historic, extractive research models with
little to no participation of or benefit to Indigenous community members, to
research standards that strengthen Indigenous data governance and capacity: (1)
What factors and indicators demonstrate effective and ethically responsible
research practice in Indigenous communities? Identified through collaboration
with an expert-practitioner advisory panel of Indigenous scientific leaders,
policy experts, and experts on Indigenous ethics in research, to co-design and
validate a methods protocol and survey instrument for determining factors that
drive or inhibit ethical and effective research and data management in
Indigenous communities. (2) To what extent are these factors and indicators
represented in codes of ethics and responsible research guidelines currently
available to U.S. tribal, agency, and academic researchers? Determined through a
comprehensive, systematic, comparative analysis of existing research protocols
and codes of ethics, including identifying priorities and gaps in codes of
ethics to inform policy. (3) What barriers to implementing responsible research
practice, and what support mechanisms for overcoming these barriers exist for
scientific research that includes Indigenous knowledge systems and communities?
Based on survey assessment of current attitudes and practices regarding ethics
in science research, additionally identifying areas where practitioners and
scholars require additional capacity and resources for data stewardship
practices. In fulfilling these objectives, this research serves to advance our
understanding of historic barriers resulting in underrepresentation of
Indigenous peoples and their knowledge systems in STEM, along with current and
future opportunities for Indigenous scholars to address social, environmental,
and economic issues as data stewards within their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.