* 1911962
* US-UK Collab:  Adaptive surveillance and control for endemic disease elimination
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,412,323.00

This research will develop theory and methods for disease surveillance systems.
Such systems are crucial for the control and elimination of animal and human
infectious diseases. For newly emerging diseases, as well as those that have not
been well studied, the development of evidence-based policy is hampered by a
lack of locally-specific data. This lack is also faced by many low-and-middle
income countries. The project will use outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD)
virus in Turkey as a case-study. Working with well-documented surveillance on
historical outbreaks, this project will identify what data are necessary to
estimate disease burden and outbreak risk, and will evaluate FMD mitigation
strategies. The researchers will then work with veterinary training workshops in
Kenya and Uganda to translate lessons learned from the Turkey case-study to the
development of surveillance programs in East Africa. The resulting theory and
methods will serve as a guide for developing surveillance systems for a wide
variety of animal and human diseases in the US and elsewhere. The project also
will provide an international research experience to US graduate students and
post-doctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop theory
and methods for the scale-up and adaptation of infectious disease surveillance
systems in tandem with the development of dynamic disease transmission models to
support disease control and elimination policies. While surveillance data will
always advance scientific understanding, model-based prioritization of data
collection and surveillance system design will lead to more efficient data
collection to specifically support policy goals. This research will
retrospectively analyze a time series of FMD virus outbreaks in livestock in
Turkey between 2001-2012. This data set, which includes detailed records of the
location, timing, size, and virus strain for each outbreak is uncommonly well-
resolved and represents a gold standard of a nearly perfect surveillance system
for a livestock disease. This project will first fit spatially-explicit
stochastic models of farm-to-farm FMD transmission to the full data to derive
the best-case understanding of dynamics, and predictability, of an FMD outbreak;
this analysis will be the first country-scale model of endemic FMD transmission.
Then, the researchers will strip away elements of the data to assess the
minimally sufficient data necessary to estimate the burden of FMD disease,
estimate the risk of FMD outbreaks, and evaluate FMD mitigation strategies,
relative to the best-case analysis. The result will be novel methods for the
integration of current model predictions into the optimal allocation of future
surveillance to detect and/or mitigate outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.