* 1911459
* OPUS: CRS: Why do heterosporous plants have so few chromosomes?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Paul Wolf, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2023
* USD 149,421.00

Most plants, and including many crop species, have undergone an increase in the
number of their chromosomes through a process called polyploidization.
Polyploidization can yield new adaptive traits and promote species
diversification, but it can also lead to genomic instability and infertility.
This project will synthesize the principal investigator's long-term research on
how plant genomes respond to polyploidization over evolutionary time. Synthesis
activities will focus on characterizing the mechanisms responsible for the
phenomenon of genome downsizing, whereby plants lose genetic material following
polyploidization. The project will then compare this phenomenon among
homosporous and heterosporous land plants to advance knowledge about the
possible genesis of their divergent genome architectures. Heterosporous plants,
which include all seed plants and some seedless ones, have several times fewer
chromosomes on average than do homosporous plants, which include non-vascular
plants as well as most ferns and lycophytes. Broader impacts will include the
production of review papers to communicate the results of the synthetic work.
Results from this research may help agronomists understand genome instability
and infertility during polyploid crop development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
five decades of theory and experiments, a mechanistic explanation for why
homosporous plants have higher chromosome numbers than heterosporous plants has
remained elusive. Well-established phylogenetic relationships of land plants
show that heterospory is the derived condition and that genome downsizing during
meiosis bears close investigation as a possible cause of divergent genome
architectures among these major groups of land plants. The principal
investigator will place this long-standing research question in a broader
context of genome dynamics in all plants. Synthetic activities will include: 1)
a review of mechanisms of genome downsizing, with a focus on spindle formation
and intergenomic translocation in diploid versus polyploid plant species; 2)
comparative bioinformatic analyses of homosporous and heterosporous plant
genomes to examine distribution of genes expressed during different stages of
meiosis and especially those associated with spindle formation; 3) synthesis of
data and theories into a comprehensive review of the relationship between
homospory and chromosome number; and 4) design of the next phase of research to
examine spindle formation and crossing-over behavior in homosporous and
heterosporous plants. Outcomes of the work will provide a synthetic historical
perspective on approaches to this research question and will advance the ability
of future researchers to investigate plant genome
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.