* 1911449
* OPUS: MCS: The importance of mitochondrial and structural mutations in generating fitness variance in the ciliate Tetrahymena
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Rebecca Zufall, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 271,696.00

There are many types of genetic mutations and they can have different effects on
an organism's fitness. For example, small mutations that change DNA base pairs
within a gene may have different effects than mutations that change the number
of copies of a gene. This research will shed light on the fundamental question:
how do different types of genetic mutations contribute to the evolution of the
enormous biodiversity found on earth? Surprisingly, the answer to this question
remains unclear. In studies of a unicellular organism, this research will find
the rate at which different types of mutations happen and look at the effects of
these mutations on organisms' fitness. The results of this research will help to
clarify the process of mutation and its role in generating diversity. This
research will make possible the training in modern genomic methods of a mid-
career scientist and several underrepresented minority and first-generation
college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies of mutation accumulation
in a microbial eukaryote, the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila, revealed a
surprisingly low base-substitution mutation rate. This rate was so low that it
could not account for the observed changes in fitness over the course of an
experiment, indicating that there must be other types of mutations responsible
for the observed changes in fitness. To determine the relative importance of
different types of mutations in generating fitness variance, this research will
measure the rates of base-substitution, structural, and mitochondrial mutations
in T. thermophila, using these previously generated mutation accumulation lines.
New genomic analyses of these lines will determine which types of mutations are
most frequent and, by comparison to phenotypic data, will determine which types
have the potential to generate the most variance in fitness-related traits. The
results of these analyses will provide valuable insight into the types of
mutations most responsible for evolutionary novelty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.