* 1911650
* Effects of experience on shared information across brains: Insights from blindness
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Janice Chen, Musz                    Elizabeth
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 01/31/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Cognitive Neuroscience program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Marina Bedny, Janice Chen, and Uri
Hasson at Johns Hopkins University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports
an early career scientist studying the functional flexibility of the human
brain, and the ways in which an individual's experiences during development can
shape cortical specialization. In particular, this project investigates the
principles that govern neural plasticity and development of the visual cortex in
blind people. The proposed research uses functional neuroimaging to study the
neuronal response properties of the visual cortices across different blind
individuals. To investigate whether the visual cortices of blind people are
sensitive to a wide range of non-visual input, the proposed experiments will
measure neural activity while blind and sighted individuals listen to
naturalistic, narrative auditory stimuli, such as stories and movie clips, that
contain varying degrees of low-level, sensory information versus high-level,
abstract content. This research has the potential to advance our understanding
of the mechanisms of neural plasticity and brain development, and the findings
from this work may inform future treatments of visual
impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to determine the
functional flexibility of the human brain by investigating how brain function is
shaped by sensory experience. The occipital lobes of the human brain, which
typically support visual processing in sighted individuals, respond to touch and
sound in individuals who are born without vision. However, the mechanisms
driving this plasticity and its implications for theories of human brain
function remain elusive and disputed. To probe whether the visual cortex of
blind individuals is sensitive to both high-level, semantic and low level,
sensory features of auditory input, these experiments employ functional
neuroimaging to measure neural activity while individuals listen to naturalistic
auditory stimuli. In addition, to compare the brains of different blind
individuals, and to relate the observed functions to the sighted brain, the
proposed research applies inter-subject, brain-to-brain neuroimaging analyses.
The first analysis will address whether the visual cortex exhibits reliably
similar response profiles across different blind individuals. To further
characterize responses in blind visual cortex, the second analysis tests whether
blind visual cortex performs similar computations to functional networks that
are observed in the sighted brain. The third analysis tests how early life
experience shapes brain development by comparing the functions of visual cortex
in individuals who are born blind to those who lost their vision in adulthood.
This work has the potential to make important contributions to theories of brain
development, particularly regarding the developmental time course and the
potential for functional specialization in cortex. Outside of blindness, these
studies may serve as a general model for understanding how experiential factors
drive brain plasticity during development. Such findings will also advance our
knowledge of how the functions of neural tissue can be optimized or re-purposed
across the lifespan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.