* 1911991
* Single-Crystal Nanostructures with Oxide Claddings for Durable Refractory Plasmonics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Svetlana Neretina, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2022
* USD 389,521.00

The stability and durability of materials is a subject of fundamental importance
that often decides whether a technology is viable, reliable and sustainable.
Such considerations become amplified when applications require that materials
operate at high temperatures. Plasmonics is a field of study that is powered by
the ability to shape- and size-engineer metals at the nanoscale. The tendency
for such structures to oxidize and morphologically reconfigure when heated can,
however, disrupt or destroy properties that were so carefully engineered in the
first place. With high-temperature plasmonics employed in a range of critical
applications such as heat-assisted magnetic recording, high-temperature
plasmonic sensing, and solar thermophotovoltaics, this deficiency puts at risk
potentially disruptive technologies that are needed for data storage to the
'cloud' and the energy infrastructure of the U.S. This grant demonstrates that
suitably fabricated plasmonic nanostructures, when encapsulated in an ultrathin
oxide layer, maintain functionality while proving robust to high temperatures.
Moreover, it shows that such structures can be fabricated over large areas using
inexpensive and scalable nanofabrication techniques such as nanoimprint
lithography. The availability of durable refractory plasmonics impacts data
storage and energy industries and the nation?s economy and prosperity. In this
project, undergraduate education is being integrated through research
internships and outreach activities place emphasis on the matriculation of women
and under-represented minority students into the engineering
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While numerous high-temperature plasmonic
applications exist, no single material has yet been identified that is able to
maintain performance for long durations. This research aims to overcome this
technological barrier through the use of a hybrid structure that combines the
plasmonic properties of single-crystal nanostructures with an ultrathin cladding
technology such that the combination yields a high-performance refractory
plasmonic material. The projected solution is founded on an underlying
hypothesis that single-crystal nanostructures are far more resistant to
temperature-induced morphological changes than their polycrystalline
counterparts. Moreover, if such nanostructures are encased in a refractory
oxide, then the surface diffusion pathways, which are responsible for
morphological reconfigurations, become blocked. The studies are divided into
four thrust areas: (i) defining a robust and pinhole-free cladding technology,
(ii) obtaining a mechanistic understanding of the cladding process and any
failure modes and then advancing failure mitigation strategies, (iii) assessing
and enhancing the capability of oxide claddings to resist chemical degradation,
and (iv) devising processing routes that yield partially clad nanostructures
which facilitate applications that require an exposed plasmonic surface.
Together, this work provides a fundamental understanding of high-temperature
diffusion processes that occur for clad metals and advances the processing
science needed for manufacturing refractory plasmonic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.