* 1911539
* OPUS:  MCS:  Evolutionary processes underlying transitions in sexual systems, pollination mode and ploidy
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Ver√≥nica Di Stilio, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 364,493.00

Many crops responsible for the bulk of human nutrition are pollinated by wind.
Wind pollination has evolved repeatedly from insect pollination in flowering
plants, yet the underlying mechanisms are poorly understood. Shifts to wind
pollination from animal pollination and to separate sexes (dioecy) from
hermaphroditism represent major evolutionary transitions in flowering plants.
Early progress in understanding the evolution of wind pollination was made in a
plant genus where multiple origins of wind pollination from insect-pollinated
ancestors is accompanied by the separation of sexes and the duplication of
genomes, also known as polyploidy. Thalictrum are herbaceous perennials with
great diversity of flower morphology, sexual system, and pollination mode
amongst its circa 200 temperate species growing worldwide. Although polyploidy
has a long history of recognized relevance to the evolution of plants, and a
demonstrated contribution to increased species diversity, few studies have
examined whether polyploidy is associated with shifts in pollinators or sexual
system. This study will contribute to a better understanding of the processes
contributing to changes in plant reproduction, with potential applications to
agriculture, where alternative pollination vectors may be needed due to shortage
of insect pollinators, and separate sexes are useful in the production of hybrid
seed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to investigate the order of trait
evolution and the phylogenetic patterns of trait-dependent species
diversification in a diverse angiosperm lineage where evolutionary transitions
in ploidy level, sexual system and pollination mode have occurred repeatedly.
Thalictrum (Ranunculaceae) is an ideal system in which to study the tempo and
mode of evolution of these ecological shifts, as they have occurred repeatedly,
allowing for multiple comparisons. The broader questions addressed by this study
are: 1) What is the effect of polyploidy, sexual system and pollination mode on
net diversification rates? Do polyploidy and animal pollination promote
speciation? Is dioecy an evolutionary "dead end"?; and 2) What is the order of
character evolution? Is transition to unisexual flowers more likely in a wind
pollinated background or did unisexual flowers evolve first? Are either of these
more likely in a polyploid background? This interdisciplinary research will make
use of phylogenetic comparative analyses to uncover trait-dependent species
diversification that will inform future evolutionary development experiments
aimed at uncovering the genetic basis underlying independent shifts to wind
pollination, dioecy and polyploidy and at determining whether these evolved
through same or different genetic mechanisms each time, i.e., is it a case of
parallel or convergent evolution?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.