* 1911276
* Area-Selective Atomic Layer Deposition Using Chemisorbed Carboxylate Inhibitors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Qing Peng, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,823.00

Computer chip manufacturing is the foundation for mobile computing, cloud
computing, fifth generation (5G) cellular network technology, artificial
intelligence and other applications. Manufacturing computing chips now demands
the capability that can place materials on substrates with unprecedented
precision in composition, spatial location and dimensions. However, development
of such manufacturing capability is still in early stages and demands new
enabling knowledge. This award supports fundamental research to generate
knowledge for the development of atomic-scale additive manufacturing. This new
process enables a scalable method of manufacturing material systems with atomic
precise control. Such material systems could also lead to new opportunities such
as new catalysts for environmentally-friendly manufacturing and pollution
control. The results from this research lead to production of useful, high
performance materials and new knowledge to accelerate the development of a novel
chip manufacturing process, thus promoting the progress of science and helping
the U.S. sustain its leading role in advanced manufacturing. This research is
cross-disciplinary and trains students in skills in manufacturing, vacuum
technology, surface chemistry, materials science and analytical chemistry. The
project involves engaging students, especially, women and underrepresented
minorities in research, thus improving engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Area-selective atomic layer deposition (ALD) is a key
enabling technology to reduce functional device dimensions, reduce manufacturing
complexity and cost for integrated circuits and reduce the energy consumption by
computing chips. However, the potential of this technology is severely limited
by the narrow choices of selective growth chemistries, as well as poor
understanding of the heterogeneity of surface chemistry on the selectivity of
nucleation in ALD. This research aims at establishing selectively-chemisorbed
carboxylate self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) as inhibitors to block or inhibit
nucleation during ALD. This research fills the knowledge gap of the inhibition
mechanisms and the gradual loss of the inhibitor's ability in blocking
nucleation during ALD, and eventually leads to new strategies to improve the
inhibitor in blocking nucleation. The collaborative team achieves these goals by
studying the formation of carboxylates and selectivity of the nucleation of ALD
chemistries with in situ characterizations of the substrate's mass and
chemistry, and gaseous byproducts, and with ex situ atomic force microscope-
infrared (AFM-IR) spectroscopy to exam the heterogeneity of surface chemistries
and establish the relationship of chemistry-process parameter-nucleation
inhibition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.