* 1911777
* Unraveling the mechanisms by which novel fungal-plant associations evolve
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Raymond St.Leger, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 10/31/2023
* USD 340,000.00

Elucidating the connection between genotype and adaptation is fundamental to the
study of evolutionary biology, yet it remains an elusive goal. A minority of
strains of the insect pathogenic Metarhizium robertsii (Mr) are root colonizing
plant growth promoters. This project will examine the mechanisms by which novel
symbioses can rapidly emerge using comparative and evolutionary approaches that
integrate a genetic screen with a transcriptional profiles of strains showing a
spectrum of mutualistic associations. Rapid evolution is a trait shared with
pathogens, pests and cancers; although in most cases the underlying mechanisms
are poorly understood. Addressing these mechanisms with Mr, which is an
experimentally very tractable model system, will involve asking many basic
questions on poorly understood topics that span much of molecular evolution,
such as the relative importance of amino-acid versus regulatory evolution.
Moreover, understanding ecological diversification is particularly crucial for
predicting the outcome of fungal responses to climate change and disease
outbreaks. By focusing on the genetic basis of recent adaptive changes this
project will address the uncertainty of how invasive strains could interplay
with the biological world and adapt to a new natural environment. Metarhizium
fungi are already deployed as biological insecticides, and by identifying how
they work as plant symbionts, and when and why they do not, this work will
facilitate their use in an expanded role as comprehensive plant growth
promoters. As Metarhizium fungi are closely related to many important plant
pathogens and biocontrol fungi, the results and conclusions from this work will
have many applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unusually broad array of
ecological niches exploited by Mr allows a genes function to be accessed in all
these lifestyles, while the spectrum of endophytic associations in Mr
populations provide a model where genomic variation can be related to adaptation
to particular lifestyles. By focusing on the genetic basis of recent adaptive
changes this project will address the uncertainty of how invasive strains could
interplay with the biological world and adapt to a new natural environment.
Identifying the factors that contribute to plant associations will be achieved
by comparative and evolutionary approaches that integrate transcriptional
profiles of strains showing a spectrum of mutualistic associations with a
genetic screen of a growth promoting strain. These complementary methodologies
will test the hypothesis that rapid changes in plant associations are determined
by regulatory controls of gene expression. This proposal will also clarify
central "unknowns" such as whether there are large sets of effector proteins,
whether they have overlapping functions with the pathogenic insect interaction
or whether Mr has a more limited repertoire of key effectors that are deployed
to colonize plants. Additional experiments will characterize these effectors and
their promoters to further address the underlying regulatory, metabolic and
biosynthetic differences that define symbiotic associations. Collectively, these
experiments will address fundamental questions on how environmental interactions
shape organismal and genome diversity, as well as the capacity of Metarhizium
fungi to rapidly evolve and adapt to new habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.