* 1911531
* Developing the Science of Science Communication in Early Career Scientists
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2020
* Rebecca Stone, Suffolk University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 11/30/2020
* USD 36,066.00

A workshop for students and early career scientists will be held in conjunction
with the annual conference of the Association of the Sciences of Limnology and
Oceanography in February, 2019. The workshop will provide a model that can be
implemented in one day at any research conference and will focus on improving
both oral and visual communication skills. Workshop organization and evaluation
will be managed by Drs. Schiebel and Stone, from Suffolk University. The main
speakers will be Dr. Jessamyn A. Fairfield, a physicist and Lecturer, National
University of Ireland Galway's School of Physics and Dr. Echo A. Rivera, owner
of Creative Research Communications, LLC. Both speakers are highly experienced
and well qualified, with expertise in training scientists to give effective
presentations to a variety of audiences. Evaluation of the workshop will be
conducted by Dr. Rebecca Stone, Assistant Professor of Sociology, Suffolk
University.

This workshop will offer a group of approximately forty students and early
career scientists an opportunity to improve their presentation skills. The plan
for the workshop is solid, and the event is likely to be well-attended and
highly successful because it will be held in conjunction with a large annual
conference. The broader impacts of the workshop include training and
professional development for a diverse group of participants. In addition to the
training provided to participants, this award will support two early career
scientists who will gain experience in workshop organization and grant
management.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.