* 1911012
* CNS Core: Small: Robust Performance Guarantee of Containerized Microservices in the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Palden Lama, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 243,940.00

Large-scale web services are increasingly being built with many small modular
components (microservices), which can be deployed, updated and scaled
seamlessly. These microservices are packaged to run in a lightweight isolated
execution environment (containers) and deployed on compute resources rented from
cloud providers. However, the complex interactions and the contention of shared
hardware resources in cloud datacenters pose significant challenges in managing
web service performance. This project will develop novel performance models and
resource management solutions that can enable cloud platforms to provide robust
performance guarantee for large-scale web services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will leverage multi-layered data collected from container-level resource
usage metrics and virtual machine-level hardware performance counter metrics for
accurate performance modeling. It will (1) develop probabilistic machine
learning-based performance models that can quickly adapt to changing system
dynamics and directly provide confidence bounds in the predictions even when the
data is noisy and sparse. (2) It will directly incorporate predictive
uncertainty obtained from the proposed models into the design and development of
a robust resource scaling system and interference-aware container scheduling
algorithm to manage the end-to-end tail latency of microservice request
workflows in a resource efficient manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
improve the performance, cost-efficiency, and scalability of a broad range of
cloud-native applications. This can spur innovation in large-scale application
development through increased adoption of cloud computing and cloud-native
design principles. To this end, the project will develop open-source solutions
for platforms such as Kubernetes. It will advance interdisciplinary education by
developing a new course, which will contribute to a Cloud Computing Certificate
jointly created by the University of Texas at San Antonio Colleges of Science,
Engineering and Business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data produced as a result of this
project, including algorithms, models, software solutions, publications, and
courseware, will be made publicly available at the project repository:
http://www.cs.utsa.edu/~plama/microservices.html. The project data will be
maintained and made available during the execution of the project and minimum
three years after the project's ending date. Data will be stored on the host
institution's dedicated web servers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.