* 1911332
* FASEB Conference on "From Unfolded Proteins in the Endoplasmic Reticulum to Disease"
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Reid Gilmore, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 9,000.00

The overarching objective of the project is to integrate research, education and
training by strongly encouraging the active participation of graduate students
and postdoctoral fellows in all aspects of a FASEB Summer Research Conference.
The FASEB conference on the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) was established in 2007
to fill a critical need for an ER focused research conference. This FASEB
Conference will bring together an international research community that
investigates the structure, function and regulation of the endoplasmic
reticulum. The conference will expose early career scientists to a broad range
of experimental systems and approaches that are being used by the leading
laboratories in this research field. Conference attendees are strongly
encouraged to submit poster session abstracts. In addition to the thirty invited
speakers, twelve additional speakers will be selected for "late breaking talks"
based upon their submitted poster abstracts, giving strong preference for
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. A critical objective of this FASEB
conference is to stimulate discussion and the exchange of information between
the established leaders in the field and early career scientists during all
sessions of the meeting including the platform talks, meet the speaker sessions,
and career development workshops. The FASEB summer conference on the endoplasmic
reticulum is a critical driving force for the application of new technologies,
development of novel concepts and fostering research collaborations between
investigators with complementary expertise. Achieving the objectives of this
project is critical to maintain the viability of this research field by
promoting broader participation in the ER field and the development of the next
generation of ER researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This multi-
disciplinary meeting brings together a diverse international community of
biochemists, cell biologists, molecular biologists, geneticists and
physiologists who investigate protein homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum.
The conference is focused on elucidating the mechanisms for biosynthesis;
processing and folding of proteins in the ER; protein quality control mechanisms
that discriminate between folded and misfolded proteins; ER stress response
pathways that allow the cell to alleviate protein-misfolding stress; and the ER
associated degradation pathway that protects cells from the toxic accumulation
of unfolded protein aggregates in the ER. While there has been tremendous
progress in this research field, there remain critical knowledge gaps that can
now be addressed using experimental methods that were not previously available
and by cross-disciplinary approaches to synergistically expand knowledge in this
research field. The conference platform sessions in the morning and evening will
feature the invited speakers as well as the late breaking talks, with sufficient
time allocated for discussion. Meet the speaker sessions at lunch, career
development workshops in the early afternoon and poster sessions in the late
afternoon will facilitate interactions between meeting
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.