* 1911229
* OAC Core: Small: Scalable Graph Analytics on Emerging Cloud Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2022
* USD 481,837.00

Graphs are powerful tools for representing real world networked data in a wide
range of scientific and engineering domains. As examples, graphs are used to
represent people and their interactions in social networks, or proteins and
their functionality in biological networks, landmarks and roads in
transportation networks, etc. Understanding graph properties and deriving hidden
information by performing analytics on graphs at extreme scale is critical for
the progress of science across multiple domains and solving real world impactful
problems. Cloud platforms have been adopted to perform extreme scale graph
analytics. This has led to exponential increase in the workloads while at the
same time the rate of performance improvements of cloud platforms has slowed
down. To address this, cloud platforms are being augmented with accelerators.
However, the expertise required to realize high performance from such
accelerator enhanced cloud platforms will limit their accessibility to the
broader scientific and engineering community. To address this issue, this
project will research and develop a toolkit to provide Graph Analytics as a
Service to enable researchers to easily perform extreme scale graph analytics
workflows on accelerator enhanced cloud platforms. This will significantly
increase the productivity of the researchers as i) the researchers will avoid
the steep learning curve of developing parallel implementation of graph
analytics algorithms, and ii) the increased size and scale of graph analytics
will allow researchers to analyze significantly large datasets at reduced
latency thereby enriching the quality of the domain research. Moreover, the
techniques developed in this project will also be applicable for performing
streaming graph analytics at the "edge" for applications such as autonomous
vehicles, smart infrastructure, etc. The toolkit is expected to be used in many
engineering and science disciplines including power systems engineering, network
biology, preventive healthcare, smart infrastructure, etc. The research
conducted in this project will also constitute materials appropriate for
inclusion in graduate and undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will research and develop high performance graph analytics algorithms
and software for key graph workflows and kernels spanning multiple scientific
and engineering domains. The target platform will be accelerator enhanced cloud
platforms consisting of emerging node architectures comprising of multi-core
processors, Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) and high bandwidth memory
(HBM) with cache coherent interface. An integrated optimization framework
consisting of memory optimizations and partitioning and mapping techniques will
be developed to exploit the heterogeneity of the target platforms. Specifically,
techniques for optimal memory data layout and integrated optimizations for cloud
execution will be developed to realize scalable performance in accelerator
enhanced cloud platforms. The memory data layout optimization seeks to fully
exploit the high bandwidth provided by HBM by ensuring data reuse for a broad
class of graph analytics problems. The proposed software will ensure seamless
parallel processing of the entire graph on a single heterogeneous node
architecture as well as cloud platforms with multiple heterogeneous nodes. The
integrated optimization framework will be developed into a scalable, deployable,
robust Cyber Infrastructure (CI) toolkit to provide Graph Analytics as a Service
(GAaaS). The framework will be developed using state-of-the-art heterogeneous
platforms. By accelerating graph analytics workflows on cloud platforms, this
project will enable researchers to perform extremely large-scale graph analytics
workflows which are key components of many scientific and engineering
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.