* 1911603
* Integrating, Disseminating, and Archiving Components of the Shoshoni Language Project
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Marianna Di Paolo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2024
* USD 197,424.00

The Native American Languages Act, passed by the U.S. Congress in 1990,
recognizes the unique status and value of Native American languages. Shoshoni
[ISO 639-3 shh] is the northernmost member of the Uto-Aztecan language family,
languages spoken from Wyoming to Central America. The Shoshoni language today
continues to be an important component of Goshute and Shoshone tribal identity.
In the 1960's-1970's, the late Wick R. Miller, of the University of Utah,
taperecorded speakers of Shoshoni (born from ~1875-1920) from several different
varieties, representing the most extensive documentary corpus of any Great Basin
language, of vital cultural, historical, and linguistic importance to several
tribal communities in the Western states. Past linguistic studies of Shoshoni
have largely focused on the internal structure of sentences in isolation and on
the structure of words, while this project will focus on its sound system and
discourse-level structure. Broader impacts include the availability of the two
corpora as free online resources from the Marriott Library (University of Utah)
and the California Language Archive (UC-Berkeley). The project will also provide
undergraduates from Shoshoni-speaking tribal communities with valuable
experience on a computational linguistic research project, and enhance
interactions between these young people and the two native-speaker elders
collaborating on the project. The team will also produce a print version and an
easy-to-read electronic version of a subset of the traditional stories from the
Wick R. Miller Collection and disseminate them to the three communities
collaborating on the project, the South Fork Band Council of the Te-Moak Tribe,
the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute Reservation and the Ely Shoshone
Tribe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While Shoshoni is fairly well-
documented for a Native American language, its discourse structure and its
phonetics and phonology are relatively understudied. Thus, these significant
gaps will be remedied by the development of two corpora. First, the 36 stories
will be marked up to produce a electronically-searchable database valuable for
sentence-level as well as discourse-level linguistic studies. Second, a
phonological and phonetically valuable corpus, consisting of audio-TextGrid
pairs of word and sentence-sized recordings which will be force aligned and
fine-tuned. In the resulting corpus, the phonemes representing each vowel and
consonant will be aligned with the corresponding part of the sound file,
allowing researchers to automate the acoustic phonetic analysis of each sound.
Such text-to-audio aligned corpora already exist for majority languages such as
English, German, Japanese, and Spanish, making their sound systems relatively
easy to study and thus leading to the development of electronic products that
can quickly process spoken language. These majority language corpora are
prepared using costly, language-specific computational tools called forced
aligners. Our project will train the Montreal Forced Aligner to align the text
of 4,000-5,000 Shoshoni words and short sentences to sound. Doing so will
provide a model of how to inexpensively use a generic forced aligner to align
text-to-audio data for any small, understudied language. The resulting forced-
aligned Shoshoni corpus will greatly speed up the acoustic analysis of this
phonologically complex language and lead to many relatively inexpensive, but in-
depth, scientifically-sound research studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.