* 1911372
* Collaborative Research: Designing New Phosphors using Computational and Experimental Co-discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Joanna McKittrick, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 666,302.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Lighting home and commercial buildings in the US
account for 6% of the total US electrical energy use and 15% of the total
electrical energy expenditure, which translates to $50 billion per year. There
is an outstanding opportunity to reduce this cost by replacing current
incandescent and fluorescent lighting with white light emitting diodes (LEDs).
However, the color quality and efficiency must be improved further. These LED-
based light bulbs produce white light by using a luminescent powder called a
phosphor, coating on top of a near-ultraviolet (UV) or blue-emitting LED chip.
The phosphor is a key component in these devices because it is critical for the
overall efficiency and color of these bulbs; unfortunately, there are only a few
viable phosphors available for this application today. Therefore, it is prudent
to discover new phosphor systems to fully realize the conversion to new
efficient lighting. The researchers are addressing this challenge by developing
computational and data-driven methods to predict the properties of phosphors.
This approach allows the directed discovery of new phosphors with enhanced
optical response. This grant also supports extensive scientific education
including sponsoring numerous research opportunities for high school and
undergraduate students. These students, mostly from underrepresented groups, are
learning how to synthesize and characterize phosphors as well as the importance
of this energy-efficient technology. The graduate students supported by this
work are trained to pursue opportunities in the optoelectronics industry and
also across the technology sector where materials science play a crucial role.
Finally, the computational products of this research are disseminated through
open-source platforms, so all researchers benefit from the scientific
developments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Replacing a traditional
light bulb with an energy-efficient, phosphor converted-light emitting diode is
one of the easiest ways to decrease electricity consumption. This goal requires
the discovery of new phosphor systems, which convert the nearly monochromatic
LED light into a broad spectrum white light, to fully make use of this
technology. The phosphors investigated in this project are based on wide band
gap materials (hosts) that contain a small amount of activator (rare-earth
element). Depending on the host:activator combination, colors across the visible
spectrum are obtained. The central hypothesis driving this research is that the
quantum efficiency and thermal quenching resistance of a phosphor are related to
the local coordination environment of the activator ion. This research employs
advanced first-principles calculations, local structure analysis using X-ray and
neutron scattering, and data science to establish a quantitative understanding
of this relationship. Modeling these properties using computational tools and
confirming the predictions through materials synthesis and characterization
produces a feedback loop where our research results are improved with each
discovery. The outcome is a series of design rules that will lead to the
discovery of new phosphors with superior optical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.