* 1911994
* US-UK Collab.: Eco-evolutionary dynamics of infectious diseases in host population networks
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Anna Jolles, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,499,474.00

This project will investigate how the way that groups are connected through the
movement of individuals affects the spread of disease by studying viruses,
bacteria, and other disease-causing parasites that infect desert bighorn sheep
in southeastern California deserts. Many animals live in habitat patches,
forming a network of populations that are linked by occasional movements.
Understanding how changes in population connectivity affect disease transmission
is important, as landscapes are changing rapidly in many regions around the
globe. Desert bighorn sheep that live on mountain tops in the deserts of the
American West. The study will measure how many of the sheep have been infected,
and the rate at which they move among populations. They will ask whether more
isolated populations have less genetic diversity and are more likely to be
infected. This research will train of undergraduate students, graduate students,
and postdoctoral fellows, and will engage the public through collaborations with
K-12 teachers, wildlife management agencies, and natural history museums.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use observational data, experiments,
and mathematical models to investigate how the spatial relationships between
interconnected host populations shape infection risks in different locales,
setting the stage for genetic adaptation of immune defenses in the hosts.
Differences in immune responses among host populations are likely to affect the
populations' vulnerability to infectious diseases. The investigators hypothesize
that network topology will constrain parasite species distributions across host
populations, and parasite interactions will structure parasite communities
within individual hosts. They expect that differences in parasite communities
across populations mediate differential selection on genes involved in immune
function, resulting in variation in immune responses and local immunogenetic
adaptation. They hypothesize that feedbacks between these ecological and
evolutionary processes drive the dynamics of parasite communities in host
population networks, resulting in differential vulnerability to emerging
infections across populations. Metagenomic data from fecal samples will be used
to discover landscape-level parasite community patterns across three
metapopulations. In a Mojave Desert metapopulation, they will combine
longitudinal observational data and experimental approaches to assess the role
of parasite interactions in structuring within-host parasite communities. Immune
responses and survey immunogenetic profiles of sheep will be used to estimate
the selective pressure underlying immunogenetic differences across fourteen
bighorn populations. The empirical data will be used to parameterize and test
mathematical network models exploring how ecological and host evolutionary
processes shape disease dynamics in bighorn in particular, and across population
networks in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.