* 1911649
* Paleoecology and new perspectives on domesticated animals from faunal and stable isotope analyses
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Emily Zavodny, Zavodny                 Emily
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 148,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. John Krigbaum
at the University of Florida, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an
early career scientist examining the introduction of domesticated animals
(cattle, sheep, goats, pigs) to different ecosystems and their long-term impact
on human behavior and environments at local and regional levels. By combining
traditional zooarchaeological analyses with innovative archaeometric techniques,
this research will contribute to our understanding of the diverse and enduring
impacts domestication has had on landscapes, environments, and other species.
Data collection will also actively involve and train undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops zooarchaeological,
isotopic, and spatial data to evaluate the scale, timing, and continuing effects
of local animal husbandry practices from the early Chalcolithic (ca. 4500 BC)
until the end of the Iron Age (ca. 35 BC). Zooarchaeological assemblages
recovered from Chalcolithic, Bronze, and Iron Age sites will be systematically
analyzed. Population profiles of fauna will be reconstructed to help
characterize broader regional and temporal trends in livestock and husbandry
practices. Some integral aspects of livestock management, such as foddering and
penning, are less visible through traditional archaeological methods and
isotopic studies of different bodily tissues offer a systematic approach to
mapping these diverse activities. In order to examine changes in management
strategies at various temporal and spatial scales, dental enamel from different
domesticated species will be sampled for carbon, oxygen, strontium (87Sr/86Sr),
and lead (20nPb/204Pb) isotopes. Data will then be incorporated into a GIS
database to better contextualize regional patterns and test theories about the
development of new management systems such as transhumance. Novel animal
management strategies are expected to have developed over time, first in
response to the unique environment and then to accommodate increasing
populations at the start of the Late Bronze Age. Results are expected to inform
current debates about biodiversity and conservation globally, and be of interest
to all scholars working on issues of resilience, sustainability, and human-
environment interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.