* 1911909
* DFG-NSF: Observational Tests of Covariant Emergent Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Stacy McGaugh, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 128,997.00

General Relativity provides a well-tested, accurate description of gravitational
phenomena over a large range of distances, but it remains a non-quantum theory
incompatible with the Standard Model of particle physics. The development of a
quantum theory of gravity is thus a central goal of fundamental physics.
Observational clues arise from puzzles such as the "dark matter" and "dark
energy" problems. These indicate an excess of attraction beyond what can be
explained by the gravity of visible mass in galaxies (hence dark matter), and a
net repulsion (dark energy) that drives the expansion rate of the universe to
accelerate. It is conceivable that these diverse phenomena are related and may
emerge from the quantum foundations of gravity. This work will develop and
explore the observable consequences of Covariant Emergent Gravity, a theory that
may provide a joint explanation for these as-yet ill-understood
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop and test a new
explanation for dark matter and dark energy. Verlinde has proposed the idea of
gravity as an emergent phenomenon, but many of the consequences of this idea
remain unexplored. A theoretical shortcoming is that it is not generally
covariant. Recently, Hossenfelder addressed this problem by developing Covariant
Emergent Gravity (CEG). CEG necessarily introduces terms beyond those already
present in Emergent Gravity. The team proposes to develop this theory and to
investigate whether CEG can be consistent with observations of galactic rotation
curves. In particular, it will derive the formulas that govern the appropriate
limit of the theory and numerically solve them to apply to real galaxies. This
work must be carried out in the non-trivial, non-spherical case of the finite
thickness cylindrical geometry appropriate to spiral galaxies. If the CEG
hypothesis is incorrect, this work should readily falsify it. If there is some
merit to it, it could point the way towards a fresh interpretation and potential
resolution of the long-standing dark matter and dark energy problems, and
provide insight into the nature of quantum gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.