* 1911783
* Using Coordinated Neural Responses to Predict In- and Out-of-Sample Sharing Behavior
* SBE,SMA
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Matthew Lieberman, Baek, Elisa
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is an important level
of professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow
must address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Carolyn Parkinson at the
University of California, Los Angeles, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist studying the psychological drivers of
information sharing. The current online media landscape affords unprecedented
opportunities for messages to spread and reach large audiences, with the
potential to influence the opinions and behavior of many. This phenomenon has
particularly important implications in the study of effective messaging, given
that exposure is critical to the success of public messaging campaigns, and
interpersonal sharing is one cost-effective way to achieve exposure.
Understanding the psychological motivations behind interpersonal sharing serves
to advance predictive models of individual and population level sharing behavior
while also providing basic science insights on the fundamental motivations
behind a ubiquitous human behavior. The purpose of this postdoctoral fellowship
is to investigate the psychological mechanisms that lead to increased
interpersonal sharing of dynamic, naturalistic messages promoting safe driving.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), this
project will examine the extent to which additional variance in sharing behavior
of naturalistic messages can be accounted for by neural similarity across
participants as messages unfold over time, thus providing information that is
inaccessible to existing behavioral methods and extending prior neural research
that used time-averaged brain activity during exposure to short texts. This
project builds upon prior research in social neuroscience that shows that the
similarity of individuals' neural responses to dynamic stimuli can predict
population-level behavioral outcomes in other messaging contexts. This project
further investigates the psychological interpretation of neural similarity by
examining whether neural similarity in a priori defined brain regions is
associated with behavioral similarity (as measured through engagement ratings
and analysis of naturalistic text descriptions of the stimuli), which in turn
leads to in- and out-of-sample sharing behavior. This project will provide basic
science insight about the mechanisms that lead to increased interpersonal
sharing, a ubiquitous human behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.