* 1911671
* Thermodynamics of Tropical Cyclone Overland Maintenance and Intensification
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Allen Evans, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 408,577.00

The energy that fuels a tropical storm's or a hurricane's winds is typically
drawn from warm ocean waters. However, for some tropical cyclones, the maximum
surface winds have been observed to be maintained or even increase over land. A
particularly noteworthy case is given by Tropical Storm Erin over Oklahoma,
which dramatically and unexpectedly intensified into a strong tropical storm as
it approached Oklahoma City from the west, resulting in millions of dollars of
wind-related damage. The few prior investigations into this phenomenon generally
agree that the required energy is drawn from the underlying land surface.
However, they disagree on the extent to which the energy is associated with land
warmth versus wetness, as well as on the physical processes that allow for a
sufficient amount of energy to be concentrated near the surface so that it can
be transferred to the tropical cyclones. Furthermore, the ideas advanced by
these previous studies have generally been developed using highly simplified
numerical weather prediction model simulations, with few instances in which
these ideas have been tested for actual tropical cyclones. Consequently, this
project seeks to significantly advance basic understanding of the energetics
supporting tropical cyclone maintenance and strengthening over land while
rigorously testing this understanding for a large sample of observed events. A
partnership with the Ronald E. McNair Post-Baccalaureate Achievement Program at
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee will support the professional development and
academic persistence of an undergraduate scholar from a traditionally
underrepresented background, helping to increase representation of minority
individuals within the workforce pipeline in the atmospheric and related
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests three guiding hypotheses:
remote surface energy exchange is the primary but not exclusive control on
tropical cyclone intensity change over land; non-desert soils cannot be
sufficiently warmed to result in sufficient upward enthalpy flux for tropical
cyclone maintenance or intensification over land; and intensity change over land
is equally sensitive to surface energy exchange and initial finite-amplitude
atmospheric variability. Factor separation applied to idealized numerical
simulations is used to test the first two hypotheses, whereas ensemble-
initialized real-data simulations are used to test the applicability of the
idealized simulation results to the real atmosphere. An expanded climatology of
atmospheric and substrate properties associated with overland tropical cyclone
maintenance and intensification is to support the numerical model simulations
and advance knowledge of the environments in which these events occur. Through
these activities, this research will reconcile competing theories regarding the
thermodynamic processes necessary to support non- or weakly baroclinic tropical
cyclone maintenance and intensification over land through quantifying the
respective contributions of local and non-local land-surface energy exchange to
overland tropical cyclone intensity change. Given the ongoing scientific debate
regarding the surface latent heat flux magnitudes needed to permit tropical
cyclone intensification over water, findings from the research will also advance
knowledge of the energetics of the traditional overwater tropical cyclone
intensification process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.