* 1911220
* Optimization of Low-Noise Amplifiers for Cryogenic Performance for Radio Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Anthony C. Readhead, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,533,976.00

This project seeks to transform the understanding of low noise amplifiers and
produce a new generation of such devices. Low noise amplifiers are a critical
technology for radio astronomy, and they also have other practical applications.
This project consists of a combined theoretical and experimental approach toward
improving the understanding and performance of these devices and deploying new
devices for astronomy. Continued US leadership in radio astronomy as well as
quantum computing and advanced radar systems depends on such progress. Radio
astronomy (such as the recent imaging of a black hole) addresses a basic human
need to understand the universe. Quantum computing will provide increased cyber-
security, and advanced radar systems help secure the national defense.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a theoretical solid-state
physics-based description of the sources of noise in indium phosphide (InP) high
electron-mobility transistors (HEMT) and use it to optimize the cryogenic
performance of low noise amplifiers. In order to perform the experimental aspect
of this work, a new test and measurement facility, an automated cryogenic probe
station, will be developed and used. The chip sets produced by this project will
facilitate the ongoing, and future, fabrication of new instruments and
facilities such as the next-generation Very Large Array (ngVLA) and radio
cameras for the Green Bank Telescope. These new facilities will enable
transformative science in the areas of large-scale spectroscopic mapping of the
Milky Way and nearby galaxies; studying the first galaxies via measurements of
highly-redshifted carbon-monoxide (CO); and unveiling the formation of solar
system analogs on terrestrial scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.