* 1911445
* IUSE: EHR: Assessing Virtual Reality Field Experiences for Enhanced Learning in the Geosciences
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Stephen Moysey, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,950.00

Virtual reality (VR) presents a new opportunity for engaging students in
geoscience field experiences, which are known to support student learning.
However, it is not clear how to design VR experiences that have comparable
results as real-world field experiences. This pilot project aims to develop best
practices for integrating VR into geoscience education and to support adoption
of those practices in college classrooms. The project includes: (1) a community
of practice; (2) a VR activity library; (3) in-class trials to compare the
effectiveness of different types of VR experiences; and (4) workshops to engage
the geoscience community in determining and disseminating best practices for VR
use in classrooms. The project aims to affect at least thirteen faculty
participants from different institutions and more than three hundred
undergraduate students. In addition to this direct impact, the work has the
potential to improve learning outcomes for most students in a geoscience or
other STEM classroom as the role of VR in education expands. Integration of
industry partners in the community of practice will support faculty development
in the use of VR as a teaching technology and help developers of VR technology
to consider educational needs as they build new VR
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initiation of the community of practice will
involve collaboration of participants from thirteen pilot universities including
research universities, primarily undergraduate institutions, and a large
community college; three of the institutions are minority serving. Joining these
academic institutions are three major industrial partners that are creating
technologies for educational VR experiences (Adobe, Unity, and ThingLink). The
community of practice will be supported by a new section of the Science
Education Resources Center website, which will provide the platform for sharing
pedagogy, contributing VR activities and lesson plans, and promoting networking
among community members. Academic partners will study the effectiveness of VR
experiences among more than three hundred students. These studies will evaluate
how realism, interactivity, and accessibility of the experience affect learning
outcomes, as well as the student experience relative to the implementation
challenges (development and delivery) associated with each experience. The
community of practice will define a set of best practices for the design of VR
field experiences in the geosciences, and these practices will be disseminated
through two community workshops. The key result of the study will be the
documentation of a set of best practices for the use of VR for learning in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.