* 1911451
* Quantifying the microbial contribution to community recovery from drought
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Rudgers, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,009,923.00

Understanding how ecological communities recover from extreme weather events can
improve our ability to manage and enhance their productivity and services.
Extreme droughts are predicted to increase in many regions, and may be
critically important in arid and semi-arid drylands, which are often more
sensitive to drought than wetter ecosystems. This project leverages previously
NSF-funded infrastructure for creating experimental drought in dry grasslands in
order to determine how much soil microbes aid in the recovery from extreme
drought. Prior research has uncovered two key results that have yet to be united
in contemporary research. First, drought leaves a legacy in the soil by changing
the composition of microbes; this legacy can persist long after drought has
ended. Second, additions of microbes can speed community recovery after
disturbance. Combined, these two results suggest that soil microbes could drive
the pace of ecological recovery from drought, but experimental studies are
needed. This project will use microbial experiments in the field and greenhouse
to determine the magnitude of drought impacts on drylands and elucidate how much
soil microbes matter to recovery and resilience. This project trains the next-
generation of diverse scientists by supporting a female Hispanic postdoctoral
researcher, two female graduate students (one Hispanic), and independent
research experiences for undergraduates, including partnership with the
Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute. A new inquiry-based laboratory module
reaches biology majors at a Hispanic-serving institution, and a drought-focused
K-12 unit enhances next-generation science standards. The project has global
importance because drylands occupy a large (~45%) and rapidly expanding
percentage of land area and contribute greatly to global carbon fluctuations.
Nearly 40% of people live in the world's drylands, and improved understanding of
the processes by which drylands recover from drought may enable rapid
restoration via microbial amendments, delivering new land management strategies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the ecological question: How do
microbes promote the recovery of plant communities and ecosystem functions
following drought? While prior studies have documented the legacy effects of
climate disruptions, the proposed work would be among the first to use microbial
experiments to quantify how much microbes contribute to the recovery process.
This project manipulates surface microbes (biological soil crusts) and soil
microbes to evaluate their influences on ecological recovery from experimental
drought. A microbial reciprocal transplant experiment will test how restoration
of pre-drought microbes speeds recovery relative to microbes with a drought
legacy. A fungal loop experiment will evaluate whether fungal networks that link
surface biocrusts with plant roots promote faster recovery than if these
networks are disrupted. Finally, a greenhouse plant-soil feedback experiment
will determine whether drought intensifies (or weakens) feedbacks that affect
the resilience of plant productivity. The project generalizes to dry grasslands
worldwide by including variation in plant life history, growth form and resource
requirements, as well as variable microbial compositions and edaphic contexts.
Research activities integrate evolutionary processes (drought alters genotype
frequencies in dominant producers), community dynamics (of both plant and
microbe assemblages), and ecosystem processes (soil carbon and nutrients) to
elucidate the pathways through which microbes contribute to recovery from
extreme weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.