* 1911701
* Research in Quantum Cosmology and Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* James Hartle, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 74,999.00

The inference is inescapable from the physics of the last 100 years that we live
in a quantum mechanical universe. The research supported by this grant is
devoted to predicting our large scale observations of the universe, starting
from theories of its quantum state and dynamics - a quantum cosmology. It aims
at explaining how the universe began and how it evolved to the universe that we
have today. The supported research aims at understanding the origin of the wide
range of time, place, and scale on which the deterministic laws of classical
physics hold in a quantum universe that is characterized fundamentally by
indeterminacy. The research will consider how quantum theory can be formulated
for a closed system like the universe where there are no observers outside
making measurements. It will show how familiar textbook quantum mechanics of
measurement situations emerges along with classical spacetime in the very early
universe.

These questions will be explored in simple minisuperspace models using the no-
boundary wave function of the universe due to Hawking and the PI in its
semiclassical approximation assuming simple field theory models for the matter
degrees of freedom. Decoherent histories quantum theory will be used to
calculate the probabilities of the individual members of sets of suitably
coarse-grained histories of the universe from the state and dynamics.
Probabilities for observations are these probabilities conditioned on a
description of the observational situation. Particular emphasis will be placed
on the probabilities for closed homogeneous and isotropic cosmological
geometries and the quantum fluctuations away from these symmetries that lead to
the large scale structure of the universe we see today in the cosmic background
radiation and the galaxy distribution, including in a regime of eternal
inflation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.