* 1911313
* OPUS:  MCS:  Is self-fertilization an evolutionary dead end? Artificial selection of a key outcrossing trait and its consequences in partially selfing populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Jeremiah Busch, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2023
* USD 197,724.00

Understanding the processes that limit evolution and adaptation remains a major
question in biology. Many plants and animals evolve traits that allow them to
produce offspring through self-fertilization. However, this transition is
thought to be a one-way street because self-fertilization limits genetic
variation which prevents further evolution. This project will determine whether
plants that primarily self-fertilize can re-evolve to be outcrossing. Highly
outcrossing and primarily selfing species of monkeyflower will be compared for
their genetic variation and artificially selected for flower traits that
determine the rate of selfing. The project will involve undergraduates in the
conduct of independent experiments and the analysis of genetic data, and new
laboratory materials will be developed on artificial selection and genetic
evolution for an undergraduate course at Washington State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited heritable variation in predominantly
selfing populations is thought to be a primary constraint on the evolution of
outcrossing traits. While declines in effective population size and the efficacy
of recombination are expected with close inbreeding, there is scant information
on their consequences for adaptive trait evolution. Constraints on the re-
evolution of outcrossing traits in primarily selfing lineages suggest either
that genetic variation is limiting or that such responses are possible but
unlikely to occur. Outcrossing populations of Mimulus guttatus and selfing
populations of M. laciniatus and M. micranthus will be subject to five
generations of artificial selection for increasing the anther-stigma distance, a
key outcrossing trait, and the realized heritability will be determined. Pooled
whole-genome population sequencing of the control and selection lines before and
after the experiments will reveal the comparative effects of selection on their
genomes. This whole-genome information has the potential to critically link
constraints on adaptation to the genetic consequences of self-fertilization
(i.e., low nucleotide diversity and strong linkage
disequilibrium).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.