* 1911758
* Better Models of Eyewitness Identification Across the Lifespan
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* David Kellen, McAdoo, Ryan M
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Law
and Social Sciences program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. David Kellen at Syracuse
University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career
scientist investigating eyewitness identification across the lifespan, including
the understudied and growing population of older adults. In particular, little
research in eyewitness identification has been guided by the sophisticated
modeling often employed in the basic recognition memory literature. Furthermore,
the unique, and growing population of aging adults is not as well studied within
this domain as younger adults, leaving an unfortunate gap in the literature. The
proposed research seeks to fill these gaps by utilizing sophisticated modeling
approaches to understand eyewitness identification research across the lifespan.
This research aims to promote the goals of the NSF by advancing basic research
in recognition and eyewitness memory and serving the public welfare through
investigation of better methods and practices for law enforcement officials
administering lineup identifications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research has two main tracks: Theory Building and Empirical Investigation. The
Theory Building portion of the proposal applies decades of knowledge modeling
basic recognition memory and confidence decisions to the complex eyewitness
identification task, using modern, sophisticated approaches to modeling such as
hierarchical Bayesian methods. This work will advance fundamental understanding
of the processes that underpin eyewitness identification decisions, and thereby
allow for the identification of factors that can enhance eyewitness memory. As
the Theory Building is underway, data will be collected from younger and aging
adults completing eyewitness identification tasks under a variety of methods. In
the Empirical Investigation, researchers will use what they learn from these new
data in Theory Building to better understand and predict how these populations
differ in making life-altering eyewitness identification decisions. Specific
phenomena to be investigated include how younger and older adults differ (if
indeed they do) in terms of accuracy, response bias (willingness to choose
anyone from a lineup), and confidence-accuracy calibration under a number of
different lineup conditions. The researchers aim to fill gaps in the literature
in eyewitness identification by determining: (1) whether simultaneous lineups
produce better performance than showups and sequential lineups for older adults,
(2) whether older adults display a strong confidence-accuracy relationship, and
(3) whether older adults exhibit an own-race bias. These phenomena have been
routinely studied in younger adults, but with no verification that they
generalize to an older adult population. Furthermore, the researchers will apply
what they learn in the Theory Building portion of the proposed research to
explain the mechanisms that give rise to the findings observed in these
Empirical Investigations. One final consideration will be the impact of
individual differences on eyewitness memory in younger and older adults. For
example, the researchers will be interested in how low- and high-functioning
older adults differ in how they perform in eyewitness identification tasks.
Other variables, including literacy, age, socioeconomic status, working memory
capacity, and attentional control, will be examined and analyzed using cutting-
edge hierarchical modeling techniques. Ultimately, the proposed research will
extend the small sphere of knowledge regarding how older adults function as
eyewitnesses by providing new data and, more importantly, identifying the ways
to improve how older adults make eyewitness lineup
identifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.