* 1911592
* NSF/DMR-BSF: Understanding Electro-Chemo-Mechanical Processes at the Atomic Level
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Anatoly Frenkel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 599,986.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials with strong mechanical response to applied
electric fields hold great importance for a wide range of vitally important
technologies ranging from focusing devices in the cameras of cellular phones to
fuel injectors in automobiles. The discovery of the so called "chemical
expansion effect" in selected ceramic materials, in which changes in chemical
composition may cause the volume change and, hence, large stress, opened a
possibility to elicit an electro-chemo-mechanical (ECM) response using
electrical current to control chemical composition. The main challenges towards
rationally designing new materials with the desired ECM response has been the
inability of current materials to operate reasonably fast at room temperature
and the lack of atomic-level understanding of their working mechanisms. The
investigators are developing a new concept of an ECM material, based on the
metal-ceramic nanocrystalline composites, that they had successfully tested for
feasibility. To study the underlying principles of how they work, the
researchers are using X-ray absorption spectroscopy, a research technique that
uses ultrabright X-rays to identify changes in the local atomic environment
around metal ions under operating conditions. The project impacts the field of
ceramic materials through the development of fundamental understanding and
design criteria for this new class of ECM materials. The project fosters
international ties between Stony Brook University and Weizmann Institute of
Science, Israel. The broader impacts of this project are being realized through
connections between faculty and students from both institutions, mentoring of
undergraduate and graduate students, and post-doctoral scholars in science and
engineering disciplines, dissemination of research results to the peer
community, and through exploration of materials for new
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The focus of this project
is to develop fundamental understanding of processes taken place in ceramic
materials during electro-chemo-mechanical (ECM) actuation, an effect recently
proposed for developing new generation of micro- and nano-actuators. The ECM
effect is the change in mechanical dimensions of a solid as a result of a change
in chemical composition induced by an electric field. To formulate the
conditions for practical realization of ECM actuation, the complex relationship
between the processes of oxidation/reduction, diffusion, phase transformation
and generation of macro- and micro-stresses must be understood. As a platform
for such investigation, Anatoly Frenkel (Stony Brook University), his
international collaborator Igor Lubomirsky (Weizmann Institute of Science) and
their respective groups are studying an oxygen ion transport-based ECM device
using metal-ceramic nanocomposites. Atomic-level synchrotron characterization
provides insights into the effects of the reduction, oxidation and strain in
real-time operating conditions. This project offers research opportunities and
training at advanced national research facilities at the post-graduate,
graduate, and undergraduate levels. The project impacts the field of ceramic
materials due to the development of fundamental understanding and material
selection rules for the new class of ceramic-based ECM actuation
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.