* 1911708
* Grammatical Gender Representation in Natural Language
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Luke Adamson, Adamson, Luke James
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 09/30/2022
* USD 170,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Linguistics program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jonathan Bobaljik at Harvard University,
this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the linguistic ingredients of grammatical gender. The research
explores how gender - a property of nouns reflected in agreement with other
elements such as adjectives and determiners - is grammatically represented,
through three related projects: i) a theoretically-oriented typological study of
syncretism (the sharing of forms across categories), ii) a comparative study of
morphosyntactic gender 'defaults', and iii) a study of putative gender
suppletion (in which pairs of forms such as aunt/uncle have a semantically
regular relationship but are expressed by a maximally irregular morphological
relationship). These projects are centered around questions of how gender
features are decomposed and structured, and how gender features are reflected in
morphology and syntax. The objective of this research is to advance our
understanding of how gender categories are linguistically defined and how they
interact with other components of grammar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
synthesizes morphological and syntactic evidence to inform the theory of the
featural representation of grammatical gender, and evaluates hypotheses such as
featural containment. It also examines the role of grammatical gender in root
suppletion. The first project addresses featural decomposition and markedness
through the gathering of extensive typological evidence on gender syncretism,
which can be used to reveal whether there are generalizations about attested and
unattested patterns of syncretism. The research thus complements recent studies
of syncretism and suppletion which observe, and propose explanations for, robust
cross-linguistic generalizations such as *ABA: the absence of a pattern in which
a marked member along some hierarchy shares a form or property with a less
marked member to the exclusion of intermediate members. *ABA has been observed
in various domains including adjectival grade, clusivity, number, and case,
though it has not yet been tested for grammatical gender. This typological
evidence can be used to evaluate the viability of a universal theory of gender
decomposition and markedness, such as the theory of featural containment. A
second component of the research investigates gender markedness through a
comparative study of morphosyntactic gender defaults. In particular, the study
examines how markedness is reflected in split results for standard gender
default diagnostics, when one subset of diagnostics indicates that one gender
category behaves as a default, while another subset of diagnostics instead point
to the default status of a different gender. Gender markedness is also
considered from a different perspective, namely in terms of the role of
syntactic licensing. Lastly, the research examines the issue of gender-
conditioned suppletion, assessing whether pairs unlike in form have different
gender representations while sharing the same 'root'. Novel types of evidence
are considered, including conceivable suppletive alternations which may or may
not be attested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.