* 1911512
* GP-EXTRA: Personal Relevance, Global Significance - Building Education and Career Pathways in Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Sharon Locke, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2024
* USD 432,038.00

The Southern Illinois University Edwardsville GEOPATHS program is a
collaboration between the Geography and Environmental Sciences departments, STEM
Center, student co-curricular organizations, and academic advisors focusing on
integrating underrepresented racial and ethnic minorities, women, veterans,
students with disabilities, and other groups into the geoscience professional
community, which has traditionally lacked diversity. The program is designed to
highlight the importance of geoscience careers, open pathways and reduce
barriers to obtaining degrees for groups underrepresented in geosciences, and
ultimately to broaden participation in the regional geoscience workforce. The
program will consist of two cohorts of 10 students that will 1) conduct
geoscience research that contributes to solving the region's environmental
problems, 2) complete a geoscience community internship, 3) take two summer
field excursions, 4) receive training in geoscience technical skills, and 5)
participate in local field trips and seminars that highlight the diversity of
geoscience careers. The program will lower barriers to geoscience student
success, including financial limitations that can hinder underrepresented
students' opportunities to participate in extra- and co-curricular activities,
and thereby gain additional professional skills that employers value.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is theoretically grounded in research on
social influence and its role in student integration into the scientific
community, with program elements intentionally designed to strengthen scholars'
self-efficacy, science identity, and values orientation as they progress through
the university, and ultimately to graduate school and/or the workforce. A key
innovation is the use of the tripartite integration model of social influence
(Estrada et al., 2011), a theoretical framework that has not been closely
examined by geoscience education researchers. We hypothesize that by emphasizing
how geoscience research and careers contribute to society, the program will help
students see both the personal relevance and global significance of the
geosciences. The project assessment team will conduct rigorous research
exploring development of scholars? self-efficacy, identity, and values, as well
as track course grades, retention in the majors, graduation rates, and post-
graduation activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.