* 1911849
* Workshop to Enhance Collaboration Between US and Indonesia in Biodiversity and Conservation Research
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Nyree Zerega, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 01/31/2022
* USD 64,965.00

Beyond the inherent value of life on earth, we all depend on biodiversity for
our own well-being. Diverse and healthy ecosystems are the basis of many
livelihoods, they provide clean air and water, offer recreational and tourism
opportunities, and are a buffer to natural disasters. Biodiversity is also the
basis for our food, much of the world?s medicine and many of the products we
rely on. With increasing global threats to the survival and health of the
world's biota, it is crucial to the environmental and economic health of the
world to document, understand, and conserve biodiversity. This workshop aims to
engage and prepare US biodiversity researchers for broad international and
interdisciplinary collaborations and the development of infrastructure and
predictive tools that can help address pressing biodiversity research and
conservation needs globally, and in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will take place in Indonesia, as a region that hosts a disproportionately large
amount of global biodiversity. It engages US and Indonesian scientists working
across disciplines of biodiversity science to discuss and strategize how to best
collaborate in efforts to continue to discover, document, understand, and
conserve biodiversity in a way that also considers human needs. Topics of the
workshop will include building and managing successful collaborations, data
sharing, applying new technologies to basic ecological and evolutionary
questions as well as applied conservation issues, and training students and
researchers at various career stages in valuable new technologies. The most
immediate outcome of the workshop will be a publication identifying common and
complementary areas of interests, synthesizing challenges and opportunities and
recommending future steps in biodiversity research. The ultimate goal is to
establish productive international research partnerships allowing for
collaborative and comprehensive study of ecosystems and the biodiversity they
encompass in a global context and facilitate international exchange and critical
training of students and professionals, ultimately leading to more successful
approaches for addressing global problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.