* 1911257
* Collaborative Research: CBET: The role of sunlight in determining the fate and microbial impact of microplastics in surface waters
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kara Law, Sea Education Association
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 87,700.00

Microplastics are plastic particles smaller than 5 mm in size. Microplastics
mostly originate from fragmentation of larger plastic objects and are now found
globally from drinking water to rivers, lakes and streams, and the oceans. An
estimated 8 million tonnes of plastic waste enter the oceans from land each
year, yet only a fraction of this material is accounted for by floating
microplastics. One hypothesis for the missing microplastic is that exposure to
sunlight degrades them to dissolved carbon. This project will assess whether
sunlight-driven photochemical reactions release dissolved organic carbon from
plastics, resulting in removal of the plastics from the water. A second
objective of this project will test whether the chemicals released affect
bacterial growth and survivability in natural waters. Results will improve our
understanding of the fate of floating plastics in natural waters. This project
will have significant broader impacts in the fields of environmental
microbiology and photochemistry. Results will be incorporated into high school
classroom learning geared towards middle and high school students, to increase
the Nation's scientific literacy and educate the next generation of
environmental engineers and scientists. In addition, the results will inform
society on how to prioritize plastic waste management to protect human and
ecological health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplastics are plastic particles
smaller than 5 mm in size and originate from fragmentation of larger plastic
objects released to the environment. Microplastics are found globally from
drinking water to rivers, lakes and streams, and the oceans, where more than 98%
of all buoyant microplastics are unaccounted for in loading estimates. The
hypothesis for this research is that sunlight is responsible for degrading
floating microplastics to dissolved organic carbon (DOC) on relatively short
time scales (years). This hypothesis will be tested through a series of field,
experimental, and analytical studies. The second hypothesis is that DOC released
from photochemical breakdown will impact microbial growth. This hypothesis will
be tested through bioassays with natural marine and freshwater microbes to
assess the degradation kinetics (dissolution, fragmentation, and oxidation) of
microplastics in seawater and freshwater in the light and dark, and with and
without microbes. Experiments with plastics of variable polymer chemistry, size,
and previous oxidation history will reveal the role of these factors in
explaining variability in degradation rates to inform future modeling studies of
plastic loss. The project brings together scientists with complementary
educational, field, experimental, and analytical skills to transform our
understanding of the fate and impact of buoyant microplastics in surface waters.
Results will be disseminated to other scientists, the press, and incorporated
into high school classroom learning via publication in the Science Journal for
Kids, an open access journal which adapts primary, peer-reviewed research papers
with age-appropriate language and illustrations geared towards middle and high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.