* 1911026
* Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance: Pacific Northwest
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2025
* Mark Richards, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 02/28/2025
* USD 3,600,000.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the
talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in
STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Pacific Northwest
LSAMP (PNWLSAMP) program was established in 2009 in response to the need for a
more diverse and skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is
particularly acute in the State of Washington. The ten public institutions that
make up the Alliance are diverse and include five four-year institutions and
five partnering community colleges. The institutions are Boise State University,
Oregon State University, Portland State University, the University of
Washington, Washington State University, the College of Western Idaho, Linn-
Benton Community College, Seattle Central Community College, Yakima Valley
Community College, and Portland Community College. The goal of the Alliance is
to increase the number of underrepresented minority (URM) graduates with STEM
degrees by 50% over the next five years. This goal will be accomplished by
continuing successful programming from previous years while expanding its focus
on leadership and mentorship. This new program will include professional
development, opportunities to participate in program operations, serve as
mentors, and have access to faculty mentorship. This focus will support LSAMP
students in developing their scientist identity and self-efficacy through
engagement in the culture of science and discussion of the role of race and
social stigma in scientific training. PNWLSAMP will also increase the number of
URM students from Alliance institutions pursuing graduate education by 5-10%
through integrated research experiences and graduate school preparation and
advisement. These goals support the National Science Foundation's strategic goal
to "cultivate a world-class, broadly inclusive science and engineering
workforce, and expand the scientific literacy of all
citizens."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational research study will take an
assets-based and intersectional approach, examining factors that contribute to
persistence in STEM for students from URM groups. The research project will
include a large multi-year study and four smaller "sprint studies" conducted by
researchers across the Alliance. The large study will examine how STEM students
from URM groups navigate within historically exclusionary social institutional
structures. It will also include a participatory action element that engages
students and administrators to develop strategies for improving equity on their
campuses. The sprint studies will each take place on one PNWLSAMP campus and
focus on different dimensions of belonging in STEM for students from URM groups.
An external evaluation team will implement both quantitative and qualitative
instruments to assess the overall quality of the programs on the individual
campuses as well as the entire alliance related to the overall goals of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.