* 1911317
* Louis Stokes B2B Alliance: Harris County Community College Alliance (HCCCA)
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Bartlett Sheinberg, San Jacinto College District
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,477,907.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on transforming
undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based recruitment and
retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in support of racial
and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM disciplines: African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska Natives, Native
Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies facilitate the
production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and motivated to pursue
graduate education or careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the United
States to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it taps into the talent
of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational preparedness in STEM
areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. The Harris County Community
College Alliance (HCCCA), consisting of two public, associate-degree granting,
Hispanic Serving two-year institutions (San Jacinto College and Houston
Community College), was formed in response to the need for a more diverse and
skilled technical workforce. That need still exists and is particularly acute in
the state of Texas. HCCCA will build on research-based models which have proven
successful in increasing the number of underrepresented community college
students who transfer to four-year institutions in a STEM discipline. This focus
supports the National Science Foundation's strategic goal to "cultivate a world-
class, broadly inclusive science and engineering workforce, and expand the
scientific literacy of all citizens." In support of the focus, the Alliance will
engage students in STEM exposure, first-year peer mentoring, faculty mentoring,
competitive summer research and internship opportunities, an annual research
symposium, STEM seminar series, and dedicated social media sites to help
facilitate the social cohesion critical for community college students to form
their academic identify. In support of the transfer goal, the alliance will use
mapping, or guided pathways, with clearly identified educational and career
goals, to provide easier transitions to four-year institutions. In addition, a
pipeline will be created that uses alumni LSAMP students already at the transfer
institution to help receive the new transfer students and establish a new
Community of Scholars at the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.