* 1911335
* Auroral Kilometric Radiation, Substorms, and Related Phenomena: Satellite Conjunction and Conjugate Studies at South Pole
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* James LaBelle, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 06/30/2023
* USD 124,999.00

The near-Earth environment (Geospace) is mostly organized by the Earth's
magnetic field, which interacts with the solar wind (charged particles, plasma,
flowing with a great speed from the Sun) and interplanetary magnetic field
(extended Sun's magnetic field). Geospace is populated by plasma that mostly
originates from the solar wind. Interaction of these two major players -
geomagnetic field and solar wind plasma produces many electromagnetic phenomena
such as beautiful ionospheric aurorae (Northern and Southern lights), natural
electromagnetic radiation, field-aligned and ionospheric currents, that
prominently appear and are observed in the polar areas where they are most
intense. Studying these phenomena is a matter of high importance since they
affect both satellite instrumentation and their communication with the ground
centers. The number of satellites flying Geospace continues to grow every
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will study and establish the relationship
between Auroral Kilometric Radiation (AKR) observed by distant satellites and
ground-level AKR-like signals, as well as will test current theories on how
these phenomena are connected. The methodology is to operate radio receivers at
South Pole during anticipated conjunctions with the Cluster satellite high-
resolution wave instrument and enabling simultaneous measurements of AKR fine
structure at both locations. Further observations of coincident AKR on the
Japanese Geotail and Canadian ePOP satellites and at South Pole will complement
these measurements. All this research can only be done from Antarctica - because
AKR-like signals cannot be regularly observed in the Northern hemisphere due to
man-made radio frequency interference, as well as because conjugate
satellite/ground-based observations at auroral latitudes require Antarctic
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.