* 1911607
* GP-EXTRA: Place-Based Participatory Path to Geoscience
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Steven Cox, Northern New Mexico College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 284,780.00

Part 1 - Northern New Mexico College serves a population that is 72% Hispanic
and 18% Native American. They have resided, uninterrupted, in the Espanola
Valley for over 400 and 1000 years respectively. It is a place of great beauty,
history and poverty. Its meager mineral beds were tapped out over 100 years ago
and its high desert climate supports only small, largely subsistence, farms -
irrigated by a communal acequia system that has been in continuous use for
hundreds of years. There is evident pride in participating in the stewardship of
a place that offers its fruits so grudgingly. The project intends to expand on
this pride by engaging our undergraduates in the detailed mapping of the many
layers of their environment, in the assimilation of these layers, and in the
tactile simulation of natural and human-caused events (fire, flood, infestation,
migration) within and across these layers. The complexity of these events and
their cost in lives and livelihoods have lead many communities to invest in
relevant technology. Given the low level of scientific and computational
literacy in rural America this reliance on technology forces local environmental
stakeholders to forfeit their agency to an outside technical expert. The intent
of the project is to prepare undergraduates to assume this crucial role in their
community. An expected outcome of the project is the resulting increase in
pride, stemming from such place-based participation, will firmly set
undergraduates on a pathway into the Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's goals are focused on creating a platform for students that emphasizes
modeling, learning and collaborative planning. The project seeks to equip
undergraduates with systems thinking skills and have them serve as valued
participants in environmental planning and flexible ambassadors of new
technology en route to deeper learning in the Geosciences. The aims of the
project's collaborative planning experience would (1) help non experts better
understand complex human-natural interactions and to use that knowledge to (2)
engage in more truly collaborative and creative planning activities. The former
will give students the skills to pursue Geoscience while the latter will assure
them that these hard won skills matter to the Earth and their
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.