* 1911331
* Communicating Across the Researcher Practitioner Divide
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Bevlee Watford, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2020
* USD 49,890.00

Despite numerous efforts to transform engineering education, challenges in
teaching, learning, and administration persist. Some have argued that one reason
for these persistent challenges is because of poor connections between research
and practice. Unfortunately, there are no existing tools to measure the extent
of this problem among researchers and practitioners in engineering education.
The purpose of this study is to design and implement a survey that measures
engineering education researchers' and practitioners' views on the role of
research in education. The data will be collected at the 2019 CoNECD
(Collaborative Network for Engineering and Computing Diversity), which is a
conference specifically designed to link research and practice. The findings of
this study will generate concrete data that will reveal underlying differences
between education researchers' and practitioners' perspectives on one of the
thorniest issues in education: how to convert research to practice. Gaining a
better understanding of what bolsters the gap between research and practice in
engineering education context will lead to the development of tools and
professional development resources that will be useful in bridging this divide
in engineering education and other STEM education disciplines. Strengthening
connections between research and practice in engineering education will improve
the impact of publicly-supported STEM education research. It will also
contribute to the development of a more diverse and competent workforce that is
well prepared to address society's greatest challenges and
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is two-pronged: 1)
to develop a valid and reliable instrument for measuring education researchers'
and practitioners' perspectives on the role of research in education using a
framework Bulterman-Bos; and 2) implement it at an upcoming conference
specifically designed to bring together engineering education researchers and
practitioners in order to determine if there are statistically significant
differences in responses based on the participants' role. The valid and reliable
instrument resulting from this work will draw broadly on the perspectives of
researchers and practitioners, as well as theories and methods developed by
other related disciplines. As such, it will be relevant to a wide variety of
stakeholders in engineering education and other STEM education-related fields
struggling to bridge connections between research and practice. Deploying this
instrument at the CoNECD conference will ensure that the findings are informed
by both groups of stakeholders, and the people who are in the best position to
offer insights about how to foster connections between research and practice.
The existence of dichotomous views, if found to be substantiated by data, could
leads to a myriad of practical things that could be done to change how
researchers and practitioners communicate with and inform one another's
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.