* 1911296
* Experimental constraints on the equilibrium hydrogen isotopic composition and rates of hydrogen isotopic exchange of C-H bonds in natural gas
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Daniel Stolper, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 379,224.00

Natural gas is a key part of the US's economy. Methane is also a greenhouse gas
and product and food source for life. Tracking methane sources and sinks is used
in energy exploration, climate science, and biosciences. One of the main ways
that natural gas sources are found is by measurement of carbon and hydrogen
stable isotope values but use of isotope ratios to identify gas sources requires
that those ratios do not change during gas accumulation and storage in the
Earth. But whether this is true is not well known. The proposed work will
measure rates of hydrogen isotope exchange and the final equilibrium values
under laboratory conditions. This will be used to evaluate conditions where
hydrogen isotope ratios could change in the earth. This information will be
useful to a variety of groups including earth scientists, energy companies, and
atmospheric scientists working to identify natural gas sources. This work will
only become more broadly applicable as the US continues to extract natural gas
from shale and exports it. The project will train one graduate student and will
offer research opportunities to undergraduate students through established
programs at UC Berkeley, and the will be highlighted at the annual "Cal" Day
event where research on campus is shared with the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical to the use of natural gas hydrogen
isotopic compositions as a fingerprint for gas origins is the necessary
assumption that isotopic compositions of samples are not modified post
formation. This could occur due to hydrogen isotope-exchange reactions occurring
in the subsurface after gas formation but before sampling. Problematically, the
conditions under which natural gas undergoes hydrogen isotope exchange reactions
at relatively low temperatures in Earth's near surface (&lt;200oC) is poorly
constrained. To be able to evaluate whether such exchange reactions actually
occur in nature and influence natural gas hydrogen isotopic compositions
requires: (i) Knowledge of the rates of hydrogen isotope exchange of these gases
with common hydrogen bearing molecules such as water at relevant natural
conditions; and (ii) The equilibrium isotopic composition between alkanes and
potential hydrogen-isotope exchange partners, the value of which determines the
final isotopic composition of the natural gases undergoing hydrogen isotope
exchange. To date, both the rates of hydrogen isotope exchange and the expected
equilibrium compositions are poorly known for alkane gases at low temperatures
(&lt;200oC). But knowledge of such are necessary for a complete understanding of
what measured hydrogen isotopic compositions of natural gas in low temperature
environments reflect about source vs. post-formational histories. To this end, a
series of experiments will be conducted that are designed to establish
experimentally: (i) the expected equilibrium dependence of hydrogen isotopic
distributions for C1-C4 alkane gases from 25-250oC, including for methane
clumped isotopes and (ii) the rates of exchange of C1-C5 alkanes with water at
multiple temperatures such that the rates of exchange can be extrapolated to low
temperatures for geologically relevant systems. The methodologies that will be
used to accomplish these tasks are: (1) The use of catalysts to equilibrate
hydrocarbons with H2 gas; (2) Heating of gases with water in gold cell reactors
at elevated temperature and pressures; And (3) measurement of the isotopic
composition of the hydrocarbons from all experiments. This work will provide the
new constraints on what sets the hydrogen isotopic composition of natural gas
undergoing isotope exchange reactions with water as well as what the isotopic
compositions will be once the gases are in hydrogen isotopic
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.