* 1911741
* Health Inequalities in Access to Care among Latino Patients
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Dagoberto Cortez, Cortez, Dagoberto
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 12/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Social
Psychology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Mark Hayward at The University of Texas at
Austin, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist
investigating the influence that social inequalities exert on terminal cancer
care for Latino patients. Research across multiple disciplines shows that Latino
patients lack access to high-quality cancer care, are less likely to receive
standard end-of-life care than other racial and ethnic groups, and face
persistent health inequalities due to additional socioeconomic challenges. Yet,
we know far less about how these social and health disparities influence care-
seeking behavior. Additionally, we know even less about how patients attempt to
overcome structural barriers and navigate the healthcare system. This project
can produce societal benefits by providing key insights policymakers and
community organizations can use to address health inequalities in Latino
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores the processes by which
terminal Latino cancer patients and their family members access medical
facilities, navigate healthcare institutions, attempt to treat the cancer, and
plan for death. This project uses a multi-method design, which includes
ethnographic observations, qualitative geographic imaging system (QGIS), "go
alongs", and in-depth interviews. Specifically, data collection includes
documenting and mapping the physical routes participants take to access care,
observing how participants navigate healthcare bureaucracies, examining how
participants talk about death (or ignore the subject) with loved ones, and
analyzing how patients and family members come to some sort of consensus about
future goals considering the dire medical circumstances. A multi-method
qualitative research design generates various types of data, which allows for
fine grain analyses, which in turn help trace the different mechanisms through
which health inequalities are reproduced and the ways patients respond to
experiencing such inequalities. This project makes novel contributions to
existing knowledge by uncovering the ways health inequalities shape terminal
cancer care for Latino patients. Studying how racial/ethnic inequalities
influence healthcare access and the resources (both material and social) that
patients use to navigate healthcare institutions can help generate policies that
help lessen health disparities and support the care-seeking strategies patients
are already successfully using. Findings from this study can also provide new
insights for future researchers that want to study the relationship between
race/ethnicity and health inequalities and the influence that socioeconomic
factors have of healthcare access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.