* 1911699
* Collaborative Research: Linking High 3He/4He to Other Isotopic Systems in Baffin Island Lavas
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Forrest Horton, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 416,518.00

Rare volcanic rocks with isotopically light helium (i.e., high 3He/4He ratios)
are thought to contain material that ascended in plumes from early formed and
long isolated reservoirs at the base of Earth's mantle. Lavas erupted on Baffin
Island in arctic Canada have the highest 3He/4He ratios found in any terrestrial
rocks and thus afford the best opportunity to investigate the stratification and
long-term evolution of the deep Earth. This project will employ novel
geochemical techniques to study a suite of high 3He/4He lavas collected on
Baffin Island in 2018. The primary objective of the project is to improve our
understanding of helium behavior in magmatic settings. Combined with a thorough
petrologic and geochemical assessment of the samples, our results will provide
new insights about deep Earth processes. This collaborative project will support
graduate students and highly specialized technical support staff at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and California Institute of Technology. The project
team also will partner with a Massachusetts-based rehabilitation center to
provide employment opportunities to local residents. All results will be
published in peer-reviewed journals, as well as translated into Inuktitut and
shared with the Baffin Island Inuit communities that assisted with
fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the composition and the long-term
evolution of the deep Earth relies on an ability to link high 3He/4He ratios to
other chemical components in volcanic rocks. This study will investigate helium
(de)coupling from other elements by combing detailed petrographic and
geochemical observations with precise 3He/4He measurements. The project will
utilize innovative techniques including helium diffusion experiments, X-ray
computed tomography, laser ablation micro-drilling, and single-grain crushing to
investigate helium mobility in olivine crystals, which are the primary hosts of
helium in the lavas. To fill knowledge gaps about Baffin Island lava
geochemistry, researchers also will measure 186Os, 182W, and heavier noble gas
(Ne, Ar, and Xe) isotopic abundances. This comprehensive geochemical assessment
of these understudied lavas will offer a fresh perspective on enigmatic deep
Earth processes. This collaborative project will support graduate students and
highly specialized technical support staff at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution and California Institute of Technology. Project members will partner
with a Massachusetts-based rehabilitation center to provide employment
opportunities to local residents. All results will be published in peer-reviewed
journals, as well as translated into Inuktitut and shared with the Baffin Island
Inuit communities that assisted with fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.