* 1911925
* Habitat and coinfection as drivers of heterogeneity in cross-scale wildlife infectious disease processes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2024
* Clayton Cressler, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,614,034.00

In order to predict and control the spread of infectious diseases, it is
important to understand the role of "superspreaders". These are hosts who
transmit disease more often than most other infected individuals. To understand
superspreaders this project will investigate how immunity to infections, host
diet, and whether or not the host is infected with other parasites creates
variation among individuals in susceptibility to pathogens and the ability to
transmit infections. To do so, this project will develop mathematical frameworks
of virus spread, to predict how food resources and infection with a parasite
will first shape the risk that an individual will become infected, and then,
will shape the spread of disease across populations and landscapes. These
predictions will be tested using laboratory and field experiments with bank
voles infected with Puumala hantavirus. The results of this project will shed
new light on why some individuals become superspreaders and others do not. This
has relevance to improving surveillance and management of this hantavirus, which
regularly spills over from its vole reservoir host to infect humans, as well to
other pathogens of concern to human and agricultural health. The project will
also support the training of high school science teachers from across the United
States, providing them with a hands-on research experience in Finland. This will
equip them with activities and materials to use to teach high school students
about the importance of emerging infectious
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the
individual and synergistic effects of habitat quality and helminth coinfection
on wild bank voles infected with the zoonotic pathogen, Puumala hantavirus. The
project will develop novel mathematical theory to mechanistically link diet and
coinfection with pathogen transmission to predict how bottom-up (diet-driven)
and top-down (coinfection-driven) processes interact to drive the emergence of
superspreaders, and how this individual-level variation scales up to influence
pathogen transmission at the population- and landscape-level. These predictions
will be tested using both laboratory vole infection experiments and powerful
manipulative experiments involving supplemental feeding and de-worming
treatments of wild vole populations in forests. By concurrently developing
mathematical models and integrating them with empirical data, this project will
quantify how habitat and coinfection influence (1) individual host competence
for microparasite infection, (2) demographic and contact processes governing
local transmission and (3) dispersal rates and landscape attributes that
determine spatial spread of disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.