* 1911831
* EAGER Collaborative Research: Early career chief scientist training for biological and chemical oceanographers
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2021
* Matthew Church, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 03/31/2021
* USD 82,569.00

Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The PIs request funds to provide training in
leading and organizing research cruises to early career researchers in the areas
of Biological and Chemical Oceanography. Participants in this training program
would be introduced to pre-cruise planning and logistics, receive training in
commonly used oceanographic sampling equipment, and conduct shipboard
measurements during a 10-day oceanographic cruise to the North Pacific
Subtropical Gyre (NPSG). The goal of this training program is to prepare early
career scientists for leading and participating in interdisciplinary
oceanographic research at sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program addresses the broader impacts criteria
successfully. The research cruise and follow-up reports and publications focus
on interdisciplinary questions important for advancing the field. Given the
rapid changes that oceanic systems are undergoing, it is important to have a
cadre of junior scientists who are adept at managing interdisciplinary
collaborations and conducting research at sea. The PIs are considering ways to
connect with diverse audiences in recruiting participants. The impact on early
career oceanographers will be very strong. This will create an experience that
will be a major impact on the careers of the trainees, especially if they stay
in the oceanography field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Statement of Merit
Review&lt;br/&gt; " This statement is non-editable and added to every proposal
Abstract once it has been saved in eJacket. This statement is viewable after the
Abstract has been saved, and is read-only.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.