* 1911151
* Speeding up the messenger: immediate detection of multimessenger transients with  Las Cumbres Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dale Howell, Las Cumbres Observatory Global Telescope Network
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 806,973.00

The operations of the Las Cumbres Observatory (LCO), for the discovery and
characterization of transient events by monitoring them minutes to hours after
their discovery, will be continued for the next three years. The worldwide
network of 21 robotic telescopes which allows almost constant access to the sky,
will after discovery of a transient event, initiate procedures to reference its
position if necessary and continuously observe it without gaps for local
daytime. LCO will observe any future transient events including IceCube alerts
and any three detector Ligo-Virgo neutron star alerts which will possibly number
in the tens of events. After discovery and localization for position, alerts
will immediately be sent out to the scientific community. The LCO network and an
array of other facilities in conjunction with international partners will
monitor the electromagnetic emission to characterize the newly discovered
transients. The postdoc and graduate student will integrate new telescopes into
the LCO network increasing their STEM skills in instrumentation and robotics. A
new education module for high school students will be developed by the PI that
focuses on kilonova and transients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
support the 24/7 operation of the for the operation of the LCO's world-wide
network of telescopes for the next three years. During this period, the LCO
network upon receiving an alert of transient emission from Ligo/Virgo of the
detection of Gravitational Waves, IceCube of a neutrino event, will
detect/discover electromagnetic radiation from its optical counterpart and
refine the position given by the alert, and immediately notify the astronomical
community. This will allow the LCO network and other telescope facilities to
monitor the electromagnetic radiation early in the outburst to fully
characterize and model the its source and understand the conditions giving rise
to it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Project advances the goals of the NSF Windows
on the Universe Big Idea&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.