* 1911545
* GP-EXTRA: MARLANI. MARine and LANguage Interdisciplinary approach to enhancing number, diversity, and professional development of undergraduate students in Earth Sciences
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Jane Alexander, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 491,395.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the proposed project is to conduct a
three-way transformative program that uses oceanography and Spanish language
education, international and national teaching experiences, and co-mentoring
tools to enhance number, diversity, and professional development of
undergraduate minorities in Earth Sciences. The study of the ocean provides
inspiration to train, energize, and challenge the next generation of Earth
scientists in a connected global world. At the core of our MARLANI project is
the&lt;br/&gt;combination of 2-week courses at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, 3-week courses at Spanish Institute of Oceanography, and the
creation of two institutes for mentoring and career planning run by
undergraduate minority students themselves, to mentor undergraduates from a two-
year undergraduate college over a two-year period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;The City University of New York, College of Staten Island, will
undertake a marine science and language interdisciplinary approach to enhance
the number, diversity, and professional development of undergraduate students in
Earth Sciences. The project will implement a transformative program that will
include classes and research at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in Woods
Hole MA, a study-abroad at Spanish Institute of Oceanography in Malaga Spain,
and an intense peer-to-peer mentoring program in geosciences for Hispanic and
non-Hispanic undergraduates. The project will test the hypothesis that the
benefits of an educational experience that offers the opportunity for Hispanic
undergraduates to visit and learn at top oceanographic research institutions in
both the US and Europe, will increase retention and improve career prospects.
This three-year program aims at: (1) attracting Hispanic students from two-year
undergraduate science programs into the four-year undergraduate B.S. in Earth
and Environmental Science; (2) developing a mid-term framework, the MentorPad,
that retains them and spread their interest in the Earth and ocean sciences; and
(3) creating a long-term platform, the CareerPad, that facilitates these
students' professional development and transition into graduate programs in
Earth and ocean science or the job market. We will document their experiences
through questionnaires, personal diaries, and interviews to shed light on their
academic experiences, compare the educational pathway of participants with those
of students who did not participate, and follow up with alumni over the long-
term through the CareerPad. By quantifying the association between participation
in this project and attraction of minorities into geosciences (attraction
metrics), retention of participants and mentored students in these programs
(retention metrics), and the acceptance of participant and mentored students
into graduate programs (transition metrics), the project has the potential to
become a model to achieve greater diversity in the geosciences in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.