* 1911826
* Developmental Consequences of Sexual Conflict on Female Behavior, Cognition and the Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Molly Cummings, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 724,880.00

Social interactions during early life can have large impacts on the development
of behavioral patterns, cognitive abilities and the brain. Research in humans
has found correlations between early experiences and cognitive-behavioral
traits. This project will test these relationships using manipulative
experiments with swordtail fish. Previous research in fish has determined that a
particular kind of stressful social interaction known as sexual conflict (where
males and females disagree over mating rates) can lead to an increase in female
brain size. Meanwhile, other research has suggested that having to navigate
different kinds of social interactions (also known as social complexity) may
result in enhanced cognitive capabilities. The research will test these two
competing hypotheses by controlling social conditions during rearing in a fish
system that exhibits social complexity and sexual conflict. There are three
different types of swordtail males, which represent different levels of sexual
conflict towards females (high, low or intermediate sexual conflict). By raising
female swordtails in social environments that vary in the type of males present,
researchers can quantify how sexual conflict and social complexity shape adult
behaviors (including anxiety, aggression and sociability), cognition (learning
abilities), and determine which brain regions grow or diminish in response to
different social experiences. This research will have broader impacts that
affect both local and national students through the investigator's efforts to
incorporate her research into local high school outreach program and the
Freshman Research Initiative course at the University of Texas, and through
student-initiated national media products (YouTube) on this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sexual conflict, the mismatch in optimal mating
rates between the sexes, is ubiquitous across animals. While the morphological
consequences of this struggle are well-studied, less is known about the
behavioral and cognitive consequences of sexual conflict. In this study, the
investigator will experimentally examine the developmental effects of sexual
conflict in the swordtail fish (Xiphophorus nigrensis), which has three
alternative male phenotypes that represent different levels of sexual conflict
towards females: courting males (low conflict), coercive males (high conflict),
and males who both court and coerce (mixed conflict). Female swordtails will be
raised from birth to early adulthood in one of five social environments that
vary in levels of both sexual conflict and social complexity. At adulthood,
females will partake in a broad range of assays to determine how social
experiences shape behavioral and cognitive traits. These assays evaluate
anxiety, sociability and exploratory tendencies as well as associative learning,
cognitive flexibility and social cognition capabilities. Female brains will be
examined to determine how social environment influences the development of
distinct brain regions and receptor distribution of candidate social pathways
including isotocin and synaptic plasticity markers. The results of this
experiment will identify how the social environment influences the development
of behavioral tendencies, as well as directly test competing hypotheses for
enhanced cognition and brain development (sexual conflict versus social
complexity). It will also identify which brain regions (focusing on the social
decision-making network) undergo differential development in response to
specific social interactions associated with conflict and
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.