* 1911111
* Modeling turbulent galaxy formation
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Andrey Kravtsov, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 07/31/2023
* USD 414,455.00

Cosmic gas flows accompanying galaxy formation have high velocities, span
enormous scales, and are highly turbulent, but the effects of turbulence on
galaxy formation and associated processes are still largely unexplored. This
project is a systematic exploration of turbulence and its effects on the
observable properties of galaxies using self-consistent and realistic high-
resolution cosmological simulations. It will address several fundamental issues
in the interpretation of observations of galaxies across cosmic time. The Adler
Planetarium will use high-fidelity, scientifically-accurate visualizations of
the planned simulations suitable for full-dome projectors. These visualizations
will be available to other planetaria, and for online streaming and viewing with
the increasingly widespread virtual reality headsets, which can provide a new
and effective way to reach broad segments of society, including students and
educators, showing the results of cutting-edge research in an engaging and
easily accessible form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is enabled by a recent
implementation of subgrid turbulence by this team, and will (1) investigate
whether slip sheet instabilities develop in cold gas accretion flows, and the
effect of turbulence on key properties; (2) explore gravitational instability
and stellar feedback in driving turbulence; (3) quantify how turbulence affects
the density structure of gas, pressure support, star formation, and mixing
processes; and (4) explore models of the initial mass function (IMF) of stars.
The methods use a model of efficient and multi-faceted feedback, including
feedback due to cosmic rays, formation of molecular hydrogen, chemical
enrichment and evolution, and radiative transfer of ionizing and far-ultra-
violet radiation. The study explores key issues, including the processes
controlling gas supply to galaxies, the environmental dependence of star and
star cluster formation efficiency, and the IMF in galaxies of different stellar
masses, metallicities, morphologies, and star formation
histories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.