* 1911683
* Multi-Muscle Magnetic Resonance Elastography (MM-MRE): a new technique to measure non-invasively individual force of forearm muscles during fine motor tasks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Fabrizio Sergi, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Redundancy, defined here as having the use of multiple muscles to perform a
particular task, is found everywhere in the neuromuscular system. Redundancy
enables humans to perform skilled tasks, respond to environmental changes, and
adapt to structural damage. The analysis of solutions to muscle redundancy,
e.g., how the many muscles in the forearm (below the elbow) can co-ordinate to
perform a task like rotating the wrist, could shed light on fundamental
processes of motor control and provide unique insight of mechanisms of
neuromotor impairment. For example, solutions to neuromuscular redundancy are
expressed differently in individuals affected by the "upper motor neuron
syndrome," prevalent in 40% of stroke survivors, or approximately two million
United States citizens. In this population, function of the hand and wrist is
most commonly affected. Unfortunately, there are no current methods capable of
measuring and analyzing how the central nervous system manages and exploits
redundancy at the individual muscle level for fine motor tasks involving
coordinated function of muscles of the hand and wrist. To address this need,
this project will develop a new technique that will enable new investigations to
study muscle redundancy for fine motor tasks. The technique combines an advanced
imaging method, which can measure muscle mechanics, with an instrumented handle,
which can measure wrist angle and torque during isometric wrist contractions. By
combining these measurements, the investigators will be able, for the first
time, to noninvasively measure force in a complete set of muscles of the
forearm. Once validated, the technique will be used to assess neuromotor
impairment in stroke individuals during tasks involving active motor function,
but that can be executed by subjects with a variety of impairment levels. The
technique developed is an important step towards a quantitative understanding of
basic principles of neuromuscular control and has important applications in
assessing neuromotor impairment and recovery. The project will also provide
training to graduate and undergraduate students in problems that require a
combination of fundamental and technological knowledge/skills, contributing to
the development of a multidisciplinary workforce ready to tackle the future
challenges of biomedical engineering research in both academia and industry. The
planned outreach activities are targeted to engage a diverse community of K-12
students in topics at the intersection between biomechanics, imaging, and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing multi-muscle
magnetic resonance elastography (MM-MRE) that will enable new investigations to
study solutions to muscle redundancy for fine motor tasks. MM-MRE combines
advanced magnetic resonance elastography imaging methods, which allow 2 mm
spatial resolution and volume acquisition time below 10 s for the entire
forearm, with the MRE-bot, a newly developed MRI compatible instrumented handle
to measure wrist angle and torque during isometric wrist contractions. By
combining measurements of muscle mechanics obtained via MRE with joint position
and torque measurements obtained via the MRE-bot in a subject-specific
musculoskeletal modeling framework, investigators will be able to non-invasively
measure in vivo force in a complete set of muscles of the forearm. The Research
Plan is organized under three objectives: The FIRST Objective is to develop and
validate MM-MRE, which will involve implementing a rapid data acquisition and
analyses scheme to extract the wave speed involving individual forearm muscles
during isometric contractions and validating wave speed measurements and
calculation of muscle force from individual muscles. The outcome will be a
methodology for estimating force in multiple forearm muscles simultaneously,
with sufficient temporal and spatial resolution for evaluating their individual
contractile behavior non-invasively and in vivo. The SECOND Objective is to use
MM-MRE to test models of muscle coordination in isometric tasks of the
hand/wrist. Studies, conducted with healthy individuals, are designed to
determine the cost function whose minimization would lead to the "optimal"
muscle coordination pattern for muscle coordination during the isometric tasks.
MM-MRE measurements uniquely enable testing of the validity of currently
established cost functions, global force level (GFL) and global activation level
(GAL), under different task accuracy requirements, as task accuracy requirements
have an effect on how individuals co-activate their muscles to stabilize
interaction in presence of neuromuscular error. The THIRD Objective is to
establish if MM-MRE can detect abnormal muscle coactivation of forearm muscles
in neuromotor impairment and thus be used as an assessment tool to identify
neuromotor impairment in tasks involving hand and wrist muscles in a pilot
cohort of individuals with chronic stroke. The analysis will be based on
comparisons between the paretic and non-paretic arm and will be aimed at
validating the developed technique as being sensitive enough to detect expected
changes in neuromotor behavior in a clinical population. In summary, the
technique developed represents a novel approach and significant advancement for
skeletal muscle MRE that will enable an innovative measurement scheme for the
study of neuromuscular control and for characterizing pathologic muscle tissue
properties during active motor function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.