* 1911532
* OPUS:  MCS - Developing a mechanistic understanding of decomposition of organic matter in frozen soil
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Susan Natali, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 170,926.00

During the winter season, soil microbes can remain active, even in frozen soils.
It has been shown that soil microbes can continue to live and function over the
winter. The activities of these microbes can be important for ecosystem carbon
and nutrient cycling. But, it is not known exactly what microbes are doing in
frozen soils over the winter. This project will advance understanding of winter
processes by developing a model to understand microbial activity in frozen
tundra soils. This project will also provide a mid-career scientist with an
opportunity to gain new research capabilities in ecosystem modeling. The project
builds on a rich history of field studies of carbon cycling in the Arctic. The
project will have substantial educational impact, through integration with an
undergraduate research program, thereby strengthening the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the mechanisms that
drive seasonal patterns of soil respiration. The central goal is to understand
the response of winter respiration to changes in temperature and vegetation. The
project will support development of a robust mechanistic model that incorporates
cold season processes. The key is to link carbon and nutrient cycling in plants,
soils, and microbes. The model will be based on an existing resource acquisition
and allocation model. The new work will add new connections between substrate
availability and freeze-thaw dynamics. The model will be developed for tundra
ecosystems. But the results will be relevant to any seasonally-frozen ecosystem.
This project will deepen understanding of ecosystem processes that may be
seasonally disconnected but have strong plant-microbial linkages. This project
will address fundamental questions in ecosystem ecology about resource
acquisition, allocation, and nutrient cycling during the
winter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.