* 1911805
* Exploring the Role of Racial Socialization and Media in Black Youth's Sociopolitical Development
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Nkemka Anyiwo, Anyiwo, Nkemka
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2021
* USD 138,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic (SBE)
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Developmental Sciences Program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Howard Stevenson at the University
of Pennsylvania and the mentorship of Drs. Riana Anderson and Matthew Diemer at
the University of Michigan, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the role of culturally-relevant parental
practices and media in promoting Black youth's awareness of and actions to
combat racial inequality. Limited psychological research has investigated the
factors that shape Black youth's sociopolitical development (SPD), the process
of developing an awareness of and engaging in action to address the systems that
contribute to inequality. It is likely that the messages that Black parents send
to Black youth about race (e.g., racial socialization) inform Black youth's
sociopolitical actions regarding issues of race. Racial justice movements have
used media to drive mainstream discourse about the pervasiveness of racism in
society. Thus, youth may draw directly on sociopolitical content in media to
inform their SPD. Furthermore, youth and parents alike may use sociopolitical
media content to inform the conversations that they have about race (e.g.,
racial socialization). Across three studies, this project seeks to elucidate the
role of racial socialization and media in Black youth?s
SPD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on a nascent sociocultural theory of SPD, this
project employs quantitative and qualitative methods. Study one uses qualitative
inquiry to examine how Black youth describe their race-related sociopolitical
beliefs and behaviors and what factors they identify as being influential in
their SPD. Study two uses quantitative inquiry to test hypothesized pathways
between parental racial socialization and indicators of Black youth's race-
related SPD. Study three uses qualitative inquiry to examine the extent which
Black parents and children draw upon media content to inform their dialogue
about racial issues and whether parents watch media content with their children
with the intention of racial socialization. Collectively, these studies
integrate theories on SPD and racial socialization to elucidate the factors that
shape how Black youth understand and respond to sociopolitical forces that have
negative implications for their development. The findings of this work will
inform the development and enhancement of family and community-based racial
socialization and SPD interventions for Black youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.