* 1911558
* GEOPATHS-IMPACT: Growing Geoscience Enrolment Through Academic Partnership with NC Community Colleges (GGETAP with NCCC)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Gordana Vlahovic, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 316,944.00

Part 1: Funding from GEOPATHS-IMPACT award will help North Carolina Central
University (NCCU), the oldest publicly funded Historically Black
College/University (HBCU) located in Durham, North Carolina create sustainable
and lasting partnerships with two North Carolina community colleges, Carteret
Community College (CCC) and Alamance Community College (ACC). Both institutions
were selected because of their proximity, the population they serve (rural
students in case of CCC and urban, minority students in case of ACC), and most
importantly the interest in developing the associate geoscience program at CCC
and increasing geoscience related course offerings at ACC. The project will
address dual challenges that are being confronted by all STEM disciplines
including geosciences that are the least diverse of all STEM careers: pending
workforce shortage due to increasing demand, low enrollments and planned record
retirement of the "baby boomer" generation, and workforce demographics that look
nothing like the US general population. HBCUs make up less than 5% of the US
higher education institutions yet award 37% of all B.S. degrees in physical
sciences earned by African American students. As NCCU is a top producer of
minority geosciences graduates, strengthening the quality of geoscience
education at North Carolina Central University and creating long lasting
partnership with community colleges will have a significant impact on the future
of the geosciences workforce in North Carolina and the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: NCCU will lead a collaborative effort
involving two local community colleges by: 1) Creating an online version of the
existing 4-year Geoscience Concentration for B.S. in the Environmental and
Geographic Sciences degree, thus allowing transfer students from partner
community colleges flexibility of completing a 4-year degree without leaving
their communities; 2) Providing online transfer students "critical positive
experiences" that research has identified as creating a sense of belonging to
the geoscience profession and influencing career choices; 3) Ensuring
sustainability of the program by formalizing partnerships by negotiating
memorandums of understanding with ACC and CCC and by reaching out to other
potential community college partners. The state of North Carolina has one of the
most developed community college systems in the nation consisting of 58
community colleges, and this network will be used to spread geospatial programs
across the state. NCCU is uniquely positioned to lead this work as it one of a
few HBCUs that has both undergraduate and graduate degrees in geosciences and
has a long history of graduating African American students in STEM fields. This
project will address critical needs for each partner institution while
increasing recruitment and retention of students traditionally underrepresented
in geosciences by providing seamless pathways from associate degrees to a 4-year
B.S. in Geosciences and Master?s degrees in Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.