* 1911972
* EAGER: Directionally Aligned Macroporous Ceramics with In-Situ Synthesized Functional Polymer Microgels as a Platform for Next Generation Membrane Chromatography
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Katherine Faber, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 05/31/2021
* USD 194,612.00

A monoclonal antibody is a protein capable of specifically binding a targeted
molecule or receptor. Through this specific binding, antibodies become highly
active drugs with reduced side effects. The market for biopharmaceuticals, such
as monoclonal antibodies, is growing rapidly, with worldwide sales expected to
reach $125 billion by 2020. The growing demand for antibodies and related
biologics has driven up the cost of treatment using these products. As a result,
the biopharmaceutical industry is increasingly under pressure from regulators,
healthcare providers, and consumers to decrease production and treatment costs.
Purification of monoclonal antibodies during bioprocessing is both slow and
costly, representing more than 80% of the manufacturing expense. Membrane
adsorbers are emerging as more efficient separation systems compared to
conventional resin column beds in downstream biopharmaceutical manufacturing.
Membrane adsorbers can be operated with much higher flow rates and throughput
and, thus, are ideally suited for reducing processing times and production
costs. The overarching goal of the EAGER project is to build the foundation for
a new generation of macroporous membrane materials and modules that overcome the
capacity, selectivity, and throughput limitations of existing commercial
membrane adsorbers. To achieve this goal, functional polymers with high protein
binding capacity and selectivity will be coupled with high surface area
macroporous ceramic scaffolds, which can be configured into scalable modules for
continuous bioprocessing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the biopharmaceutical
manufacturing community, the desired transition to precisely targeted
therapeutics based on monoclonal antibodies (mAb) depends on dramatically
increasing manufacturing speed and reducing production costs. Although membrane
chromatography has demonstrated advantages over standard column chromatography,
including higher throughput and lower cost, it is limited by low protein binding
capacity and selectivity of commercial membrane adsorbers as well as complex
module configurations and fabrication. Consequently, there is a critical need
for a new generation of membrane adsorber materials that can be readily
configured into scalable modules with high binding capacity and selectivity.
This project seeks to build a foundation for the next generation of scalable
membrane adsorber materials and modules for downstream biopharmaceutical
manufacturing that overcome the limitations of existing commercial membranes.
This EAGER project will focus on achieving two specific objectives: the design,
preparation, and characterization of 1) salt-tolerant membrane adsorbers with
high protein binding capacity for mAb purification; and 2) membrane adsorbers
for selective mAb capture and recovery from bioreactor harvests. The strategy to
establish the foundation for these membrane adsorbers relies upon the design of
a family of macroporous ceramics with tunable pore size, structure, and
morphology using directional solution freeze casting. Building upon the porous
scaffolds, a two-pronged approach will be undertaken. Firstly, in-situ
polymerization and phase-separation micromolding will be employed to prepare
functional polymer microgels inside macroporous ceramic scaffolds that contain
high concentrations of ligands with large protein binding capacity and
selectivity. Secondly, conformal microgel coatings of highly tortuous dendritic
pores will be prepared to provide hydrodynamic trapping and adsorption sites
inside macroporous scaffolds. Fundamental understanding of the material
preparation and functionalization process and protein binding capacity and
selectivity will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.