* 1911940
* The four dimensions of nucleosome chain folding
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sergei Grigoryev, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,132,229.00

DNA in eukaryotic cells is repeatedly coiled around histone proteins forming
'beads-on-a-string' chains of nucleosomes that are further folded into higher-
order chromatin structures. Changes in the nucleosome chain packing density and
DNA accessibility govern gene expression and repression during cell
differentiation and tissue development. This project will investigate the
3-dimensional structures of nucleosome chains in the cell nucleus and their
transitions over time in the course of tissue development and maturation,
referred to as the 4th dimension. The outcomes of this research will provide
crucial information for designing genetic and pharmacological tools capable of
altering nucleosome chain folding and thus modulating epigenetic changes and
developmental plasticity in differentiated cells and tissues. This project will
be deeply integrated with graduate education and provide new research
opportunities for undergraduate students, inspiring and training them for
careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
reveal nucleosome chain folding motifs that characterize certain epigenetic
states and are associated with locking down the underlying genes in mature cells
and inhibiting tissue regeneration. The first research aim is to resolve the
nanoscale chromatin structure of epigenetically distinct chromatin states in a
reference human cell line. The second aim is to determine nucleosome chain
transitions underlying chromatin condensation during mouse retina development. A
unique technique, EMANIC (electron microscopy-assisted nucleosome interaction
capture) will be applied to resolve nucleosome folding motifs. This technique
will be used in conjunction with biochemical assays to link the nucleosome chain
folding with specific epigenetic states and chromatin rearrangements. By
integrating crucial structural information: nucleosome repeat length,
internucleosomal interactions, and nucleosome chain flexibility with
computational modeling, this project will provide new structural cues for
engineering chromatin epigenetic states and modifying chromatin functions
related to tissue developmental and regenerative
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.