* 1911061
* From Radio to Gamma-Rays: Interpreting the Multiwavelength Emission from Young Supernovae as a Probe of their Evolution, Progenitors, and Cosmic-Ray Acceleration
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Vikram Dwarkadas, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2024
* USD 560,929.00

When a massive star explodes as a supernova (SN), the shock wave from the
explosion interacts with the material around the star, which has been ejected by
the wind from the star during its lifetime. The rapidly moving shock wave heats
this medium to high temperatures, and accelerates subatomic particles to high
energies, thus producing radiation at all energies from low-energy radio waves
to very high-energy gamma rays. A research group at the University of Chicago
will study these interactions through computer simulations. They will interpret
the signatures of the emitted radiation to infer the nature of the ambient
medium with which the shocks interact, which can be related to the type of star
that exploded. This will allow the investigators to relate the wide diversity of
types of SNe to their different progenitor stars, helping to solve a very
important problem in SNe and stellar astronomy. The researchers will also study
the gamma rays emitted from young SNe. The project will provide research
opportunities for undergraduate students, and one high school student each
summer will be selected to work at the University of Chicago on supernova
research. The lead scientists will also work with local school teachers to
improve science education and give astronomy lectures to non-scientific
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using sophisticated emission routines, including
non-equilibrium ionization X-ray calculations, a radio synchrotron emission
code, optical light curve fitting using the computer programs MESA and STELLA,
and other available routines, the team will compute the X-ray, radio and optical
emission arising from the interaction of the SN shock with the ambient medium.
The programs will be used to fine-tune the models of the circumstellar medium
structure, which in turn can be used to estimate the mass-loss properties of the
progenitor, constrain ejecta parameters, and determine explosion parameters.
Coupling to descriptions of mass-loss mechanisms will allow the investigators to
probe the properties of the progenitor star. The detailed kinematic information
from their models will be used to understand the acceleration of particles to
relativistic energies in SN shocks, and predict the gamma-ray emission, which
can be directly compared with data from ground and space-based telescopes. This
project advances the goals of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.