* 1911273
* Cellulose Nanomaterials Enabled Manufacturing of Multi-Scale Porous Structured Ceramics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Johan Foster, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2023
* USD 494,004.00

This grant establishes the scientific and engineering foundation for a new
manufacturing platform for multi-scale nanostructured porous ceramics using
cellulose nanomaterials. These ceramics are used in next generation components
for a wide range of applications, including, electronic devices, bioimplants,
catalysts, aerospace and energy harvesting, which greatly impacts U.S. economy
and prosperity. Cellulose nanomaterials are fibers much smaller than human hair
and are available from trees and cotton as a clean material source. Currently,
the fabrication of multi-scale nanostructured porous ceramics entails many
steps, often not compatible with large-scale manufacturing, using chemicals that
are only valid for certain compositions. This research creates new
multidisciplinary knowledge in the areas of materials science, surface chemistry
and materials processing to manufacture porous structured ceramics in a more
simple, efficient and cost-effective manner by reducing processing steps and
additives. The versatility of this approach makes this a manufacturing platform
capable of generating a range of advanced materials using natural resources and
plant waste, such as, grain husks. This opens possibilities for access to higher
education in materials and manufacturing and training of the next generation of
more diverse and inclusive scientists ready for the work force. The simplicity
of the approach can potentially lower manufacturing cost for these types of
materials, resulting in cheaper and better computers, solar panels and bone
implants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellulose nanomaterial morphology and surface
chemistry makes it an excellent candidate to be used for the synthesis,
processing and shaping of a wide range of ceramic materials and structures. This
project explores the self-assembly, kinetics and structural formation mechanisms
through which cellulose nanomaterials can enable simplified processing and
production of multi-scale meso-structured porous ceramics. The project explores
the potential use of cellulose nanomaterials as surface and templating agents
and as a shaping aid in ceramic processing. The research focuses on developing
an understanding of the interaction between ceramics and cellulose
nanoparticles, specifically, the chemical and structural control of these
mixtures, and using this understanding to process the porous ceramics. The
experiments are driven by computational imaging as well as models that correlate
microstructure with the self- assembly of cellulose nanomaterials with ceramic
particles into different structures by chemical and physical mechanisms. The key
feature of this approach relies on the ease of processing (chemistry
compatibility, ease of mixture, simple templating) provided by this platform
versus the current state-of-the-art to create mesostructured materials. The
potential application of this research is to make significant impacts in
facile/simplified processes and approaches to design mesostructured ceramics at
the 'bulk' level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.