* 1911327
* OPUS: MCS: The emergence of large-scale patterns of biodiversity from interactions between people, their yards, and urban wildlife
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Emily Minor, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 141,385.00

Residential yards and gardens provide many physical and mental benefits to urban
residents. They may also be particularly important spaces for urban wildlife.
Collectively, they can contain most of the vegetation in North American cities.
Urban gardens serve as vital habitat for birds, bees, and other animals. Some
yards are dominated by turf grass while others are more lush and diverse, with
layers of vegetation, flowering plants, and features intended to attract
wildlife. The choices that people make in their yards can vary widely, but it is
known that people?s choices are influenced by their neighbors as well as by the
wildlife they see in their neighborhoods. This research will use a modeling
approach to examine the choices that people make in their yards. It will study
the consequences of these choices for wildlife habitat, including the
biodiversity of birds and bees. A model will be developed to investigate future
changes in residential yards and gardens. The project will make recommendations
about how yards can provide the most benefit for birds and bees. The model will
also be used to educate school children, college students, and the public about
the importance of their yards and gardens for biodiversity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, humans, their yards, and urban wildlife form a
complex, coupled human and natural system. Such systems are often nonlinear,
contain feedbacks and thresholds, and shift from one state to another over time
and across space. The ecological impacts of these dynamics may not be
immediately observable or predictable because of time lags. This research will
use empirical data gathered over the last ten years in the metro area of
Chicago, Illinois to parameterize an agent-based model. The model will examine
the spatio-temporal dynamics of an urban residential ecosystem under the
influence of residents? landscaping choices. In particular, the model will
examine feedbacks between people, their yards, and urban wildlife. It will test
the idea that those feedbacks might switch from positive to negative depending
on the abundance of wildlife in a neighborhood. The model will be used to
explore patterns at larger spatial and temporal scales than can be examined
empirically. It will examine the impacts of various scenarios that might affect
bird and bee communities across the landscape. Thus, the model will identify
emergent phenomena in urban biodiversity that result from local-scale
interactions between individual agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.