* 1911999
* US Government Support for IAI Core Budget 2018-2023
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2024
* Marcella Ohira, Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2024
* USD 6,521,786.00

The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) is an
international treaty organization, of which the US is a partner. It was created
to coordinate and promote scientific research related to global change in the
Americas and to build scientific capacity in the region in addition to fostering
collaboration and coordination of science on global change across national
boundaries. The IAI supports extensive long-term collaborative research networks
that increase use of inter- and transdisciplinary research on global change as
it impacts the Americas. The Institute also develops training materials for
constituents to foster the integration of research across disciplinary and
international boundaries. As part of its office functions, the IAI helps support
scientist/community/policy maker interactions and the co-design and development
of interdisciplinary scientific research projects to help better understand
complex problems plaguing nations in the Americas that involve physico-chemical-
human-ecosystem related challenges resulting from global change, the solutions
of which involve addressing the needs of diverse stakeholders such that the
results can be used in the development of effective science-based policies that
serve local communities and/or national and regional and/or cross-border
interests. In this regard and in response to its governing body of nations from
across the Americans that define IAI's agenda for each funding period, the
Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research will continue to support its
collaborative research network programs and will also analyze and make public
best practices for establishing inter- and transdisciplinary, intersectional
teams that can tackle problem-focused research. Broader impacts of the work
include the fostering of international collaboration between and among
scientists, research groups, and countries across the Americas; creating
educational and training materials for effective creation of transdisciplinary
scientific research projects that address pressing issues related to global
change; encouraging the adoption of open data and data sharing practices; and
enabling the production of scientific research results useful to local
communities as well as policy- and decision-makers. Other impacts include an
aggressive educational program for students and others that includes workshops
on science diplomacy and the science-to-policy process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research is
an office that has an evolving science agenda that is determined, on a regular
basis, by its governing body, which is comprised of 19 countries across the
Americas. Its science agenda is complementary to the research priorities of the
US Global Change Research Program. The award covers IAI Directorate staff
salaries and travel costs for administering the office and for interacting with
partner states and its research coordination networks. It also covers consultant
services; computing, web, and internet services; communications; and part of the
IAI publication budget. IAI activities are also supported by membership fees
from each of the countries making up its governing board. The main goals of the
organization are to: (1) promote regional cooperation for interdisciplinary
research on aspects of global change affecting the Americas; (2) enable regional
scale research which cannot be pursued by any individual country or institution;
(3) build science capacity and improve the scientific and technical capabilities
and research infrastructure of the States in the region; and (4) foster
standardization, collection, analysis, and exchange of scientific data between
research groups and countries. Over the next five years, IAI will also work to
build partnerships with other global change organizations with interests in
global change science and policy. As part of its mission, between 2014 and 2018,
IAI helped coordinate 17 multi-country inter- and transdisciplinary global
change research collaborations involving over 100 investigators in 90
institutions in 15 partner countries. Its mission is to assist the scientific
community in the region to developing a collaborative way of providing solid
scientific understandings of global change issues in support of sustainable
development in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.