* 1911485
* OPUS:  CRS:  Integrating organismal biology into the geographic mosaic of coevolution
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Edmund Brodie, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2022
* USD 362,844.00

This project studies a predator-prey arms race between toxic newts and the
garter snakes that eat them. The coevolutionary dynamics that push arms races
such as this one onward are determined by many factors. The coevolutionary
dynamics may involve the geographic distributions of the species, the
physiological effects of toxins, or the structure of proteins that are used in
attack or defense. Synthesizing how these different levels of biological
organization interact and dictate arms races will help us better predict
outcomes of coevolutionary battles. Understanding what drives one enemy to
outpace the other, or eventually win the race, can inform strategies for
managing interactions between humans and disease, hosts and parasites, and
plants and their herbivore pests. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This synthesis of
several integrative studies will explore the connections between landscape
ecology, microevolution processes, and underlying genetic and protein variation.
Previous work on these newts and snakes has amassed thousands of physical
specimens with associated phenotypic, genetic, and spatial data spread across
multiple labs and collections. The proposed synthesis activities will aggregate
these resources into a single relational database. These data will be used in
spatially explicit analyses to test predictions about the historical,
ecological, and environmental factors that structure geographic mosaics of
coevolution. The intersection of organismal mechanisms and evolutionary process
will be explored in a single-authored popular science book that follows the
pathways to discoveries within the newt-snake system. The book will focus on how
natural history observations led to hypotheses, and how tests of those ideas in
turn generated new questions to pursue. Additional products include the publicly
accessible database, three new papers from spatially explicit analyses, and a
series of educational video trailers that introduce evolutionary concepts to
high school audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.