* 1911441
* The Human Neurocircuitry of Occasion Setting in Pavlovian Fear Conditioning
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Tomislav Zbozinek, Zbozinek                Tomislav       D
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Cognitive Neuroscience program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dean Mobbs, PhD at California
Institute of Technology, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating the effects of anxiety on learning about
ambiguous relationships between objects/situations, as well as the underlying
neurocircuitry. Much of what people need to learn about in everyday life
contains at least some degree of ambiguity. For example, meeting someone new is
an ambiguous situation since it is unknown to what degree positive outcomes
(e.g., enjoying the conversation, making a new friend or romantic partner) or
negative outcomes (e.g., boredom, rejection) will occur. Ambiguity can
potentially negatively affect people's learning and decision making in multiple
situations, including financial, social, professional, or medical decision
making. However, researchers know far less about how people learn to reduce
ambiguity than how they learn about consistent relationships. Clinically, highly
anxious individuals tend to have difficulty disambiguating whether
objects/situations are dangerous or safe based on context, but it is less clear
how anxiety affects our ability to learn how one discrete stimulus disambiguates
the meaning of another discrete stimulus. For example, a person may feel anxious
that giving a speech may lead to rejection only some of the time, such as when
they give their speech after a particularly eloquent and engaging speaker. By
understanding how people learn about ambiguity, the results of this project may
ultimately contribute to research aiming to improve people's quality of life and
the treatment of anxiety disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pavlovian occasion
setting is a learning phenomenon in which specific stimuli (i.e., occasion
setters) help resolve ambiguity. Occasion setting occurs when a stimulus (X)
modulates the relationship between two other stimuli: usually a conditional
stimulus (CS) and a biologically relevant stimulus (i.e., unconditional
stimulus; US). For example, positive occasion setting occurs when the CS
predicts the US only if the occasion setter, X, is presented. Occasion setters
can be contextual cues (e.g., time, place) or discrete cues (e.g., tone, light).
For example, whether giving public speeches leads to rejection from the audience
may be ambiguous/uncertain. For a person who is sometimes afraid of this
happening, giving a speech after a particularly eloquent speaker (discrete cue
occasion setter) or in a particular location where the audience is known to be
critical (contextual occasion setter) may disambiguate the situation, leading to
increased fear of rejection. In this research proposal, the goal is to better
understand occasion setting, its neural mechanism, and its relation to anxiety.
This project consists of two Pavlovian fear conditioning studies: the first
study will assess the effects of anxiety on disambiguating safety/danger with
discrete stimulus occasion setting, and the second will be conducted using fMRI
to investigate the neural mechanisms of discrete stimulus occasion setting. The
researchers will also measure self-report and physiological responses of fear in
both studies. By understanding occasion setting, this project may be able to
contribute to research aimed at improving people's quality of life and improve
the treatment of anxiety disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.