* 1911518
* Collaborative Research: Electrospray Deposition of 'Melting Gels' for Multifunctional Coatings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Singer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 318,045.00

Silica glass has been valued more than 2000 years for its optical properties and
chemical and thermal stability, making it a natural candidate for surface
coatings. Current methods, such as chemical vapor deposition or conventional
sol-gel processing, often require energy-costly high vacuum or high temperature
methods. This collaborative project seeks to couple innovations in a new class
of sol gel materials, 'melting gels', with electrospray deposition to create
materials-efficient, durable hybrid glass coatings. Melting gels transform into
these hybrid glasses at low temperatures enabling the use of substrates that
would not normally be considered, such as polymer webs that are key for
continuous manufacturing. The combination with electrospray, a type of
industrially-accepted electrostatic manufacturing technology, enables thin
(microscale) coatings on complex three-dimensional surfaces with facile
incorporation of additives in ambient processing conditions. This award
contributes fundamental understanding of the key process settings and the
resulting coating properties (e.g. mechanical, electrical, chemical, and/or
biological) that are desirable for a wide variety of coating applications.
Results from this research benefits industrial applications in aerospace,
nautical, automotive, and medical implant sectors, which would benefit U.S.
economy. This project provides opportunities for students from a smaller
Hispanic-serving institution and a major research institution to collaborate and
engage in multidisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Melting gels are
oligomeric silsesquioxane materials made by a sol-gel process that possess
consolidation temperatures in the range of 120 to 170 degree C, where the
melting gels decompose and crosslink into an irreversible hybrid organically-
modified silica network. Melting gels and their hybrid glass partners are
synthesized using a soft-chemistry approach that allows for direct covalent
bonding of organic moieties to the inorganic network. Electrospray deposition, a
means of delivering uniform charged microdroplets in a high electric field,
provides the necessary dynamic control of the micro- to nano-scale structure of
melting gels to achieve superior coating properties. However, the effects of the
charge injection and polarity of the spray on the sol-gel are currently unknown.
This research varies these parameters along with the melting gel consolidation
temperature and intrinsic charge to identify changes in the consolidation
mechanism through primarily mechanical and spectroscopic analysis. These effects
are then be connected to the final performance of the coatings. The team for
this grant consists of two partners, combining sol-gel chemistry and
electrospray deposition expertise to create a holistic approach for synthesis,
processing, and property characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.