* 1911527
* GP-IMPACT: GEODES - GEOsciences Diversity, Excellence, and Support Program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 02/29/2024
* USD 697,978.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;GEOsciences Diversity, Excellence, and Support (GEODES) is a
program designed to increase retention and success of under-represented students
in the Earth and Planetary Science Department at UCSC, an ongoing challenge for
the Earth sciences in the USA. The program provides sustained mentoring,
networking, reliable and current information about career paths and
opportunities, as well as and professional development. This program will
improve retention of students entering the major, ensure a positive and
productive experience of a more diverse group of students in the EPS department
and help students make the transitions from undergraduate to graduate study and
beyond. Ultimately, this program will reduce disparities in graduation rate,
course success, and overall GPA among Earth and Planetary Science Department
under-represented undergraduates and increase the preparation and transfer of
our primarily Hispanic under-represented students to graduate school and/or the
geoscience workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2 &lt;br/&gt;GEODES goals are to
reduce disparities in UM outcomes in passing courses, overall GPA, graduate
school admission, and to improve job placement for UM and non-UM majors. To
accomplish this goal, we will focus on UM academic support and building a sense
of belonging within the Earth science community. Specifically, GEODES will focus
on three activities: (1) Create a cohort-based support program, targeted to UM
students called GEOACE, modeled on UCSC's successful Academic Excellence (ACE)
program which has significantly increased UM retention and GPA in introductory
STEM courses. Students in GEOACE will receive extra academic support (skills
workshops, EPS course-based problem-solving sessions and professional
development advising). (2) Offer a paid summer internship to UM students to
expose them to geoscience work options and develop skills and connections to
help them get jobs or aid in admission to graduate school. (3) Foster a
geoscience student community and near-peer support system via a GeoSlugs Lounge
Program. Open to all EPS undergraduate students, the Lounge will be a welcoming
space to gather, develop friendships and get tutoring and mentoring from
graduate students (guided, course-related problem solving as well as general
advice and support). GEOACE instructors and Lounge tutor/mentors will receive
pedagogy training through ACE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.