* 1911453
* Policy Innovation Labs: New Frontiers for STEM Policy Innovation?
* SBE,SMA
* 05/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Adam Wellstead, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 05/31/2022
* USD 64,687.00

Policy Innovation Labs (PIL) are dedicated teams, structures, or entities
focused on constructing public policies in an innovative, design oriented
fashion, in particular by engaging citizens and companies working within and in
collaboration with the public sector. Practitioners describe these efforts as
"design thinking" or evidence-based approaches, which places the end users at
the center of each stage of the policy-making process. After policy proposals
are formulated, they are tested and validated through various forms of
experimentation. In addition to co-creating and re-imagining policies and public
programs, PILs also undertake a wide range of activities such as preparing
prospective studies, organizing creativity workshops, or instilling a sense of
empowerment through training and other learning activities. Nearly all US-based
PILs are relatively new undertakings with a median age of two years. The PIL
life cycle is dynamic. Every year, a handful of labs are created while other
programs are placed into "hibernation" or cut for a number of reasons, including
budget reductions, shifts in political agendas, or changes in elected leaders.
However, little is known about how US-based PILs operate in federal, state, and
municipal governments or in civil society. There has been little critical
appraisal of this type of "design thinking" in a US context. Second, PILs may
potentially play an important role in "rethinking design" and formulating
innovative science-based policies. An overlooked feature of PILs is space for
STEM disciplines to contribute to policy design and innovations efforts. This
particularly important in emerging data science and engineering fields such as
big data, algorithmic governance, artificial intelligence, or 3-D printing. This
proposal seeks to understand the emergence of STEM-based policy innovation labs.
These labs have the potential to improve understanding at the science-policy
interface and to promote public engagement of science and evidence-based
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessing US-based PILs will draw on four
complementary methodological approaches. First, a review of existing academic
and grey literature will be undertaken. This will inform the design of a web-
based survey of US based PILs. The survey will assess the types of labs, their
focus (e.g. social issues, environment &amp; energy, local economic development,
migration, digital economy, health &amp; well-being, transportation), their
lifespan, the role of STEM tools, and their geographic location, their function
(e.g., design-led labs, open government/data labs, evidence-based labs, and
mixed labs). Third, a hyperlink network analysis, which applies social network
methods, to a vast number of hyperlinks which utilizes the links between
websites. This cost-effective methodology for studying the extent of PIL
networks, their network structures, linking patterns and dynamics. From the
online survey and network analysis, 7-9 case study PILs will be selected from
which semi-structured interviews of PIL employee and stakeholders will be
conducted in order to assess factors responsible for the rise, formation, and
functioning of PILs. Finally, case study analysis will assess if STEM-based
universities would be feasible environment for science-policy based
PILs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.