* 1911792
* Epitaxial Ceramic Nanocomposites by Design
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The capabilities of electronic devices can be
improved by incorporating new ceramic materials into the traditional
manufacturing process. Magnetic and ferroelectric materials are particularly
appealing because they enable data to be stored and manipulated, and unlike
conventional semiconductor devices, the information is preserved even without
power. This research is developing new composite oxide materials with precisely
tailored structures on the nanoscale and attractive magnetic, optical and
electronic properties that could be used in applications such as new types of
microelectronic memory or logic devices, or filtration membranes with designed
porosity. Graduate students are being trained in interdisciplinary science and
engineering fields including materials design, measurement, and modeling, which
prepares them for employment in the high-tech sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The route to enhanced functionality in
electronic and magnetic devices occurs through the use of new materials and
structures, and oxide materials in particular exhibit a wide range of highly
tunable magnetic, optical and electronic properties. In this research, oxide
nanostructures are being created by self-assembly, consisting of two different
materials with precisely engineered nanoscale geometries. The properties of the
nanocomposites differ qualitatively from those of the individual bulk materials
due to coupling of the two phases at the interfaces and can be tuned via the
composition, crystal structure, size, shape and interface geometry of the two
phases. Through appropriate materials selection and design, these nanocomposites
can display exciting properties including high conduction at interfaces,
enhanced ferroelectricity and magnetoelectric coupling that are either absent or
difficult to modulate in single-phase materials. The overall goal of the
research is to develop strategies to synthesize ceramic nanocomposites by
design, in which the morphology and 3D arrangement of the two phases can be
controlled, their properties are explored, and device applications and
manufacturing strategies (including growth methods compatible with semiconductor
fabrication) are developed. These materials may be used in applications such as
new types of microelectronic memory or logic devices, or filtration membranes
with designed porosity. The research is training students in interdisciplinary
STEM fields that span thin film processing, materials characterization, and
modeling of structure, strain and electronic properties. Within this project,
online educational materials are being developed and public outreach is being
conducted through an activity called the NanoObservatory, in which lithography
and microscopy are demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.