* 1911457
* Novel weapon evolution in mycobacterial pathogenesis, dispersal and ecological persistence
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jean-Francois GUEGAN, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,499,999.00

Understanding and controlling emerging infectious diseases before they reach
epidemic proportions is important for preventing devastating effects on human
health, for promoting animal welfare, and for improving species conservation.
Buruli ulcer disease is a chronic, debilitating infection that destroys skin,
soft tissues, and bone, and has been reported from over 30 countries worldwide.
Disease is caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans, a pathogen closely related to those
that cause tuberculosis and leprosy. It is not clear how humans get M. ulcerans
because there is uncertainty in identifying ecological reservoirs from which
people can become infected, and mechanisms that allow the pathogen to live in
and move around in the environment. This project tests how M. ulcerans has
evolved to produce a novel molecular weapon that it uses to successfully live in
environments where risk of humans contacting it is highest. This molecular
weapon is the toxin responsible for Buruli ulcer. Furthermore, because pathogens
like the one that causes Buruli ulcer constantly interact with communities of
other microbes (microbiomes), this project examines how it persists and
replicates in environmental and host microbiomes. Discovering new interactions
between disease-causing organisms, where they live, and the other microbes
living with them provides insight into the basic understanding of how diseases
emerge and spread. This interdisciplinary project will train undergraduates,
graduate students, and research professionals with focused inclusion of diverse
individuals from underrepresented groups, military veterans, and indigenous
cultures. In addition, this work will contribute publicly available data that
can be used by other researchers and public health professionals to deliver
educational tools necessary to improve broader health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will test the Novel Weapons
Hypothesis, which posits that some taxa can become dominant due to toxin
production that is then subject to selection for this role in the invader's
success. This will be achieved using a mycobacterial clade that demonstrates
diversity of genes that produce mycolactone, the toxin responsible for Buruli
ulcer. Mycolactone is hypothesized to have initially evolved to facilitate
mycobacterial colonization and persistence in complex microbial consortia of
environmental hosts and reservoirs, but also has a functional role in vertebrate
pathogenesis: an attribute that aligns with the Coincidence of Virulence
Hypothesis. This project will identify the ecological and evolutionary roles of
mycolactone in watershed ecosystems of French Guiana, a French territory
northeast of Brazil, where disease is endemic. Previous assessments of global M.
ulcerans genetic diversity reveal the Guiana Shield to be a hotspot of molecular
evolution. The research will be accomplished through expeditions to collect
aquatic communities for quantifying the diversity of mycolactone producing
mycobacteria along three watersheds. The team will conduct comparative genomic
research on environmental mycobacteria, including a co-phylogenetic analysis
involving a candidate fish host reservoir (guppies), which is now globally
distributed due to anthropogenic dispersal. Several integrated mathematical
modeling approaches will be used to synthesize project results to determine how
molecular evolution of a pathogen toxin leads to human disease through complex
ecological interactions across scales. The results will contribute insights into
the mechanisms behind establishment, persistence and spread of disease-causing
agents in naive host and environmental communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.