* 1911316
* Collaborative Research: GP-IMPACT: A Geopathway Utilizing High-Tech Geoscience Experiences for Recruitment and Retention -- A Collaboration between PBSC and FAU
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Becky Mercer, Palm Beach State College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2023
* USD 56,765.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to ameliorate the current and increasing
severe shortage of geoscientists in the U.S. workforce. The goal is to
institutionalize a transformative model to effect a long-term, sustained
increase in recruitment and retention of students from Palm Beach State College
(PBSC), a two-year college (2YC), particularly more women and underrepresented
minorities (URMs), into geoscience programs at Florida Atlantic University
(FAU), a four-year (4yr) institution in South Florida. The proposed activities
of this model, such as embedding workforce readiness components into the science
curriculum at FAU and PBSC, developing and implementing Exploring Geopaths
Summer Institute (EGSI) and Undergraduate Geopaths Research Experiences (UGRE),
which will both expose and train more students in cutting-edge geoscience
technologies, support and align with NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution, and
Future of Work Big Ideas. PIs anticipate a sustained increase in graduation
rates of skilled geoscientists who will enter the workforce ready and pursue
employment opportunities in much needed sectors such as: energy, oil and gas,
environmental services, mining, research institutes, and federal, state or local
governments. Through this project PIs also intend to position PBSC and FAU
students and faculty in line with NSF's INCLUDES Big Idea that "aspires to
transform education and career pathways to help broaden participation in science
and engineering".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
ameliorate the current and increasing severe shortage of geoscientists in the
U.S. workforce. Our goal is to institutionalize a transformative model to effect
a long-term, sustained increase in recruitment and retention of students from
Palm Beach State College (PBSC), a two-year college (2YC), particularly more
women and underrepresented minorities (URMs), into geoscience programs at
Florida Atlantic University (FAU), a four-year (4yr) institution in South
Florida. By targeting the diverse student population at PBSC, the project will
significantly increase the enrollment, and the number of females and URMs in
geoscience programs at FAU. As part of the transformative model PIs will
implement: (1) Growing the transfer student pipeline and increasing student
diversity by recruiting geoscience majors from PBSC, revising and strengthening
the transfer articulation agreement (Link Program), implementing geoscience-
specific 2+2 transfer flight plans, developing a cross-institutional
collaborative advising protocol framework, and initiating and embedding career
readiness components directly into the geosciences courses taken by PBSC
students prior to transferring to FAU. (2) Developing a new Exploring Geopaths
Summer Institute (EGSI), with authentic experiences utilizing a rich spectrum of
geoscience high-tech and field methods, designed to attract, and recruit PBSC
students. (3) Developing a new Undergraduate Geopaths Research Experiences
(UGRE), designed to motivate and retain transfer students early in their
matriculation into geoscience degree programs at FAU. (4) Enhancing the
departmental culture with faculty and peer mentors to make it a more welcoming,
and supportive environment for students. PIs anticipate the outcomes will
position this model as one that can be easily adopted by other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.