* 1911955
* US-China Collab:  Harnessing Big Data to understand and predict diversity and transmission of human- and animal-infected avian influenza viruses in China
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Diann Prosser, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

In the past two decades, highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses have infected
poultry in many countries in the world, including China and the USA, which
resulted in losses of billions of dollars in the poultry sector. According to
the World Health Organization (WHO), a subset of these viruses has also caused
symptoms or deaths to thousands of people since 2013. As these viruses persist,
evolve, and spread, economic losses and health concerns to the agricultural,
wildlife, and human communities are growing. Data and knowledge on the diversity
and transmission of these viruses in epicenters such as China remain scattered,
limited, and incomplete, which substantially hinders development of advanced
capacity towards prediction and forecasting of diversity and transmission
dynamics of avian influenza viruses. This project assembles an international and
multi-disciplinary team from three US institutions (University of Oklahoma, U.S.
Geological Survey Patuxent Wildlife Research Center, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital) and three institutions from China (China CDC, China
Agricultural University, and Sun Yat-sen University), as well as the WHO
Collaborating Center for Reference and Research on Influenza (China), and the
WHO Collaborating Center for Studies on Ecology of Influenza in Animals (USA).
The investigators will use both the One-Health (environmental-animal-human
health) framework and Big Data approaches to advance research in ecology and
evolution of influenza viruses and strengthen the capacity for international
stakeholders to tackle critical issues in surveillance and pandemic
preparedness. The project will train postdoctoral researchers and graduate
students in interdisciplinary research skills for studying disease ecology and
epidemiology. Through crowdsourcing, citizen science, and outreach activities
this project will also educate non-academic stakeholders and the public on
ecology and evolution of infectious diseases, which may lead to changes in human
behaviors that could reduce the transmission and spillover of avian influenza
viruses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this collaborative work is
to better understand, predict, and forecast the diversity and transmission of
avian influenza viruses under four sets of specific aims and tasks. First, this
project will use the One-Health framework to identify and document driving
factors of avian influenza viruses at the human-animal-environment interface
since the early 1980s in China, and Big Data approaches will be harnessed to
improve disparate geospatial datasets of avian influenza viruses and discover
driving factors of spill-over. These large datasets range from avian influenza
virus genomic data to satellite-based landscape and wild bird migration data.
Collation and synthesis of these data could substantially reduce the spatial and
temporal uncertainties in our understanding and modeling of the transmission of
avian influenza viruses. Second, this project will use phylogenetic and
phylogeographic models to investigate the evolution of avian influenza viruses,
which will help us better understand and predict their diversity. Third, this
project will combine statistical and mathematical models to better understand
and predict transmission dynamics of avian influenza viruses over time and
space. Fourth, the research team will work with China CDC and other stakeholders
to incorporate model results to support disease surveillance, control, and
prevention. Data-models will be assimilated to assess the past and current avian
influenza virus surveillance plans and guide the design of future surveillance
plans. Simulations under various disease control scenarios will help assess
outcomes and effectiveness of control measures on diversity and transmission of
avian influenza viruses, which would assist decision makers and stakeholders in
their efforts to tackle challenging issues in management of infectious diseases
and public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.