* 1911641
* Investigating language use in a multilingual community
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Bradley McDonnell, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 351,074.00

Research into the ways in which multilingual people use different languages in
the course of their everyday lives has led to important scientific discoveries
about the cognitive, social, and cultural aspects of language. One type of
multilingualism that is increasingly prevalent under pressures from
globalization occurs in small, tight-knit communities wherein one of the
languages being spoken is endangered. The importance of scientific
investigations of these situations is twofold. First, little is known about the
processes at play when multilingual people shift away from one of the languages.
Second, the endangered language, which encapsulates important knowledge, often
has been the least documented and researched. One important example of this
situation is found in the Nasal speech community in southwest Sumatra, a region
full of linguistic diversity and exceptionally complex multilingual situations.
What is striking about this multilingual community is that the endangered
language, Nasal, was not known by linguists until 2007, and to date it has not
been the subject of any significant research. Yet, preliminary fieldwork reveals
Nasal has unique linguistic properties, such as unique verbal affixes that
present disparate meanings related to the "completeness" of an action. This
project is an international collaboration between the University of Hawai'i at
Manoa (UHM), Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia, and Nasal community. It
will provide important training in linguistics to faculty and community members
in Indonesia, and students in the US and Indonesia. It will also foster
binational relationships between the US and Indonesia. The broader impacts also
include the professional development of a UHM doctoral student and a public
repository of recordings of speech events and their transcriptions that can be
accessed by scholars from the US and Indonesia and Nasal community members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document the linguistic practices of the
Nasal speech community, which represents an especially complex sociolinguistic
situation in Bengkulu province, Indonesia. This community is multilingual where
Nasal (nsy), an endangered Malayo-Polynesian isolate with little existing
documentation, is used alongside South Barisan Malay (SBM; pse) and Kaur (vkk)
in everyday interactions. The primary aim of this project is to document Nasal
in all of its multilingual complexity. Thus, this project will produce extensive
audiovisual documentation of Nasal in its multilingual context accompanied by a
comprehensive grammatical description. These materials provide crucial data into
the study of multilingualism in tight-knit communities, the history of western
Indonesia, and the nature of unique verbal affixes in Nasal. Furthermore, as
historical linguists and archeologists piece together the history of western
Indonesia, additional data from Nasal has the potential to radically alter this
picture. Specific activities include: (i) assemble a large audiovisual corpus of
the linguistic practices of the Nasal speech community, (ii) compile a
multilingual lexicon, (iii) mentor a doctoral student who will write a
dissertation on Nasal, and (iv) draft a Nasal reference grammar and Kaur sketch
grammar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.