* 1911310
* Houston - Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Donna Pattison, Texas Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 02/29/2024
* USD 4,000,000.00

Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Houston- Louis Stokes STEM Pathways
and Research Alliance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, Texas Southern
University (HBCU), Texas State University (HSI), the University of Houston
(HSI), the University of Houston-Downtown (MI/HSI), and the University of
Houston-Clear Lake (HSI) will form the Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research
Alliance (H-LSAMP). The H-LSAMP program was assembled to significantly increase
the number of underrepresented minority students who earn a baccalaureate degree
in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, bringing
our graduation numbers in line with the population we serve. In this proposal,
the H-LSAMP STEM Pathways and Research Alliance proposes to fund new efforts in
individual student retention and progression to baccalaureate degrees, transfer
programs from community colleges, high-quality undergraduate research
experiences, and seamless transitions into STEM graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our program aims to increase the number, quality, and
diversity of undergraduates successfully entering and completing graduate school
as well as selecting careers in the exciting and important research areas across
the STEM disciplines. Upon completion of the award period, the H-LSAMP program
will have provided the opportunity for all level-one students to participate in
research. Further, we project that around 50 percent of the level-one students
will move on to professional or graduate school and that minority STEM retention
will improve to over 75%. As a STEM Pathways and Research Alliance, we will work
toward eliminating the two well-documented causes of attrition in STEM fields at
the University level: financial need and academic
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Based on Tinto's model and our
robust collaborative learning community, the alliance will add individual
development plans coupled with career explorations to provide scholars with
sufficient knowledge and skills to provide for fulfilling employment and success
in graduate school. Students are supported using best practices of tutoring,
peer-led team learning, and mentored research. &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: This
LSAMP proposal has some of the most ethnically diverse research universities in
the country which includes participation from high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students, staff, faculty and administrators across all STEM
disciplines. Building on programs to improve female representation in STEM, and
with a mix of all races, this Alliance serves as a model that can be replicated
at HSI, MSI, and HBCUs nationwide. The H-LSAMP program has had tremendous
success in developing and graduating a quality UREP STEM workforce and projects
to continue its nation leading growth during the next five years. Our program
works to identify recruitment and retention methodologies that can be scaled and
replicated nationally. Our program will provide new PLTL course material, summer
bridge modifications to accelerate UREP STEM success, demonstrate the use of
IDPs and career awareness to enhance long-term student success, and populate the
countries PhD programs with quality UREP STEM future
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Houston- Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and
Research Alliance &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, Texas Southern
University (HBCU), Texas State University (HSI), the University of Houston
(HSI), the University of Houston-Downtown (MI/HSI), and the University of
Houston-Clear Lake (HSI) will form the Louis Stokes STEM Pathways and Research
Alliance (H-LSAMP). The H-LSAMP program was assembled to significantly increase
the number of underrepresented minority students who earn a baccalaureate degree
in the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, bringing
our graduation numbers in line with the population we serve. In this proposal,
the H-LSAMP STEM Pathways and Research Alliance proposes to fund new efforts in
individual student retention and progression to baccalaureate degrees, transfer
programs from community colleges, high-quality undergraduate research
experiences, and seamless transitions into STEM graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our program aims to increase the number, quality, and
diversity of undergraduates successfully entering and completing graduate school
as well as selecting careers in the exciting and important research areas across
the STEM disciplines. Upon completion of the award period, the H-LSAMP program
will have provided the opportunity for all level-one students to participate in
research. Further, we project that around 50 percent of the level-one students
will move on to professional or graduate school and that minority STEM retention
will improve to over 75%. As a STEM Pathways and Research Alliance, we will work
toward eliminating the two well-documented causes of attrition in STEM fields at
the University level: financial need and academic
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: Based on Tinto's model and our
robust collaborative learning community, the alliance will add individual
development plans coupled with career explorations to provide scholars with
sufficient knowledge and skills to provide for fulfilling employment and success
in graduate school. Students are supported using best practices of tutoring,
peer-led team learning, and mentored research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: This LSAMP proposal has some of the most ethnically diverse research
universities in the country, which includes participation from high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, staff, faculty and administrators across
all STEM disciplines. Building on programs to improve female representation in
STEM, and with a mix of all races, this Alliance serves as a model that can be
replicated at HSI, MSI, and HBCUs nationwide. The H-LSAMP program has had
tremendous success in developing and graduating a quality UREP STEM workforce
and projects to continue its nation leading growth during the next five years.
Our program works to identify recruitment and retention methodologies that can
be scaled and replicated nationally. Our program will provide new PLTL course
material, summer bridge modifications to accelerate UREP STEM success,
demonstrate the use of IDPs and career awareness to enhance long-term student
success, and populate the countries PhD programs with quality UREP STEM future
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.