* 1911107
* The Role of Dwarf-Dwarf Galaxy Interactions Over Cosmic Time
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Sabrina Stierwalt, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 02/29/2024
* USD 223,073.00

According to current understanding, large galaxies like our Milky Way are built
through the merging together of smaller, dwarf galaxies, and yet research into
these important merging events is still mostly uncharted territory. The numbers
of known dwarfs in the nearby universe is about to sky-rocket with upcoming
planned large surveys and the next generation thirty-meter class telescopes, but
we lack answers to even basic questions surrounding their evolution. This
project investigates the physical processes at work in a unique set of dwarfs
caught in the act of merging. Since Los Angeles, the hub for this program, is
known more for its traffic than for its clear skies, the investigators will
develop a traveling planetarium program. This program will be run by
undergraduates and it will bring science to those who normally would not have
access to such an outreach program. Audiences will include low income,
predominantly minority groups, while encouraging the students involved to become
leaders in their academic and local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project leverages the first systematic study of interacting dwarf galaxies, TiNy
Titans, to investigate the impact of dwarf-dwarf interactions on galaxy
evolution at all mass scales through a set of multiwavelength observations.
Specifically, the project will produce the first comprehensive data sets of deep
narrowband Halpha and broadband optical imaging, radio line and continuum maps
of a large, systematically-selected sample of interacting dwarf galaxies and it
will provide direct test of cosmological predictions. The main scientific goals
of this project are aimed at quantifying the physical processes taking place in
dwarf-dwarf interactions, including how star formation and gas processing behave
in dwarf galaxies which are low metallicity, highly impacted by interactions,
and may mirror conditions in the early universe. This project builds upon the
extensive efforts by Occidental College to recruit underrepresented minority and
first generation college-bound undergraduate students into science by providing
these students with hands-on experience traveling to telescopes, conducting
their own data reduction, and presenting their own results at national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.