* 1911857
* Sleep adaptations to seasonal changes in light and temperature
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Jerome Siegel, Yetish                  Gandhi
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Biological Anthropology program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare
promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in
academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two
years of training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Jerome Siegel at the
University of California, Los Angeles, this postdoctoral fellowship award
supports an early career scientist investigating sleep patterns in a modern
hunter-gatherer population. Most people find it impossible to start their day
without an alarm clock and a cup of coffee, but San hunter-gatherers do not have
such amenities. During human evolution, early humans needed to figure out what
time they needed to wake up each day and go to sleep each night in order to
maximize their reproductive success in the context of a traditional hunter-
gatherer lifestyle. The San population lives a similar lifestyle today, with
most plant food being collected from wild sources, and all meat coming from
hunting wild animals with bow-and-arrow. They live in a remote village where
they do not have access to electricity or running water. People spend almost all
of their time outside, including sleeping outside, except for when rain is
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier work in this and two other similar
populations found that sleep duration is 5.7-7.1 hours per night, similar to the
typical sleep duration observed in the United States. Sleep is normally
initiated several hours after sunset and terminated at the coldest time of the
24-hour day. People sleep one hour longer per night in the winter months than
they do in the summer months. These similarities in sleep patterns across three
independent populations may be driven by biological adaptations to the natural
environment. The follow-up research in this fellowship investigates how ambient
conditions affect sleep within the San population. Changes in sleep timing and
duration across the year, measured with wrist-worn accelerometers, can be
analyzed in tandem with weather data to assess the relative influence of light
and temperature on sleep. In addition, using portable EEG monitors, the
distribution of REM and non-REM across the night can be assessed and compared
between the summer and winter months, when sleep duration differs by about one
hour per night. This research will identify the importance of temperature as a
predictor of human sleep conditions, and begin to explain why sleep varies
across the year in hunter-gatherer populations. These insights are important to
better identify how our evolved sleep biology clashes with modern Western
conditions, and how that clash may increase the risk of various sleep
pathologies. They are also important first steps towards better understanding
some of the adaptive challenges that faced early human ancestors as they
transitioned from sleeping in trees in tropical climates, like chimpanzees, to
the patterns of sleep conditions seen today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.