* 1911191
* CNS Core: Small: RUI: Optimal and Efficient Resource Allocation in Policy-Driven Data Centers: A Network Flow Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bin Tang, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 354,291.00

Emerging data- and communication-intensive applications such as online video
streaming, social media, health and medical applications, scientific
applications including high-energy physics and bioinformatics, and educational
applications (such as the rapidly-growing Massive Open Online Courses) are all
enabled by large cloud data centers. However, this underpinning infrastructure
is increasingly stressed by the growing complexities of managing data center
resources. This is evidenced by the frequent outages of cloud services from
leading tech companies, including Amazon Cloud Storage and Microsoft Skype, and
popular mobile apps such as Gmail and Whatsapp. To address this challenge, this
project will create an optimal and efficient resource allocation framework for
policy driven data centers (PDDCs), to manage cloud user applications and cloud
resources (i.e., servers, networks, and power) in an integrated fashion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to integrate compute, data,
and middleboxes (MBs), three building blocks of PDDCs, into one framework to
achieve optimal cloud resource management. A variety of important problems in
PDDCs, including virtual machine (VM) migration and placement, load balancing,
flow priority and fault tolerance can all be solved using network flow
techniques that provide optimal and efficient resource allocation solutions. In
particular, the project identifies a series of new policy-preserving problems
that adaptively coordinate compute, data, and MBs, and invents a suite of
policy-preserving algorithms that satisfy diverse cloud policies while consuming
cloud resources efficiently. The proposed techniques include placing, migrating,
replicating, and traffic engineering compute, data, and MBs in the PDDC. The
project will compare results with integer linear programming (ILP)-based
solutions and extend the approach to multi-objective optimization problems.
Expected outcomes are fundamental theories, architectures, algorithms, and
protocols for the PDDCs, and prototypes that provide long term policy-preserving
cloud services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.