* 1911819
* Experience with large outages of long duration and public preferences for grid resilience against extreme weather events
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Peter Larsen, Baik, Sunhee
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 02/28/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program. The goal of the SPRF
program is to prepare promising, early career doctoral-level scientists for
scientific careers in academia, industry or private sector, and government. SPRF
awards involve two years of training under the sponsorship of established
scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research.
NSF seeks to promote the participation of scientists from all segments of the
scientific community, including those from underrepresented groups, in its
research programs and activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an
important level of professional development in attaining this goal. Each
Postdoctoral Fellow must address important scientific questions that advance
their respective disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Peter H.
Larsen at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and Dr. Alexander L. Davis at
Carnegie Mellon University, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist exploring the fundamental science of human decision-making and
preference elicitation for grid resilience and helping decision-makers in high-
risk regions make more informed, collective, and socially-responsible policy
investment decisions. &lt;br/&gt;American society depends on electric power for
many individual, household, and commercial activities, making our individual and
collective vulnerability to power disruption a key public policy concern. While
most power outages are short and local, large outages of long duration (LLD-
outages) occur more often than expected and result in considerable disruption,
economic cost, and social harm. Introducing new technologies such as islanded
microgrids could make it possible to provide limited emergency private and
social backup services and mitigate the impacts of LLD-outages, implementing
such technologies require incremental investments and have benefits that are
uncertain and difficult to quantify. A key input to assessing whether such
incremental investments are justified is understanding how much individuals and
organizations value small amount of electricity to meet those critical demands.
Robust estimates of society's willingness-to-pay to assure that some power
remains available during LLD-outages are one of those
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is mainly consisted of two parts. The
first part focuses on collecting data on the economic and social value of
sustaining critical electricity-dependent demands during LLD-outages and
creating psychologically grounded preference elicitation approach that can close
the preference gap between those who have vs. have not experienced LLD-outages.
Using Hurricane Sandy, Florence, and Michael as natural experiments, this study
explores whether there is a significant gap in respondents' preferences
resulting from the levels of exposure to extreme events, whether there is a
difference in accuracy of expectations and recollections between respondents who
were exposed to LLD-outages under different levels of severity and time frame,
and whether present respondents with information and exercise help them better
articulate their values and decreases the gap resulting from real-life
experiences. The second part focuses on identifying technically feasible
strategies that effectively and efficiently mitigate the consequences of LLD-
outages, providing a more complete picture of the decision-making processes
along with behavioral, economic, and technical consideration, and helping
decision-makers in high-risk regions facilitate their analytic-deliberative
processes around grid resilience in their regions. Overall, this study
integrates decision science, economics, and engineering analyses to demonstrate
and develop an improved understanding of the value of enhanced grid resilience
against LLD-outages with expected policy impacts at the local and national
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.