* 1911074
* Hawaii Supernova Flows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* John Tonry, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 555,978.00

Thirty years ago, observations of the cosmic microwave background was found to
be slightly hotter in one direction than in the opposite direction. The accepted
explanation was that the radiation is doppler shifted by the motion of our Milky
Way Galaxy and its companions of 630 km/s. For 30 years, astronomers have sought
the sources of attraction that would cause this extreme motion. There must be
attractors on scales of a billion light years. The only known methodology to
study motions on such large scales is based on the well-defined luminosities of
a class of supernovae. Over three years, our program will monitor thousands of
such supernovae, determine their distances and, for the first time, map the
motions of galaxies in response to the distribution of matter to a distance of a
billion light years. This research is part of a quest to understand the nature
of dark matter, the mysterious dominant constituent of matter. We cannot
comprehend the development of the universe without an understanding of dark
matter. This problem is central to current research efforts in physics and
cosmology and, ultimately, to societal interest in understanding the universe
and our origins. Through videos, interactive models, and virtual reality this
knowledge can be made accessible to the public. The work that is described
achieves a particular resonance with lay audiences and this program is committed
to public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the University of Hawaii, the means
exist to identify a large sample of supernovae within z=0.1 and obtain the
requisite supplementary information to determine accurate distances. The two
facilities with the best cadences for detecting nearby supernovae and
documenting their light curves are ATLAS and ASSAS-SN. A half dozen new SNIa
events will be discovered every night. These events must be identified among the
large number of other transients. The University of Hawaii 2.24m telescope will
be employed to obtain spectra to certify the supernova type and to give a
redshift. The 3.8m UKIRT on Maunakea is used to acquire light curve information
in the near infrared where the standard candle nature of SNIa is best
defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.