* 1911738
* I-Corps: Dry Preservation of Blood for Long-Term Storage at Ambient Temperatures
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Jonathan Kopechek, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of dried blood for storage at ambient temperatures. Blood
transfusions are one of the most common medical procedures in U.S. hospitals and
the global market for blood products is over $30 billion. However, red blood
cells can only be stored up to six weeks when refrigerated. Red blood cells can
be frozen for longer durations using glycerol but the thawing and processing
steps are complex and time-consuming. Due to these limitations the blood supply
is limited or non-existent in austere environments. Dry preservation of red
blood cells at ambient temperatures would enable rapid blood transfusions in
austere environments where blood storage is not currently feasible, which would
likely save lives in these remote locations. In addition, dried blood is
expected to also have an impact on the blood supply for veterinary transfusions.
Furthermore, this technology may enable dry preservation of many other cell
types for research and medical applications. It is expected that this technology
will have a significant impact on human healthcare and will revolutionize
civilian and military applications where long-term storage of blood is currently
impossible.

This I-Corps project will provide new insights into potential commercialization
opportunities for dried blood. A new method has been developed which utilizes
ultrasound and microfluidics technology to load red blood cells with trehalose
in order to protect the cell membranes when preserved in a dried state. Results
from experimental studies have found that this method yields a significant
increase in recovery of viable red blood cells compared to other approaches. The
activities of this I-Corps project will aid in identifying or excluding
potential areas of market fit for dried blood, including military use,
veterinary use, blood banking, hospitals/medical centers, and cell preservation
for research applications. Customer discovery interviews will provide new
insights into the unmet needs and pain points for providers of blood
transfusions and other cell preservation applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.