* 1911643
* SBP: Creating cultures of growth: An organizational mindset approach to reducing social identity threat among women in STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Mary Murphy, Reeves, Stephanie Lauren
* Fellowship Award
* Josie S. Welkom
* 11/30/2020
* USD 82,500.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's Social
Psychology Program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising, early
career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia, industry or
private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of training under
the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage Postdoctoral Fellows to
perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the participation of
scientists from all segments of the scientific community, including those from
underrepresented groups, in its research programs and activities; the
postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of professional
development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must address
important scientific questions that advance their respective disciplinary
fields. Under the sponsorship of Dr. Mary Murphy at Indiana University, this
postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early career scientist investigating
the role of organizational mindsets in shaping women's experiences and outcomes
in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math). Recruiting and retaining
more women in STEM fields is a pressing concern in US society. One reason that
women often opt out of STEM fields is that a variety of subtle situational cues
and messages can lead women to experience social identity threat (i.e. the
concern that they may be devalued or excluded because of their gender) in STEM.
Previous research has shown that one robust and powerful cue that affects
women's experiences of identity threat in STEM is the beliefs that powerful
people in a given organization hold about the fixed or malleable nature of STEM
abilities - that is, the organization's mindset. But how do STEM organizations
communicate their mindsets to current and future employees? That is, what
policies, procedures, and actions lead people to view a company as espousing a
fixed or a growth mindset? And how can an understanding of these organizational
mindset messages be leveraged to mitigate gender disparities in participation
and achievement in STEM? The proposed research addresses these questions using
an innovative multi-method approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Phase 1
of the proposed research consists of a series of laboratory experiments to
identify the cues and messages that communicate organizational mindsets across
several different organizational functions. These experiments provide a rigorous
casual test of the impact of these cues on women's experiences of identity
threat, interest, trust, and performance in STEM professional settings. Phase 2
consists of a randomized control trial with experience sampling and longitudinal
components to examine how organizational mindsets can be changed to mitigate
experiences of identity threat for women in STEM workplace settings. The
proposed research contributes to both contextual theories of social identity
threat and to the implicit theories (i.e. mindsets) literature. Although a small
but growing number of studies have linked perceptions of organizational mindsets
to experiences of identity threat among members of underrepresented groups, no
research has yet examined where these perceptions of organizational mindsets
come from or how they can be changed. This research also carries broader
implications for society by illuminating strategies to increase women's
participation and retention in STEM organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.