* 1911206
* Multiple Approaches to Multiple-Messenger Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Enrico Ramirez-Ruiz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 751,859.00

A research group at the University of California, Santa Cruz will train two
graduate students in observational and theoretical astrophysics, focusing on the
new field of multi-messenger, gravitational wave (GW) astronomy. The students
will work with the two lead investigators and other senior scientists to combine
multiple approaches to solve new problems in this nascent field. One student
will primarily work with data from several telescopes for which the researchers
have preferential access, and will also use National Optical Astronomy
Observatory telescopes, telescopes through collaborations, and public data when
appropriate. The other student will primarily produce theoretical models and
numerical simulations. The main scientific goals are to (1) discover and
characterize new electromagnetic (EM) counterparts to GW events, (2) produce new
models starting with hydrodynamical models of the merger to predict the EM
emission, (3) study the demographics of compact-object mergers, (4) combine data
and theory to understand the physics of rapid neutron-capture (r-process)
nucleosynthesis, or the production of atomic elements, and (5) measure the local
expansion rate of the universe using standard sirens. An education and public
outreach program associated with the research will cross-fertilize the training
of scientists and students in the visual arts and digital media using state-of-
art astrophysical simulations and observations as common ground. The team will
build a group environment that significantly increases the number of under-
represented students trained in astrophysics. The resulting visual products will
be used to disseminate results, inform the public about science and the
Universe, and provide raw material for science curricula, documentaries, and
presentations. The team will work directly with existing partners in California,
including the NSF-funded Lamat Summer Research Program on High Performance
Computing in Astrophysics, which recruits and mentors students from under-
represented groups. Key components of the Lamat program include intensive
research instruction through summer internships, academic counseling and
mentoring, and workshops that integrate family members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overriding questions addressed by this proposal are:
What are the EM counterparts to GW events? What are the demographics of compact-
object mergers? What environments produce neutron-star mergers? What elements
are generated and expelled by these events? What is the local cosmic expansion
rate and is there tension between it and the expansion rate inferred from
distant probes? How can we best use all GW and EM data with advanced theoretical
models to improve our answers to these questions? The research group discovered
SSS17a, the first optical counterpart to a GW source. Knowledge of gravity,
nuclear physics, the origin of the heaviest elements, and cosmology were all
dramatically expanded by this discovery. The results of the new research project
will address some similarly important physics. This project advances the goals
of the NSF Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.