* 1911853
* US-China Collab: Lessons from the past: synthesizing drivers of host persistence across a pathogen invasion gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,499,820.00

The invasion of pathogens into new regions has caused widespread population
declines and driven some species to extinction. However, after host species
initially decline from disease, it is unclear how some hosts can coexist with
pathogens, particularly when the pathogens are lethal. Understanding the
mechanisms of host-pathogen coexistence can provide insight into pathways that
promote healthy host populations, including disease management strategies and
treatments. This global project is a collaboration between U.S. and Chinese
scientists and will examine how bats survive with a deadly fungal pathogen that
causes white-nose syndrome. This work will explore whether similar coexistence
strategies have arisen in bats repeatedly as the disease spread from Asia, to
Europe, and then to North America over the last several thousand years. This
project also includes communications training for wildlife disease researchers
and stakeholders, work with state and local resource managers to develop disease
management strategies, and the establishment of international networks to
promote cross-border wildlife conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying
disease dynamics and population impacts along an invasion gradient can
facilitate understanding of the host-pathogen interactions that shape
populations and species communities. This project will use field studies, lab
experiments, and mathematical models to address four central aims: (1) Quantify
contact networks and transmission along a pathogen invasion gradient; (2)
Determine the role of environmental factors and the strength of selection on
host-pathogen dynamics; (3) Examine the role of host resistance, tolerance, and
pathogen virulence in population persistence across epidemic and endemic
regions, and (4) Determine the impact of disease in endemic regions on current
and historic populations using demographic studies and paleogenomics. To address
these aims, this project will leverage an interdisciplinary international team
to develop a mechanistic understanding of host persistence with a virulent
pathogen. Combined, this work has wide-ranging implications for reducing the
consequences of emerging infectious diseases in multi-host
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.