* 1912584
* Studies Relating to Black Hole Evaporation and to the Validity of the Semiclassical Approximation in Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Paul Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2023
* USD 151,839.00

This award supports studies on black hole evaporation processes, with a focus on
investigating quantum effects during and after the formation of a black hole.
The results may provide insight into the important question of what happens to
the information about how a black hole forms. Bose-Einstein condensates are
systems that typically contain very cold atoms. For certain configurations,
quantum effects will occur which are in some important ways similar to those
that occur for black holes. Experimental studies of Bose-Einstein condensate
analog black holes have been carried out. Theoretical calculations will be made
using the same techniques as are used to study quantum effects related to real
black holes. The results will be compared with the experimental data. The
semiclassical approximation has been used to investigate quantum effects such as
particle production in a variety of situations including the early universe. It
provides a bridge between macroscopic (classical) and microscopic (quantum)
phenomena. It's validity will be studied for an important model in which the
universe is initially contracting, reaches a minimum size, and then begins to
expand. Particle production is expected to be particularly important during the
contracting phase where it could significantly alter the dynamical evolution of
the universe. The results will help to determine whether the semiclassical
approximation is valid in cases where quantum effects are significant. Four
graduate students, and probably some undergraduates, will participate in some
aspects of the research, continuing a long history of their training in
numerical and analytical research techniques and co-authorship on publications.
Results will be disseminated to the research community through publications and
presentations at national and international meetings. Some results obtained will
be relevant for condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this grant addresses black hole evaporation, observable effects in
Bose-Einstein condensates which can serve as black hole analogs, and early
universe cosmology. Specifically, it will investigate questions related to the
information about how a black hole forms, the correspondence between theoretical
and experimental results related to quantum effects in analog black hole
systems, and the validity of the semi-classical approximation in models of the
universe. In the case of black hole evaporation, the objectives include studying
in detail quantum effects that occur if a spherically symmetric null shell
collapses to form a black hole. One goal is to check the accuracy of similar
calculations in two dimensional dilaton theories of gravity. It is also possible
that insight will be gained into the question of what happens to the information
about how the black hole formed. Bose-Einstein condensates that can serve as
analog black holes have been created in the laboratory. The goal is to determine
whether certain experimental results are in quantitative agreement with
predictions resulting from quantum field theory in curved space calculations in
the analog spacetime. The primary goal for cosmology is to determine whether the
semiclassical approximation is valid for models in which the universe contracts
to a minimum size and then expands. The models used will consist of a closed
universe with a positive cosmological constant. For the black hole evaporation
project the stress-energy tensor for a quantized massless minimally coupled
scalar field will be numerically computed in four-dimensions in the case of a
null shell that collapses to form the black hole. For the cosmology project the
semiclassical backreaction equations will be solved numerically in the case that
a massive conformally coupled scalar field is present. The results will be used
to investigate the validity of the semiclassical approximation in a collapsing
universe. The density density correlation function for a Bose-Einstein
condensate analog black hole will be computed using quantum field theory in
curved space techniques for a model that closely matches the velocity and sound
speed profiles used in the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.