* 1912280
* CRCNS US-France Research Proposal: Oscillatory processes for visual reasoning in deep neural networks
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Thomas Serre, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 11/30/2023
* USD 548,809.00

The development of deep convolutional networks (DCNs) has recently led to great
successes in machine vision. Despite these successes, to date, the most
impressive results have been obtained for image categorization tasks such as
indicating whether an image contains a particular object. However, DCNs ability
to solve more complex visual reasoning problems such as understanding the visual
relations between objects remains limited. Interestingly, much work in computer
vision is currently being devoted to extending DCNs, but these models are still
outmatched by the power and versatility of the brain, perhaps in part due to the
richer neuronal computations available to cortical circuits. The challenge is to
identify which neuronal mechanisms are relevant and to find suitable
abstractions to model them. One promising set of candidates is the neural
oscillations that are found throughout the brain. This project seeks to identify
the key oscillatory components and characterize the neural computations
underlying humans ability to solve visual reasoning tasks, and to use similar
strategies in modern deep learning architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use existing computational models to develop tasks and stimuli to
be used in EEG studies to identify the key oscillatory components underlying
human visual reasoning ability. The analysis of these EEG data will be guided by
the development of a biophysically-realistic computational neuroscience model.
This will inform the development of hypotheses on the circuit mechanisms
underlying the oscillatory clusters and relate these mechanisms to neural
computations. Finally, the project will develop novel machine learning
idealizations of these neural computations, which are trainable with current
deep learning methods but still interpretable at the neural circuit level. In
particular, the project will further develop initial machine learning
formulation of oscillations based on complex-valued neuronal units, thus
extending the approach and demonstrating its ability to qualitatively capture
key oscillatory processes underlying visual reasoning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
companion project is being funded by the French National Research Agency
(ANR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.