* 1912266
* Collaborative Proposal: CRCNS US-German Data Sharing Proposal: DataLad - a decentralized system for integrated discovery, management, and publication of digital objects of science
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Yaroslav Halchenko, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 11/30/2023
* USD 649,643.00

Scientists collect terabytes of critical data every year. Recently a strong open
science movement has generated traction for the beneficial practice of sharing
data across laboratories, universities and research institutions. Yet, sharing
data is not enough. Data must be shared using standardized formats and
accompanied by curated metadata to allow for tracking, search, and organization.
Metadata are essential for scientific discovery, as they are routinely used to
complete all data analyses. However, to date, most brain projects focus on
collecting or analyzing data, not on metadata management. Typical metadata
records consist of heterogeneous study descriptions, developed at study release
stage, without consistency across records or standard mechanisms to track
changes. &lt;br/&gt;This project will increase access to brain data and improve
metadata handling by combining two NSF-funded projects. It will develop a first-
of-its-kind metadata management system able to track data and metadata
distributed across heterogeneous geographical locations, storage systems and
data formats. This portion of the project will expand the functionality of a
previously funded NSF project DataLad. DataLad will also be enhanced to
interoperate with major data repositories such as OSF and Figshare. Furthermore,
the project will use the NSF-funded cloud computing platform brainlife.io to
create a data and metadata marketplace by gathering data from multiple currently
separated repositories into a single ecosystem . The goal is to improve
interoperability across open science projects and make data and metadata easily
searchable and available for computing on national cyberinfrastructure systems,
ultimately advancing scientific discovery by increasing data discoverability,
utilization, and publication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate
various technological advances. The core target will be an extensible system
capable of automated gathering of metadata from various domains. It will be
comprised of two major components: 1) a set of metadata parser algorithms that
extract metadata from datasets and individual files using a flexible JSON-LD
based data structure (with the ability to encode controlled vocabularies where
available) and 2) an aggregation procedure that merges the aggregated metadata
across parsers and stores them into compressed files that are optimized for
bandwidth-efficient exchange and can be queried directly, or used as input into
SQL or graph databases for data discovery applications. Extracted metadata will
be included within the same datasets under Git and git-annex version control for
unambiguous referencing and versatile data logistics. In parallel development we
will improve interoperability of DataLad with existing data publishing portals
(such as Figshare and OSF) by taking advantage of extracted metadata (e.g.,
Author, Description) to prefill required fields, and also by bundling the entire
Git object store within the publication to make such published datasets
installable back by DataLad without any loss of information. To make such
published datasets discoverable, we will establish a crowd-sourced registry
(with a RESTful API) which will get announcements on the availability of new
datasets upon publication and aggregate their metadata to enable querying across
datasets and data hosting providers. The final development will be the
integration of DataLad within the brainlife.io data marketplace. This will make
it possible to search and install datasets on brainlife.io as well as to process
the data utilizing the brainlife.io analyses Apps on various NSF-funded national
cyberinfrastructure high-throughput computer systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
companion project is being funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and
Research, Germany (BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.