* 1912741
* SBIR Phase I:  Polyacrylated Glycerol (PAG) Polymers in Asphalt Maintenance Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Joseph Drbohlav, ADVENTUS MATERIAL STRATEGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to introduce a novel
and renewably resource-derived polymer, Polyacrylated Glycerol (PAG), to the
asphalt road maintenance industry. The project will demonstrate the performance
and efficiency of PAG to improve the performance and life expectancy of common
asphalt maintenance applications. If successful, this project will create a
pathway to new demand for glycerol, a significant byproduct of the bio-diesel
industry. Furthermore, it will create the potential to replace up to 50,000 tons
per year of petroleum-derived polymers with a green product having significant
renewable content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase 1 project will explore the potential for PAG elastomers to perform
as adhesion promoters, sealants, primers, and asphalt additives in asphalt
roadway maintenance applications. A series of laboratory produced PAG polymers
with variations in molecular weight, average acrylic functionality, and residual
acrylic acid comonomer content will be explored using a series of laboratory-
based tests designed to characterize performance of asphalt primers, seal coats,
tack coats, micro surfacing, and chip seals modified with the PAG polymers. In
addition, this Phase 1 project will explore the potential to scale-up the
manufacturing of the PAG polymer from a laboratory scale to pilot
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.