* 1912699
* RUI: Investigations of Mirror Coatings for A+ and Third Generation Gravitational Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Steven Penn, Hobart and William Smith Colleges
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational wave detector instrumentation and
it addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) project has opened
new windows to observe and understand the universe. The first direct detection
of gravitational waves was also the first observation of the inspiral and merger
of binary black holes. While black hole mergers are one of the most energetic
events in the universe, they were not visible by electromagnetic telescopes.
Now, after viewing several such observations, LIGO is developing a catalogue of
the population of binary black hole systems. In addition, LIGO's observation of
a binary neutron star merger inaugerated the field of multi-messenger astronomy.
These simultaneous observations of gravitational waves and light allow for
deeper insights into neutron star structure, and they allow us to test
fundamental concepts like the speed of gravitational waves and the Hubble
constant. The major challenges in this field are the noise sources that limit
sensitivity, most notably thermal noise in LIGO's mirror coatings. LIGO is an
interferometer, an L-shaped detector with 4 km long arms, which detects
gravitational waves by observing tiny differential stretching in the arms.
Identical light waves, emitted at the vertex, pass down each arm to a mirror and
are reflected back. Any phase difference in the recombining beams corresponds to
a difference in arm length. Thus detecting gravitational waves depends on the
precision detection of the surface of the end mirrors, but for LIGO that
precision is a daunting one billionth of an atom width. The mirrors, at room
temperature (300; K), vibrate due to thermal energy at the mirror's resonant
frequencies, which are much higher than the gravitational waves frequencies that
LIGO can detect. If the mirrors were composed of an ideal elastic material,
these vibrations could be ignored and of no concern. Indeed the fused silica
glass used for the mirror substrates is a nearly ideal elastic material. However
the highly reflective mirror coatings have internal friction that shifts some of
the vibrational energy down to gravitational wave frequencies. That motion,
which masks the gravitational wave signal, is mirror coating thermal noise
(CTN). This research project is designed to understand and reduce CTN in order
to improve LIGO's sensitivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to reduce
coating thermal noise by lowering the dissipation, or mechanical loss, in the
coating materials. This dissipation occurs when a fluctuation in thermal or
strain energy causes a dissipative state transition. This dissipative process is
commonly modeled as an asymmetric double-well potential. The dissipation is
reduced by increasing the energy asymmetry in the states, which lowers the
transition probability. The team will investigate crystalline coatings,
specifically AlGaAs, which has excellent optical properties. The AlGaAs elastic
loss is very low for small samples, but further study is needed to understand
the loss for large coatings. The team will also investigate stabilized amorphous
dielectric coatings. Amorphous dielectric coatings produced by ion beam
sputtering can have excellent optical properties, but they typically have high
elastic loss. Annealing lowers the dissipation by allowing the material to relax
into its lowest energy state. But annealing is limited by low crystallization
temperature for these materials. Stabilized amorphous coatings are mixtures of
dielectrics in which material mixture frustrates crystallization and allows a
higher annealing temperature and lower elastic loss. The team will collaborate
on experiments to test if the effects of annealing can be achieved by heating
the substrate during deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.