* 1912083
* Pulsed Quantum Optomechanics with a Particle in a Magneto-Gravitational Trap
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Brian D'Urso, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 478,660.00

The project will experimentally investigate a fundamental question in physics:
What is the largest size scale explained by quantum mechanics, the theory of
physics that has led to computers, smartphones, light-emitting diodes (LEDs),
and lasers? While quantum mechanics correctly predicts the behavior of small
objects such as electrons and atoms, the application of quantum mechanics to
larger objects has puzzled physicists for over 80 years. Most famously, applying
the often strange predictions of quantum mechanics to the macroscopic objects we
experience in daily life led the famous physicist Erwin Schroedinger to conclude
that a cat could be placed in a state in which it is both dead and alive at the
same time! In the present project, the investigators will test the predictions
of quantum mechanics on a small sphere, approximately 1 micrometer across, which
is 10,000 times larger than an atom but still 100 times smaller than the
diameter of a human hair. To isolate the sphere, it will be levitated in a
magnetic field in a sealed chamber with nearly all the air removed; less than
one millionth of one millionth of atmospheric pressure will remain. Since
nothing is allowed to directly touch the sphere, it will be pushed around using
laser light. Ultimately, the behavior of the sphere under these conditions will
increase our understanding of the limits of quantum mechanics, which makes much
of modern life possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project is to
test the predictions of quantum mechanics on a mesoscopic object, a micrometer-
scale sphere levitated in a magneto-gravitational trap. The project builds on
the unique properties of a microsphere in a magneto-gravitational trap,
including static trapping fields, stable trapping, extreme isolation from the
environment in ultra-high vacuum, high efficiency of optical detection of the
particle position, and the precise control of the motion of the particle which
is possible with feedback cooling via radiation pressure. While the motion of
the particle is classical over long time scales (seconds), new sub-millisecond
pulsed measurements with greatly increased optical intensity are predicted to
reveal quantum-limited behavior when the radiation pressure shot noise due to
the illumination dominates the motional state decoherence. In particular, the
pulsed measurements are expected to enable position detection near the standard
quantum limit. With continued improvements in isolation, the system will enable
tests of gravitational collapse models such as continuous spontaneous
localization and serve as a platform for future exploration of mesoscopic
quantum mechanics and ultra-sensitive force
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.