* 1912527
* RUI: Decomposition of Organic Pollutants Using Electron Beams: A Theoretical Investigation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Samantha Fonseca Dos Santos, Rollins College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 154,901.00

Atmosphere and soil degradation is strongly related to emission of pollutants
from combustion of fossil fuels. These pollutants, mainly volatile organic
compounds, are toxic gases that participate in the formation of ground level
ozone and cause stratospheric ozone layer depletion. The main toxic gases
emitted by industry, power stations, and vehicles, are Nitrogen oxides (NOx) and
Sulphur dioxide (SO2). Nitrogen oxides can be easily converted into gaseous
nitric acid and other organic nitrates in the air contributing to irrespirable
particle levels in the atmosphere. SO2 is itself a major air pollutant with
similar negative impacts on the environment and animal life, including humans.
Pulse electron beams have recently been proposed to clean up emissions from
power plants, thereby representing a promising and cheap technique to scrub
toxic molecules at combustion level without any byproducts. As an electron from
the beam collides with a NOx or SO2 molecule, it can be captured forming a
temporary negative ion, eventually leading to instabilities responsible for
molecular dissociation in a process known as "dissociative electronic
attachment." The present project aims to investigate how effectively pulse
electron beams can cause the dissociation of these toxic gases thereby reducing
their emission. At the end of this project we expect to have improved the
understanding of these reactions and paved the way for future techniques to
clean dangerous gas emissions using electron beams. At the same time, the
project will create training and educational opportunities for undergraduate
students to learn and get involved in state-of-the-art computational quantum
chemistry techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will study the
dissociative electronic attachment mechanism of NO2 and SO2, from the electron
capture step all the way to the dynamics of the dissociating fragments. This
research will provide cross sections and their dependence on the initial
molecular vibrational state. In order to obtain the cross sections, the
electronic structure of the molecule and the temporary negative molecular ion
states will be characterized. Then, the results of these calculations will be
used to construct the possible energetic routes the system can take in order to
dissociate. The calculations will also be used to compute angular distribution
of the molecular fragments, and the results will be compared against
experimental works with high angular resolution of fragment
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.