* 1912587
* Sequence Specific Targeting of RNA Using Complementary Strands: Energetics, Kinetics and Hydration
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Luis Marky, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 06/30/2023
* USD 900,000.00

Ribonucleic acid (RNA) is known to play a central role in a wide variety of
cellular processes. To exert their function, RNA molecules must fold into a
specific three-dimensional structure. In this project, the PI and his students
will study the folding energetics and hydration properties of complex RNA
structures and will determine the thermodynamics and kinetics governing their
association with complementary strands. This would help improve our current
understanding of the physical factors that determine their stability, melting
behavior and structure, which are basic to the rational design of targeting
strategies and computational models. Furthermore, the data obtained in this
project will be compiled on a free-to-access website and applied to molecular
modeling of RNA structures to show that detailed thermodynamics is needed to
bring RNA modeling to the same accuracy as DNA modeling. This project will have
societal impacts in the mentoring of young scientists, including high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows. The project will
develop biophysical methods and will train students in a wide variety of
biophysical techniques, exposing them to a diverse range of topics in the
physical sciences. The PI incorporates the research findings into curricular
enrichment and seminar presentations. The student presentations of their work at
scientific conferences allow them to integrate within the scientific community.
Furthermore, the PI recruits students from diverse groups to participate in the
Summer undergraduate research program at his institution, co-organizes a
educational workshop every other year in "Structural Biology and Molecular
Biophysics" in the Midwest; and attends the annual SACNAS meeting to increase
the participation of young scientists from diverse groups into biophysics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's laboratory will obtain nearest-neighbor data on
intramolecular RNA secondary structures and use this data to improve structural
modeling and targeting of RNA. In particular, the project aims to determine the
unfolding thermodynamics of RNA stem-loop motifs, pseudoknots, stem-loop motifs
with bulges, three and four way junctions, and biologically relevant RNA
riboswitches, such as preQ1, SAM-II, and adenine riboswitch, as a function of
sequence, loop length and solution conditions. The thermodynamic results will be
correlated with hydration and SAXS structural data. The PI will also study the
thermodynamic contributions and kinetic rates governing the reaction of
intramolecular RNA structures with their partially complementary strands (SS)
via duplex formation and the molecular forces governing the formation of SS-
polycation complexes and to use SS-polycation complexes for targeting RNA
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.