* 1912047
* Integration of Virtual Reality (VR) to Support Technology-based Active-learning and Retention: iVR to STAR
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2023
* USD 249,942.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support to design, implement, study and assess efforts to increase the
numbers of students and the quality of their preparation by strengthening
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and research.
This project at Tuskegee University provides a strategic approach to infuse
selected courses in aerospace engineering, biology, mathematics, mechanical
engineering, and physics with immersive virtual reality lessons. Undergraduate
students are involved in this project as researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
two-year pilot project has the goals to determine the impact of integrating
virtual reality in the learning environment of undergraduate STEM education, to
identify challenges and determine limitations of virtual reality technology in
STEM undergraduate education, and to establish best practices of this
pedagogical approach. The project will achieve these goals by: establishing an
infrastructure with the required hardware and software to develop, test and
implement virtual reality-based lessons on selected STEM topics; reinforcing
STEM concepts through experimental and hands-on technology-based learning
activities; increasing student engagement utilizing the interactive learning
experience; and improving the learning outcomes of students with the virtual
reality technology-infused STEM courses. The project will study the efficacy of
this intervention using qualitative and quantitative measures. The project will
be guided by formative and summative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.