* 1912099
* 2019 Chemistry Early Career Investigator Workshop
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2019
* Paula Diaconescu, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 11/30/2019
* USD 80,901.00

Faculty beginning their independent careers often find the process of writing
their first grant proposals to be challenging. Professors Dominik Konkolewicz of
Miami University, Ohio, and Paula Diaconescu of the University of California,
Los Angeles are organizing a workshop that seeks to provide new chemistry
faculty insight into the proposal writing and reviewing process so that they can
identify and develop strong research, education and outreach activities.
Participants have the opportunity to network with each other as well as
successful grant recipients and federal program officers from a variety of
agencies. The participants engage in mock panels, research presentations, and
other activities designed to provide them with a better understanding of how to
put together a research plan that is ambitious, yet realistic and compelling.
Broader impact criteria are also discussed in terms of educational activities,
outreach, and technical applications to societal problems.

The 2019 Chemistry Early Career Workshop, supported by the Division of Chemistry
will be held on May 20-21, 2019 in Alexandria, Virginia. This workshop will
bring together 80 junior faculty from a broad range of institutions and
demographics to discuss steps in strategically crafting research ideas, planning
educational and outreach activities, and assessing and evaluating project aims.
Potential participants can access more information (as it becomes available) at:
https://blogs.miamioh.edu/early-career-investigator-workshop/. In addition an
email address is also available: che.early.career.workshop.19@gmail.com.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.