* 1912183
* Implicit Multi-Scale Plasma Simulations Using Low Cost Matrix-Free Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Andrew Christlieb, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The Carrington event of 1859 was a massive solar flair that hit the earth and
left large amounts of charged particles trapped in the earth's magnetic field.
These charged particles created large currents that coupled to the telegraph
wires via an inductive coupling, as what happens in transformers. The currents
that were pushed through the telegraph wires were so large they caused the
telegraph machines to explode. If this were to happen today, unless we know to
turn off and disconnect the power grid, such an event would destroy modern power
infrastructure. Yet solar flairs happen all the time, we can't simply turn off
the power grid every time one happens. From the time of detection, it takes 3
days for a solar flair to travel the distance to the earth. Predicting if a
solar flair will hit the earth is currently done with low resolution models,
which are not particular good at predicting these events. Increasing the
accuracy to include more physics in the calculation leads to bigger calculations
that simply can't be done in three days, even on modern super computers with
state of the art methods. This project centers on creating a new class of
methods that could make these calculations possible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One
way to begin to address the issues of simulating problems with a significant
number of time scales is to use implicit solvers. These typically lead to large
systems of implicitly coupled equations. The main bottleneck in scalable solvers
for such systems is in the communication and large number of interactions that
are needed to solve these systems. In this project we are pursuing a new
paradigm that solves coupled systems of non-linear PDEs, it is important to note
that the pieces of the operators are typically linear. We have developed a
strategy of expanding these pieces of the operators as global convolutions that
give unconditional stability when combined with explicit time stepping methods,
but can be cheaply evaluated with three term recurrence relations and avoids
iteration. This approach has led to unconditionally stable solvers for problems
such as degenerate advection diffusion or the Hamilton Jacobi equations. Here we
are working to extend these methods to systems of
PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.