* 1912525
* OPUS:  CRS: Trade-offs among fungal traits that influence responses to the environment and effects on ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Kathleen Treseder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 331,908.00

To help the U.S. prepare for droughts, wildfires, heat waves, and other
environmental changes, this project will focus on invisible players in soil
ecosystems: fungi. Although they are small, soil fungi are important because
they strongly impact soil fertility and carbon (C) storage. Currently,
scientists use computer simulations called Earth System Models to predict future
environmental change. These models can be improved by including better
information about how soil fungi function under different environmental
conditions. In this project, researchers are gathering information from ten
years of experiments on fungi in Alaska, California, and Costa Rica. Their work
will analyze how thousands of fungal species respond to the environment, and
link those species to their impact on ecosystem function. This information will
be used to improve the predictive role of Earth System Models. In addition, the
project will test foundational ideas about fungal ecology, like whether fungi
that adapt to more stressful environmental conditions lose their ability to grow
well under favorable conditions. The project also includes training for a PhD
student and work to make field research practices safer, especially for women on
scientific teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central challenge in ecosystem science
is to improve predictions of carbon (C) cycling in ecosystems under future
environmental conditions. The synthesis proposed for this fungal ecology project
is a critical step in this process, and will leverage ten years of fungal DNA
sequence data from experimental field manipulations. From these data, they will
characterize how thousands of fungal taxa respond to contrasting environmental
changes. Using the new community-generated Fungal Functional Traits Database,
the PI and a graduate student will link the responses of individual taxa to
their functional (i.e., morphological, physiological, and genetic) traits. They
can then predict how changes in environmental conditions like drought can select
for fungi that perform particular functions within ecosystems, like recalcitrant
C production. Analyses will also test the applicability of Grime's Competitive-
Stress Tolerance-Ruderal scheme for fungi, to determine whether evolutionary or
physiological trade-offs preclude a given individual from thriving broadly under
an array of conditions, including environmental stress and disturbance. The PI
posits that across fungal taxa, the suites of functional traits associated with
moderate, stable conditions versus those associated with environmental stress or
disturbance will be negatively related to one another, owing to trade-offs among
these traits. Via the synthesis activities described above, results are intended
to move soil fungal ecology past the discovery phase and toward the
interrogation of foundational conceptual frameworks. The value added will be a
documentation of links between the responses of fungal taxa to the environment
with their potential effects on ecosystems. The linkages discovered can be used
to parameterize microbial trait-based models to improve predictions of C cycling
in ecosystems. In addition, these analyses will expand the Fungal Functional
Traits Database to include responses to environmental conditions. To facilitate
use by the broader community, all products will be open-access and open-
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.