* 1912729
* LTREB Renewal:  Collaborative Research: Understanding the strength, duration, and stability of connectivity effects on community diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ellen Damschen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2024
* USD 352,728.00

Habitat loss is the greatest cause of species diversity loss, as it isolates
small patches of habitat along with the plant and animal populations in these
fragments. This project examines landscape connectivity, and the degree to which
landscape corridors of natural vegetation among fragments facilitate the
movement of organisms and alleviate the isolating effects of fragmentation.
Although landscape connectivity is considered to be fundamental to the
maintenance of species diversity, there is remarkably little evidence
documenting the effects of corridors on species diversity. The investigators
will extend an ongoing experiment explicitly designed to test the effects of
landscape connectivity on diversity. Results to date show that species diversity
of plants increases when fragments are connected by corridors, but the question
remains whether these responses are short-term or persistent. The project will
generate long-term data to resolve the relationship between connectivity,
diversity, and time, in order to determine whether connectivity effects are
long-lasting or transient, and evaluate underlying causes of this relationship.
A website dedicated to bridging the science and practice of conservation
corridors, ConservationCorridor.org, will contribute to these efforts. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be engaged in and trained through participation
in the research, continuing a successful collaboration with the US Forest
Service to train and mentor women and students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Landscape connectivity, or the degree to which the
landscape facilitates dispersal, is viewed as a&lt;br/&gt;fundamentally
important factor regulating species diversity. This has led to a large and
growing emphasis on connectivity in ecological theories of diversity and in
conservation of ecosystems impacted by habitat fragmentation and environmental
variation. How connectivity affects temporally variable communities, such as
those undergoing succession or being influenced by disturbance events or climate
variability is uncertain. This research will advance our understanding of the
importance of connectivity for community diversity using a long term dataset.
The research team will continue to collect core data to extend the time series,
as well as new data on species abundances, and create a database of plant
species functional traits. The proposed research will identify the ecological
mechanisms responsible for observed patterns of species richness over time,
including whether connectivity increases colonization rates or decreases
extinction rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.