* 1912546
* Studies of Waveguide-QED Analogues with Matter-wave Quantum Emitters in Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dominik Schneble, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 593,473.00

Harnessing the interaction between light and matter is a central topic in
quantum optics and emergent quantum technologies. Waveguide-QED (quantum
electrodynamics) provides a recent framework in which such interactions, i.e.
those between guided photons (particles of light) and elementary quantum
emitters (real or artificial atoms), are controlled and engineered through the
structure and geometry of the environment in which the two interact. Work under
the preceding NSF award has demonstrated the implementation of a novel
experimental platform for studies of waveguide-QED effects in the context of
ultracold atoms. Here, the wells of an optical lattice (i.e. a crystal made of
light) act as quantum emitters, while guided atomic matter waves play the role
of light. As a matter-wave analogue of optical waveguide-QED, this platform
offers exquisite tunability and control of the relevant parameters along with
access to novel geometries, which are difficult to realize otherwise. The
project will investigate the interplay of emitter energies, interactions and
geometry to study fundamental questions in waveguide-QED, such as how quantum
emitters interact with an engineered environment, how they interact with each
other, and what novel phenomena can result from the interaction. The project
will thereby offer a glimpse at the quantum simulation of exotic material
systems, which can guide future technological efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project, which builds on prior NSF-supported work, is devoted to studies of
matter-wave analogues of spontaneous-emission phenomena in photonic-crystal
waveguides, using arrays of matter-wave quantum emitters in a state-selective
optical lattice. The free tunability of both the excitation energy of the
emitters and their vacuum coupling in this recently demonstrated platform
enables the exploration of a wide range of novel effects across regimes both
accessible and inaccessible to standard quantum optical systems. The project
aims to investigate Markovian and non-Markovian emission dynamics into one- and
higher-dimensional environments that feature multiple spectral gaps and
singularities. Furthermore, the project seeks to characterize coherent couplings
between emitters mediated by a dynamical bound state via quasiparticle transport
and the formation of interacting many-body phases, and to exploit some of the
unique features arising from collisional interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.