* 1912170
* Implementation Project: PERSIST - Pathways to Enhance Retention of Students in Science to Transition
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Lisa Brown, Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,249,895.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation project at
Morgan State University provides a multilayered approach to broaden
opportunities for African-American students to succeed in STEM majors. The focus
of the project is on retaining students during the critical freshman year,
preparing them for graduate school or the workforce in STEM fields and
graduating them. The project is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation,
as well as by internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the goals to: 1) develop a six-
week pre-college transition program to enhance retention and persistence of a
select number of incoming freshmen; 2) increase student persistence through the
freshmen year by a deeper engagement in course material and through role
modeling; 3) increase the number of students who are engaged in academic
research; and 4) integrate critical thinking activities and assessment into the
curricula of all science majors. The program is divided into the pre-freshmen
phase, a freshmen phase, and a post-freshmen phase that contains activities to
foster transition and persistence to degree completion. The activities in the
post-freshmen phase serve as a link to many of the established undergraduate
research programs at the university. Campus-wide professional development
activities for faculty that focus on critical thinking applications in the
classroom will also be provided. This project will serve as a model for
enhancing student success and increasing persistence to degree
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.