* 1912545
* Research on Quantum Fluctuation Effects and Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Lawrence Ford, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports studies of large quantum energy density fluctuations and
their physical effects. These fluctuations are more likely than was previously
expected, and their study could lead to new insights into both quantum physics
and gravitation. Large energy density fluctuations can lead to large
fluctuations of spacetime geometry, which is an aspect of quantum gravity. This
work can help clarify the relation between relativity theory and quantum theory,
which is major unsolved problem in fundamental physics. It may also help
understand the processes in the early history of our universe, such as phase
transitions and black hole nucleation. The project will also study analog models
in condensed matter systems, such as light propagation in nonlinear optical
materials and density fluctuations in liquids. The results may have application
to other areas of science and possibly to technology. The project will
contribute to education through the participation of students, and development
of new ways to explain subtle concepts to students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will study probability distributions for spacetime averaged quantum
stress tensors, and their physical applications. These distributions have been
shown to fall relatively slowly, leading to a relatively large probability of
large fluctuations. The details of this effect will be studied in more detail
through a combination of analytic and numerical methods. The physical
implications of the large fluctuations will also be studied. These may include
increased rates of false vacuum decay, which will have implications for the
study of phase transitions in the early universe, and nucleation of primordial
black holes. Analog models, such as quantum density fluctuations in fluids, will
also be studied. Here the probability distribution is expected to be similar to
those for quantum stress tensor fluctuations, and may be accessible to
experimental investigation. The role of large quantum stress tensor fluctuations
in producing passive fluctuations of gravity and their effects will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.