* 1912269
* Quantum Control of Molecules Using Dressed States Created by Laser Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ergin Ahmed, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 548,586.00

This project will contribute to the development of control mechanisms of
molecular quantum states using laser light. In general, molecules are not
spherically symmetric objects, and as a result most collisional processes
involving them depend strongly on the relative alignment of the colliding
partners. Understanding the basic physics of collisional processes between atoms
and molecules is of importance for a number of research areas including chemical
reactivity, the dynamics of processes involving ultracold atoms and molecules,
and astrophysics of the interstellar medium. Molecules also have an elaborate
internal structure due to the innumerable ways in which chemical bonds can be
realized. This leads to a rich variety of internal quantum states that often
interact with each other. Such interactions can cause changes in the nature of
the chemical bond between covalent and ionic and also give can rise to breaking
of the chemical bond due to couplings between attractive and repulsive
electronic states in the process of predissociation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the presence of an electromagnetic field (light), the energy levels of an atom
or a molecule are modified ("dressed") by the electromagnetic radiation. One of
the goals of this project is to use this phenomenon to study the dynamics of
molecular collisional processes by probing selectively the change in the
alignment of the molecular rotational angular momentum during collisional
processes. Quantum state selectivity will be achieved by removing the degeneracy
of the magnetic sublevels of the target rotational state of the molecules using
the Autler-Townes (AT) effect of a control laser. In addition, dressing of
molecular states by a coupling laser will be used to measure the electronic
transition dipole moments and to demonstrate control of predissociation in
regions of avoided crossings between covalent and ionic potentials of the
lithium dimer. Furthermore, the dressed states approach makes it possible to use
the spin-orbit interaction as a tool for molecular valence electron spin
polarization. The spin-orbit interaction arises due to the coupling between the
internal magnetic moment (spin) of the electrons and the magnetic field caused
by the orbital motion of the electrons. The Autler-Townes effect, in this
context, will make it possible to switch the molecules between a singlet
(antiparallel spins) state and a triplet (parallel spins) state. Realizing this
"spin switch" has potential applications in quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.