* 1912130
* Collaborative Research: Advancing Understanding of Aerosol-Cloud Feedback Using the World's First Global Climate Model with Explicit Boundary Layer Turbulence
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Peter Blossey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2024
* USD 418,847.00

Aerosols, meaning tiny particles suspended in the atmosphere, play a key role in
cloud formation, as cloud droplets and ice particles are produced when water
vapor condenses onto aerosols. When more aerosols are present clouds tend to
have a larger number of smaller droplets, making them brighter and more
effective in reflecting sunlight back to space. Thus increases in aerosol amount
due to industrial activity can increase the brightness of clouds, resulting in a
cooling effect on climate. The extent to which the global temperature increase
from greenhouse warming has been offset by human-induced radiative forcing from
aerosol-cloud-interactions (RFaci) is an important and unsolved problem in
climate science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One obstacle to progress on RFaci is the
difficulty of performing computer simulations which explicitly represent cloud
properties yet cover the whole earth, so that global climatic effects can be
assessed. Cloud motions are turbulent and require models with grid points spaced
a fraction of a kilometer apart, while global model grid spacing is typically
tens to hundreds of kilometers. To bridge this scale gap the PIs have developed
an ultraparameterized (UP) model, meaning a global model with coarse grid
spacing in which each grid box contains a fine-scale cloud resolving model with
a domain size much smaller than the grid box. The model is challenging both
scientifically and computationally, and the project includes a concerted effort
to improve computational efficiency to make simulations
practical.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses several specific
questions regarding RFaci. One question is why climate models tend to
overestimate RFaci compared to estimates from satellites, in some cases by a
factor of two. Comparisons between the UP model and satellite observations will
be facilitated by a nudging methodology, in which external forcing is used to
constrain the simulated weather patterns to match the days when the satellite
observations were taken. The nudging minimizes differences between simulated and
satellite-estimated RFaci due to incorrect simulation of large-scale circulation
features, allowing attribution of differences to aerosol-cloud
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the
societal implications of high versus low RFaci: if the cooling effect of
industrially-driven RFaci is large, the strength of greenhouse warming must be
at the high end of current estimates in order to explain the warming seen over
the past century. Likewise, if industrial RFaci cooling was small over the last
century, the sensitivity of global temperature to greenhouse gas increase is
likely to be on the lower end of its estimated range. RFaci is thus among the
largest uncertainties in determining climate sensitivity and the severity of
climate change impacts. In addition, software developed under the project is
made available to the research community, in part through a version of the
Community Earth System Model. The project provides support and training for a
postdoctoral research scholar, thereby providing workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.