* 1912837
* Mechanisms and Regulation of Cell Division
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jorge Torres, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 740,000.00

Cell division is a highly coordinated set of events that ensures the faithful
transmission of genetic material from one mother cell to two newly formed
daughter cells. The mitotic spindle is the complex molecular machine used by the
cell to separate the genetic material. However, the assembly and regulation of
the mitotic apparatus is still incompletely understood. This project will
increase this understanding by elucidating the role and mechanism of function of
five enzymes whose roles in mitosis have not been previously appreciated. This
project will have a Broader Impact for society by training and preparing the
next generation of scientists for careers in STEM fields. A diverse group of
students at all levels, from high school through graduate students, will
participate in educational, mentoring, and research training activities. This
research will enable students to become independent critical thinkers, to
generate scientific data, and to develop computational software that will be
freely available and will benefit the scientific community. All research results
will be disseminated to a broad audience through publications, research
presentations, and at science outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mitotic
spindle, comprised largely of microtubules, is key to the process of cell
division. It's proper assembly, function, and regulation relies on a multitude
of enzymatic reactions and protein-protein interactions that are tightly
controlled in a spatial and temporal manner. Current efforts to comprehend cell
division as a biological system have been hampered by a lack of understanding of
the enzymatic machinery and their mechanistic functions that contribute to cell
division. This proposal integrates experimental and computational approaches in
a synergistic fashion to address these gaps in knowledge. Many enzymes with
uncharacterized roles in cell division were recently uncovered in a proteomic
screen to identify novel mitotic microtubule associated proteins. Genetic
screens confirmed the importance of these proteins for cell division. These were
termed novel cell division proteins (NCDPs). To further elucidate the mechanisms
that drive and regulate cell division, this project will characterize the
function of five NCDPs using a range of cell biological, molecular, and genetic,
and biochemical approaches to determine their localization, function and mode of
regulation in cell division. This project will develop novel computational tools
to analyze NCDP proteomic data sets, and establish a user-friendly open access
web server that the scientific community can use to analyze mass spectrometry
data. Together, this research will advance an understanding of the enzymatic
activities that drive and regulate cell division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.