* 1912497
* Improving the Accuracy, Robustness, and Computational Efficiency of the Spinning, Precessing Effective-One-Body Numerical-Relativity (SEOBNRv3/SEOBNRv4P) Codes
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Zachariah Etienne, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. In
order to detect and characterize the gravitational-wave signals observed by
Advanced LIGO, theoretical models that predict the detailed behavior of the
signal as a function of the source parameters are required. These models must
provide an accurate approximation to the exact solution of Einstein's equations,
but must also be rapidly and robustly calculable, so that they can be used to
predict the signal at hundreds of millions of parameter locations in order to
characterize a single event. To that end, this project will create a new state-
of-the-art in accurate and efficient waveform models, thus helping to ensure
that future Advanced LIGO observations are not limited by the waveform models
being used. In addition to the scientific benefits, this work will result in the
training of a graduate student in the best practices of analytical relativity
and gravitational-wave data analysis, thereby helping to train the next
generation of gravitational-wave astronomers. Finally, this proposal will help
facilitate impactful education and outreach throughout the state of West
Virginia, by contributing to the existing Space Public Outreach Team (SPOT)
program through the development of a new presentation on gravitational-wave
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Precessing Spinning Effective-One-Body
Numerical-Relativity (SEOBNRv3, and SEOBNRv4P currently under development)
gravitational waveform model is one of only two models (along with IMRPhenomP)
capable of facilitating complete parameter estimation (PE) of black-hole binary
events. However, despite their great efficiency and reliability when compared to
numerical relativity waveforms, the original SEOBNR codes were still far too
slow to be directly useful for standard Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)-based
PE. To address this issue, the PI's team previously developed optimized versions
of the SEOBNR approximants, which make it possible, using SEOBNRv3_opt, to
perform PE on a candidate event at a much faster rate. In addition, the
development of SEOBNRv3_opt uncovered occasional pathological behavior in the
underlying SEOBNRv3 approximant. While only occurring in one out of every
~10,000 to 100,000 cases, this frequency nonetheless presents a major obstacle
to PE, which requires the generation of 10^8 waveform realizations. Therefore,
there is an urgent need to develop an approximant that is both significantly
more efficient than SEOBNRv3_opt, and also substantially more robust. This
project will create a new state-of-the-art approximant that is both more
accurate and more robust than any currently in existence. This will require,
first, the creation of a new approximant based on SEOBNRv3_opt, but replacing
the ringdown attachment with the Backwards One-Body (BOB) merger-ringdown model
developed by the PI, which produces merger-ringdown waveforms as accurate as NR
results across the entire range of parameter space probed by NR. Because BOB can
be extended to earlier times than the light ring, it can avoid the extreme
sensitivity of SEOBNRv3 to the exact light ring location, thereby dramatically
improving the robustness of the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.