* 1912350
* Few-Body Quantum States and Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Chris Greene, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 373,475.00

A class of problems where current theory is extremely limited is in its ability
to model the interaction of more than three or four particles, which might be
atoms or molecules or nucleons or even quarks. This research advances one of the
most promising theoretical methods for attacking this difficult class, which is
based on the introduction of unusual collective coordinates that describe the
motions of the system. Once the best coordinates have been selected, the project
can implement the quantum mechanical equations on modern computers, and extract
accurate numerical solutions. Subsequent explorations of the parameter space
after accuracy has been attained should yield not only credible predictions of
new phenomena, but also qualitative insights that can suggest new paths that
further advance the field of research. The project also tackles the effect of
modified dimensionality on quantum mechanical interactions, such as squeezing a
three-dimensional gas into a pancake-shaped two-dimensional geometry or a cigar-
shaped one-dimensional geometry. Such geometrical changes can have a dramatic
effect on the collisions and bound states that occur in a few-particle
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project advances one of the most
vital scientific directions at present, namely, by deepening our understanding
of the quantum mechanical behavior of atoms, molecules, and light, and improving
our control of those systems. For decades, the progress in computing technology,
in creating novel materials, in the development of chemical processes, has been
able to proceed largely without utilizing the novel quantum mechanical laws that
operate at the smallest scale. With increasing miniaturization of devices and
advancing microscopic control of materials at the atomic level, it has become
paramount to improve the capability of theory to describe the quantum mechanical
behavior of matter and light. This project details plans to create advanced
theoretical techniques that enable this ability to predict the properties of
such atomic scale systems, and push forward capabilities for designing new
classes of quantum systems that can enable applications in previously
unanticipated directions. The effort also strengthens the pool of talent capable
of tackling the most challenging theoretical questions in the microscopic
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.