* 1912747
* Flexible and Sound Computational Harmonic Analysis Tools for Graphs and Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Naoki Saito, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

In recent years, the field of data analysis on graphs and networks is
experiencing rapid growth due to a confluence of several trends in science and
technology: the advent of new sensors and social network infrastructure,
together with the availability of low-cost computing devices, has ignited an
explosion in research and development activities in both academia and industry.
It has become a pressing issue to develop more flexible yet mathematically sound
tools for graph data analysis. The algorithms and software tools to be developed
will make a positive impact in solving practical data analysis problems on
graphs and networks in diverse fields, e.g., biology and medicine (analyzing
data measured on neuronal networks); computer science (analyzing friendship
relations in social networks); electrical engineering (monitoring and
controlling sensor networks); geology (measuring stream flows in a ramified
river network); and civil engineering (monitoring traffic flow on a road
network), to name a few. Moreover, those algorithms and software tools will be
highly useful for data in conventional formats such as usual digital signals and
images. This is because those tools can treat the conventional data as graphs,
consequently can extract signal features that are not readily accessible by
conventional methods. Students engaged in this project will be trained to be the
next generation of interdisciplinary scientists who have deep knowledge in one
area yet have open mind to the other areas and try to actively seek
collaborations with domain experts (such as neuroscientists or civil engineers).
The proposed project will also bring in the insights gained by the experience of
the PI in the different fields: image analysis; scientific computing;
statistical signal processing; computational neuroscience; and harmonic
analysis. These students will gain broad perspectives, which will be helpful for
their future career, either in academia or in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop flexible and sound computational harmonic
analysis tools for analyzing data recorded on graphs and networks and
demonstrate their usefulness on a variety of applications. The PI team has
developed such a tool, called the Generalized Haar-Walsh Transform (GHWT), which
completely lifted the conventional Haar-Walsh wavelet packet transform from the
regular lattice setting to the much more general graph setting. Yet, that is not
enough. The proposed project will extend the GHWT to make it more flexible and
adaptive to graph data of interest. In particular, the PI team will develop the
extended GHWT (eGHWT) and the associated best-basis selection algorithm for
graphs that will significantly improve the previous GHWT with the similar
computational cost, and apply it to important problems ranging from simultaneous
image segmentation and compression to matrix data analysis. The PI team will
also investigate what would be the natural dual domain of a given graph and how
one could build a sound graph wavelet theory and generate smooth multiscale
basis dictionaries on graphs. This part begins with the idea of defining a
multiscale metric between any two eigenvectors of the graph Laplacian matrix of
an input graph. Then, the project will construct the natural dual domain of the
graph, i.e., a low dimensional Euclidean space where those eigenvectors are
embedded using that metric (like the Fourier domain lattice for the regular
spatial lattice case). Once this is done, it should be able to build natural and
sound wavelets and multiscale basis dictionaries on that graph by appropriately
grouping and clustering the eigenvectors in the dual domain in a similar manner
to how the conventional Littlewood-Paley theory organizes the sinusoids in the
regular lattice case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.