* 1912776
* Support for the Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Virginie Renson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 356,181.00

The Archaeometry Laboratory at the University of Missouri Research Reactor
(MURR) conducts compositional analysis of archaeological materials like
ceramics, chert, obsidian, and metals. Such chemical analyses are essential
pieces of evidence used by archaeologists to investigate the technology,
economics, social and political organization, identity, and religious practices
in ancient societies. Understanding past human behavior can inform modern
efforts to address issues such as population movement, resource exploitation,
group interaction, and internal group social stress. The long-term success of
the Archaeometry Laboratory has resulted in an unparalleled database of artifact
and raw material chemical compositions that enhance the explanatory power of
future analytical studies as well as provide the raw material for large-scale
research projects using existing data. The laboratory is able to support a wide
variety of projects and numerous students, graduate interns, researchers, and
visiting scholars every year, and contributes to knowledge diffusion through
close scientific collaborations between MURR staff and outside researchers,
student education, and professional publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MURR
Archaeometry Laboratory focuses on elemental and isotopic analysis in order to
examine the production, exchange, and movement of a broad variety of artifacts
including ceramics, lithics, and metals, using neutron activation analysis
(NAA), X-ray fluorescence (XRF), and inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (ICP-MS) including a laser ablation system and a multi-collector.
The laboratory also supports geochemical research on the petrogenesis of various
igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks. Broader impacts of the Archaeometry
Laboratory at MURR include: (1) availability of affordable chemical and isotopic
analyses for students and faculty from academic departments and non-profit
research organizations in the US; (2) training of undergraduate and graduate
students in the selection and use of laboratory methods of analysis; (3) advice
in project design, statistical analysis, and interpretation of the chemical and
isotopic data; and (4) public access by archaeologists, geologists, and
scientists from many disciplines to the compositional
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.