* 1912702
* Encrypted control for privacy-preserving and secure cyber-physical systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Felice Manganiello, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2024
* USD 411,998.00

Driven by advances in cloud computing and wireless communications, many control
systems are increasingly integrated with sensing, communication, and computing
devices, leading to the so-called cyber-physical systems (CPS). Typical examples
of CPS include critical water, gas, and power infrastructures, swarm robotics,
and vehicle platoons. Those control systems usually have their feedback control
loops closed via communication networks, leading to critical privacy and
security challenges due to the vulnerability of (shared) communication networks.
In fact, concerns on security and particularly privacy have spurred various
legislative polices and recommendations for many privacy-and-security critical
CPS like smart grids and intelligent transportation systems. For example, the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration has required that privacy issues
must be addressed when implementing vehicle-to-vehicle communications, and
privacy measures must be undertaken to prevent individuals from being tracked in
location. Although researchers in the control community and the computer science
community have proposed several technological solutions to enhance the privacy
and security of CPS, existing approaches fail to combine and synergize control-
theoretical approaches with conventional information technology solutions like
encryption, which significantly restricts the overall achievable strength and
scope in protecting the privacy and security of CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal seeks to provide an encrypted control approach for CPS privacy-and-
security protection by seamlessly integrating control and encryption. The
integration creates tremendous synergy and enables new capabilities: not only
does it enable decentralized privacy-and-security protection without any data
aggregator or third-party, it also avoids compromising accuracy, a typical
problem with differential-privacy based privacy-protection approaches.
Furthermore, the seamless integration guarantees low computational complexity as
well. The project will: i) develop an encrypted control framework and
corresponding theories for cloud-based control to protect privacy with
guaranteed stability despite encryption-induced representation errors; ii) under
the encrypted control framework, develop new verification mechanisms to combat
integrity attacks on both communication links and shared computing platforms
such as the cloud; iii) extend the encrypted control to completely decentralized
multi-agent settings without any data aggregator or third-party; and iv)
systematically validate the approach using a multi-robot platform. The proposed
research will provide privacy-and-security protection for general CPS such as
smart grids and connected vehicles, in which privacy and security are crucial.
It is also expected to impact many other critical infrastructures such as water
and wastewater systems where control over communication networks is becoming the
norm. The project will significantly enrich existing graduate/undergraduate
courses in cryptography and control, which the PIs regularly teach. It will also
directly address the underrepresentation of ethnic groups and women in science
and engineering through leveraging scheduled training activities under an
existing NSF RTG grant as well as through ongoing outreach activities to
minority middle-school girls under the Clemson WISE (Women in Science and
Engineering) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.