* 1912665
* Developing a Radium Toolset for New Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Andrew Jayich, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 511,029.00

This work will deploy ion trapping techniques (in which electric fields are used
to grab onto and hold an atom which has a missing electron) to an unusually
heavy, and radioactive, atom: radium. This atom is particularly important for
the study of the conditions in the early universe. Part of the reason is that it
contains a deformed nucleus, specifically one with a pear shape, which makes it
more sensitive to some effects than lighter elements with a more round nucleus.
Because radium is radioactive, however, it is challenging to study. This work
addresses this challenge by using a small radium sample in an experiment in
which lasers are used to cool and trap radium ions and hold them for extended
periods of time to study. This work will produce the first measurements of some
basic properties of the radium ion. It will also create and study molecular ions
that contain radium. This work will improve understanding of the element and its
potential to address long-standing physics questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project the PI and his colleagues aim to make first measurements of basic
radium ion properties and study radium-based molecular ions. For the radium ion
they will measure the branching fractions of the 7P_3/2 state, the lifetimes of
the 7P_1/2, 7P_3/2, 6D_3/2, and 6D_5/2 states. Besides a lower bound on the
6D_5/2 lifetime none of these values have been previously measured. The values
are important for a basic understanding of the radium ion, and essential for
advanced work, such as parity nonconservation measurements. The group will
further study radium-based molecular ions, such as RaOH+, which are promising
for studying charge-parity violation. They plan to create the molecular ions in
the ion trap, sympathetically cool them with co-trapped Ra+, and then probe the
molecular ions with photodissociation spectroscopy to provide a basic
understanding of their energy level structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.