* 1912465
* Theoretical Studies at the Interface of Atomic Physics and Precision Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andrei Derevianko, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 422,571.00

Cosmological observations indicate that modern physics can explain only a small
fraction (about 5%) of the microscopic composition of the Universe. Exacting the
nature of the remaining 95%, dark matter and dark energy, is one of the grandest
challenges in modern physics. This project aims at finding inroads to solving
this outstanding problem through interpretation, design, and characterization of
precision measurement experiments carried out in laboratory settings. Such
experiments, while being relatively inexpensive, have a tantalizing discovery
potential. Any discovery in this area would profoundly help in painting a more
complete picture of Nature's inner workings. Historically, such advances
eventually lead to technological advances. The project will train a young
theoretical/computational physicist, contributing to the high-technology
workforce development. The project will be carried out in Nevada, a state
historically underrepresented in the scientific enterprise, thus contributing to
diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A signal of new physics may come as a small
perturbation on top of a conventional Standard Model physics background; thereby
an interpretation of experimental measurements requires input from theoretical
calculations characterizing such backgrounds. A major part of this project deals
with high-precision calculations of atomic properties required for improved
interpretation of the violation of mirror symmetry in atoms. Together with
previous experimental results, the calculations will either reveal new physics
or place powerful constraints on the dark sector. Another part of the project
will estimate fundamental physics limitations on the accuracies attainable with
atomic timekeeping and also improve the interpretation of searches for
ultralight dark matter with precision instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.