* 1912159
* Workshop on Data Science Across the Undergraduate Curriculum: University-Industry Online Case Studies on Applications of Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Thomas Woodson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2020
* USD 49,796.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project will develop and hold a
national workshop entitled "Data Science Across the Undergraduate Curriculum:
University-Industry Online Case Studies on Applications of Data Science." The
workshop has two major aims: 1) review the national landscape of major online
resources for learning and teaching data science across the undergraduate
curriculum; and 2) make initial plans for developing frameworks that will guide
curricular design, facilitating learning environments, and doing assessments in
the context of online case studies on applications of data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growing abundance of data from heterogeneous sources
is impacting research, design, manufacturing, marketing, and many workplace
practices. Workshop participants will explore how colleges and universities, in
partnership with industry, can better prepare undergraduate students from any
major to gather, analyze and use data effectively to improve processes. The
workshop will engage participants in online resources and learning environments
to develop case studies based on examples of data science applications across a
wide range of STEM areas. Each case study will address technical and technology
dimensions, applications, and societal implications. Participants will also
consider ways to help students understand societal impacts of data science. The
workshop will generate a report of its findings that will be available online
and on relevant STEM education networks. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.