* 1912766
* The 50-CCD Tower of DAMIC-M to Search for Light Dark Matter Particles
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Alvaro Chavarria, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2021
* USD 560,000.00

Dark matter (DM) is ubiquitous yet invisible. It has an enormous influence in
our Universe: it binds together galaxy clusters, makes stars move faster around
their galaxy, drove the large-scale structure in the galaxies' distribution in
the Universe and left an unequivocal imprint in the cosmic microwave background
power spectrum. Weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs), relics from the
early Universe, are a compelling explanation chased by sensitive experiments in
deep underground laboratories. However, searches for the theoretically-favored
heavy WIMPs (about 100 times the proton mass) have been so far unsuccessful. Nor
has evidence for such particles been found at the CERN Large Hadron Collider.
Alternative scenarios are now emerging, including the existence of a hidden
sector of lighter DM particles that can only be observed from their interactions
with electrons. The DAMIC program searches for DM candidates beyond the heavy
WIMP hypothesis by detecting nuclear and electronic recoils induced by low-mass
DM particles in the bulk silicon of charge-coupled devices (CCDs). The DAMIC
experiment at SNOLAB is currently in operation and has already established
itself as one of the most sensitive detectors for low-mass DM particles. The
next step in the program is DAMIC-M: a 50-CCD detector of 1 kg target mass at
the Laboratoire Souterrain de Modane (LSM) in France. This award provides
funding to support the activities of the DAMIC-M group at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities at UW will bring together a
diverse group of participants to collaborate in an international setting in the
development and construction of a cutting-edge scientific apparatus. The
experience will provide students with the experimental foundation necessary to
have a significant impact in a larger collaborative setting as they progress in
their careers. The cohort of participants will come from a variety of programs
in the Seattle area and the Pacific Northwest that implement active recruitment
strategies to enhance diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.