* 1912599
* RUI: Searching for Gamma-Ray Burst and Fast Radio Burst Counterparts in LIGO Gravitational Wave Data
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Ryan Fisher, Christopher Newport University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2023
* USD 149,950.00

Starting with the initial detection of gravitational waves (GW) from a binary
black hole merger, and now continuing with the first detection of GWs from a
binary neutron star merger associated with a gamma-ray burst (GRB), the era of
true GW astronomy has begun. The detection of GWs from the binary neutron star
merger, GW170817, when combined with the coincident GRB detection, GRB 170817A,
and the electromagnetic follow-up campaign that discovered associated afterglows
across the electromagnetic spectrum, has had a significant impact on the
understanding of the progenitors of short GRBs, kilonovae, and the equation of
state of neutron stars. This collection of observations and discoveries has
demonstrated the capabilities of multi-messenger astronomy with the addition
GWs. These successes of the first and second Observing Runs of The Advanced
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) and the French-
Italian Virgo detector are now being expanded upon, as these detectors began
observing the universe at sensitivities never before achieved in their third
Observing Run, starting in April of 2019. This award will support the search for
GWs associated with new GRB events, for which only one coincident detection has
so far been made. The award will also support the search for GWs associated with
fast radio bursts (FRB), which are extremely short-lived and extremely energetic
bursts radio waves first detected by radio telescopes in 2007. The progenitors
of FRBs are completely unknown, and many astronomers are actively trying to
detect more of these events to learn what might cause them. Any detection of a
GW associated with a FRB would result in a significant increase in the
understanding of the astrophysical origin of these mysterious events. The award
will support the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce
through the training of undergraduate and masters students to become competent
scientific researchers able to conduct research at the internationally
recognized level as the next generation of gravitational-wave
astronomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As was demonstrated with the multi-messenger
observations of GW170817, combined detections of GWs with electromagnetic
detections have significantly advanced the understanding of astrophysics of
high-energy events. This award will support the search for GWs associated with
GRBs using a coherent, matched-filter search for compact binary coalescence
sources. These searches will be conducted in response to announced GRB
detections, and any GWs detected will be announced to the astronomical community
for prompt follow-up. This search extends the effective sensitivity of the GW
detection network beyond that of an all-sky search by using the information
provided by the external trigger's sky location. Additional detections of GWs
associated with GRBs in the third and fourth observing runs of LIGO and
complimentary Virgo data will enable the astrophysical properties of neutron
stars to be better constrained. Additionally, the full electromagnetic emission
model for these binary neutron star merger sources will be refined with future
multi-messenger observations. This award will also support the coherent,
template-based search for GWs associated with fast radio bursts (FRB).
Currently, the models of FRB progenitors are poorly constrained, and very few
candidate progenitor sources have been eliminated due to a combination of the
paucity of bursts detected thus far and a lack of multispectral observations. If
a GW were detected with a template-based search in LIGO and Virgo data and found
to be associated with a FRB, this would immediately indicate that the source of
FRBs are binary neutron star mergers or neutron star-black hole mergers. At the
same time, if no coincident detections are made in this search, this will better
constrain models of the FRB progenitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.