* 1912649
* Identification and Interpretation of Gravitational-Wave Signals in LIGO Data
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Patrick Brady, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,350,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational wave detector data analysis, and
it addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
With the gravitational wave detection of the coalescence of a binary neutron
star system by the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) on
August 17, 2017, the near-simultaneous detection of gamma-ray emission from the
same region of the sky by Fermi, and the highly successful followup of the
electromagnetic counterpart from X-rays to radio waves, the era of
multimessenger gravitational-wave astronomy began. The Advanced LIGO detectors
are now in their third observing run. In coordination with the European Virgo
detector and eventually the Japanese KAGRA detector, this network of
gravitational wave observatories will survey the universe with unprecedented
sensitivity. A trove of new discoveries is at hand. This grant supports the
research activities of the University of Wisconsin--Milwaukee (UWM) LIGO
Scientific Collaboration (LSC) group. The overarching theme is gravitational-
wave astronomy with an emphasis on activities that are on the critical path for
the scientific success of LIGO and its full participation in multimessenger
transient astronomy. This project brings highly-engaged faculty with a proven
track record in gravitational physics, astrophysics, data analysis, education
and outreach together with undergraduates, graduate students and postdocs in a
close collaborative environment to deliver science at the dawn of multimessenger
gravitational-wave astronomy. This project supports the creation of critical
components of a system that will allow the rapid transmittal of gravitational-
wave observations to the entire community of astronomers via open public alerts,
and facilitates the integration of gravitational-wave science into the broader
field of astrophysics. The excitement of this budding branch of astronomy is
brought to the community through outreach efforts such as the UWM
Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UWM LSC group will deliver several
critical elements to a low-latency, streaming search for transient gravitational
waves, including those produced during the coalescence of binary neutron stars
and/or black holes. Among the data analysis elements that will be developed and
operated are the online search for signals from compact binary coalescence, a
near real-time source classification system, and a rapid parameter estimation
utility. A system to rapidly identify signals will be an essential element of
gravitational-wave science in the era of multimessenger astronomy in which
observations of several kinds (gravitational waves; electromagnetic waves; high
energy particles) are synthesized to obtain a detailed understanding of the
sources of the most cataclysmic events in the universe. Gravitational-wave
astronomy will reveal the inner mechanism of gamma-ray bursts, will provide a
means to measure the population of black holes and determine the channel by
which massive black holes are grown, and will probe the fundamental nature of
matter above nuclear densities. New ways of measuring cosmological parameters
will become available, which will complement existing observations. To this end,
this project supports work, identified as critical path in the LSC Data Analysis
White Paper and the LSC Program, that will result in gravitational-wave
detections of binary coalescence, provide rapid sky localization and parameter
estimation to facilitate electromagnetic follow-up efforts, yield fast turn-
around targeted searches prompted by triggers generated by other observational
facilities, obtain the nuclear equation of state by measuring the tidal
interactions of binary neutron stars just prior to their merger, and exploit
gravitational wave observations to measure various cosmological
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.