* 1912673
* Terrestrial Planetary Atmospheres and Climate Extremes:  From Earth to Titan
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jonathan Mitchell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2023
* USD 683,632.00

At first glance Titan, a moon of Saturn with a surface temperature of -290F,
looks nothing like Earth. But closer inspection reveals some oddly familiar
scenes: photos from the Cassini mission appear to show seas, lakes, dry lake
beds, and drainage channels. As on earth these surface features come about
through the action of precipitation, but Titan's raindrops are made of liquid
methane instead of liquid water. Also as on Earth, raindrops on Titan form in
clouds, albeit clouds consisting of condensed methane cloud droplets, which in
turn come from the convergence of methane vapor, carried by the winds from
regions in which liquid methane evaporates from the surface. In short, Titan has
a methane-based "hydrological cycle", complete with methane ice and snow, liquid
methane on the surface, methane clouds and rain, and methane vapor, at
temperatures low enough for methane to change phase just as water does on Earth.
Recognizing the commonalities of Earth's water cycle and Titan's methane cycle,
this project treats Titan as an Earth analog, a completely independent
expression of hydrological cycle physics and dynamics which can be used to
develop a deeper understanding of the water cycle and climate of our world.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many features of the water cycle have methane
analogs on Titan, the behavior of the analogs is different in ways that suggest
the same underlying dynamics but with different values of a few key parameters.
For example, Earth has an intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ), a narrow low-
latitude band of clouds roughly parallel to the equator, and Titan has a similar
feature. In both cases the ITCZ has a seasonal cycle in which it shifts north
and south over the course of the year. But on Earth the shifts are modest and
the ITCZ remains in the tropics, while on Titan the ITCZ migrates all the way
from the north pole to the south pole. This dramatic difference can be explained
by the difference in planetary rotation rate between Earth and Titan, as Earth
rotates 16 times faster than Titan. Idealized simulations of Earth at much
slower rotation rates by the PI and others show a comparable widening of the
north-south migration of the ITCZ. Thus, as far as ITCZ migration is concerned,
rotation rate can be regarded as a dynamical parameter which can be varied to
transition from an Earth-like to a Titan-like state. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
other parameters are considered in the work: the amount of vapor in the
atmosphere and the amount of liquid at the surface. On earth the water vapor in
a typical atmospheric column would amount to between one and ten centimeters if
it were condensed to liquid form, but on Titan the methane vapor in a column of
the atmosphere is higher by a factor of perhaps a hundred (although methane is
still only about two percent of Titan's atmosphere, which is about 98%
nitrogen). The water vapor content of Earth's atmosphere increases with
temperature so that, somewhat counterintuitively, when it comes to column vapor
content Titan resembles a much warmer earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regarding
surface liquid, Titan resembles a very dry earth, as Earth's surface is
dominated by deep oceans while Titan has only lakes and small seas. The project
examines the extent to which variations in the three parameters can cause an
Earth-like atmospheric circulation and water cycle to take on Titan-like
behaviors. One such behavior is Titan's relatively meager cloud cover, which
occurs despite the high methane vapor amount and precipitation which can come in
heavy downpours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is conducted largely through
computer simulations. The suite of models used includes ICON, a global cloud
resolving model from the Max Planck Institute for Meteorology (MPI), the Isca
model from the University of Exeter, and atmospheric column models which can
simulate convection in a simplified setting. A ground hydrology model including
subsurface flow is constructed for Isca as part of the project. A key element of
the modeling strategy is a modification to the equation for saturation specific
humidity (the Clausius-Clayperon equation) which allows column water vapor to be
increased without increasing mean temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts through a number of educational activities connected to the
project. The PI incorporates results of the research in his undergraduate
teaching through a "weather in a tank" suite of hands-on fluid dynamics devices.
In addition, the project supports development of a radial inflow device that
demonstrates the importance of angular momentum conservation on fluid flow in
the atmosphere and ocean, designed by students as a class project. Classes also
include a field trip on Santa Monica bay in a small research vessel, and funds
from this project are used to cover costs of the trip. The project provides
support and training to two graduate students, and funds are provided in the
budget to allow the students to visit the foreign collaborators at Exeter and
MPI. Finally, the project supports development of a land hydrology component
model for use with Isca, an open-source model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.