* 1912585
* Broadening Participation Research: Strategic Application of Science Capital to Increase African-American Students' Motivation, Retention and Persistence in STEM at an HBCU
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Simone Smith, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 349,999.00

Researchers at North Carolina A&amp;T State university will examine the extent
to which institutional knowledge of students' science capital can be leveraged
to enhance their motivation, persistence, and persistence in STEM. They
hypothesize that knowledge of students' science capital can be used as a
powerful tool to inform the development of novel teaching approaches, learning
strategies, and STEM interventions that will promote academic success. The eight
dimensions of science capital that the study will address include science
literacy; science-related attitudes, values, and dispositions; knowledge about
the transferability of science; science media consumption; participation in out-
of-school science learning contexts; family science skills, knowledge and
qualifications; knowing people in science-related roles; and talking about
science in everyday life. The underlying assumption is that the more of the
eight defined dimensions of science capital that a student possesses, the more
likely the student will have a positive science identity and will continue post-
undergraduate education. The proposed project is the first to investigate
science capital as a tool to promote STEM persistence at a Historically Black
College and University. The project will produce new insights into student
motivations and experiences that faculty can use to personalize and localize
science instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will employ a mixed-
methods and a quasi-experimental design to develop a generalizable instrument to
measure students' science capital and use this instrument to inform curricular
changes to broaden participation in STEM. The research questions that will guide
data collection and analysis are: (1) Using the literature and existing measures
as a guide, what kinds of assessment tools can be developed that sufficiently
capture students' science capital and are sensitive to the unique assets,
interests, and experiences brought by students in HBCU communities? (2) To what
extent does faculty development focused on understanding, measuring,
incorporating, and promoting students' science capital influence the development
of an asset mindset and motivate changes in curriculum design and instructional
delivery? (3) How does an overt focus promoting awareness of students' science
capital - directed toward both faculty and students - impact student interest,
engagement, and persistence in STEM? The researchers will develop a science
capital survey and establish a scale to assess students' science capital level,
provide faculty development in asset-based thinking to promote novel program
development around student science capital, and pilot the application of science
capital inventory in one course to test its potential for student engagement. By
coupling data collection and analysis with program implementation activities,
researchers will obtain the information needed to answer the research questions
and simultaneously share information and findings with relevant groups in
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU-UP) program, Broadening Participation in
STEM Education Research track, that focuses on the creation and investigation of
new theory-driven models and innovations relevant to the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM education and the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.