* 1912196
* Targeted Infusion Project: Innovative Jarvis Undergraduate Mathematics Program (I-JUMP):  Embedding Computational and Mathematical Biology into Life STEM
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Shakhawat Bhuiyan, Jarvis Christian College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Jarvis Christian College
will promote and expose the interface between computational and applied
mathematics and Life STEM and build capacities in the learning, teaching, and
research of under-represented minority students in cutting edge computational
and applied mathematics tools, techniques and concepts applicable for biology.
The project activities will provide professional development for faculty,
increase recruitment, student retention and graduation rates and provide
pathways for minority students to pursue graduate study and careers in
computation and mathematical biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
objectives of the I-JUMP project are 1) to enrich the mathematics curriculum by
embedding cutting edge computational and mathematical biology tools, techniques,
and concepts into the mathematics courses; 2) to improve teaching strategy
through converging differentiated instruction with cutting edge technology to
engage the students in learning new concepts; 3) to expand students?
visibilities and competencies in computational and mathematical biology research
via infusion of computational and mathematical biology research into the
existing undergraduate research curricula, research internships, and peer-
mentored research and 4) to update teaching and research infrastructure to
support the new teaching strategies and the inquiry, project and research-based
courses in computational and mathematical biology and mathematics general
education courses. The outcomes of the project will embed the concepts of
mathematical biology into every student's education at Jarvis Christian College.
The training and knowledge in mathematical biology will provide graduates with
the critical thinking, collaboration, creativity, and communication skills that
will benefit them in their selected career pathways. Moreover, the project will
create opportunities for minority and underrepresented students to participate
in undergraduate research, pursue graduate study, and provide a pathway to
careers in computational biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.