* 1912507
* Attosecond Photoemission Dynamics: Novel AB Initio Methods for Atomic and Molecular Ex-situ Spectrscopies
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Luca Argenti, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 336,983.00

At a fundamental level, atoms consists of negatively-charge particles, the
electrons, flying around a massive positively-charged nucleus. Using ultrashort
laser pulses, snapshots of electrons can be taken with attosecond time
resolution (one attosecond is a billionth of a billionth of a second), which is
the natural timescale of electronic motion. To control how atoms evolve in time,
however, it is also essential to be able to predict their fast dynamics. This is
a difficult task because electrons try to avoid each other in their motion
around the nucleus. Furthermore, electrons occasionally do collide, causing the
choreography of the dance to change. During the last three years, this research
group has developed numerical tools that can predict how this complex dynamics
unfolds under the influence of external light pulses. The present project will
add to the theoretical toolbox the pieces necessary to describe three important
aspects of electron dynamics; the interaction of their spin with their orbital
motion, their interaction with circularly polarized light, and, in the case of
molecular electrons, their interaction with two or more nuclear centers. These
new tools will contribute to consolidate the U.S. presence in the ultrafast
atomic and molecular international community, and to equip the students involved
in this research with unique computational
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond pulses have given access to the time-
resolved study of electronic excitations in atoms and molecules above their
ionization threshold. Such studies rely on ever more sophisticated theoretical
models. Currently, it is possible to describe, within the electrostatic
approximation, the ionization of systems as complex as neon and argon. Yet, the
accurate treatment of atoms beyond the first period requires incorporation of
their spin-orbit interaction. Thanks to constant experimental advances, the
polarization of attosecond light pulses can now be changed at will, and it is
possible to detect angularly resolved photoelectron spectra from oriented
molecular targets. This project will include spin-orbit effects and the
interaction with arbitrarily polarized pulses in the time-resolved description
of atomic ionization, and it will extend existing molecular scattering codes to
finite-pulse multi-photon ionization regimes. The inclusion of relativistic
interactions will be essential to quantify the ionization delay due to the
interplay between spin-orbit interaction and electron correlations. The study of
ionization with arbitrarily polarized ultrashort pulses will open the way to
non-axially symmetric photoemission. The new molecular-codes will be a more
rigorous basis for attosecond interferometric spectroscopies. This project aims
at solving persistent discrepancies in atomic attosecond experiments that are
due to the non-negligible spin-orbit splitting in the valence and inner-valence
shells of atoms as heavy as argon and krypton. It will explore new pump-prope
schemes with circularly-polarized pulses, which hold the keys to the direct
measurement of resonant retardation in photoemission and to the dichroism in the
ionization of chiral systems. This project will also foster STEM excellence in
Florida by promoting the participation of students from local high schools to
the USA Physics Olympiads through off-campus training
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.