* 1912284
* Targeted Infusion Project:  Cybersecurity for Everybody - A Multi-Tier Approach to Cybersecurity Education, Training, and Awareness in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Nikunja Swain, South Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,840.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at South Carolina State University will enhance
undergraduate education in the Computer Science department to prepare students
to meet the needs of the workforce or advanced studies in cybersecurity related
fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a successful
model of institution-wide reform for undergraduate cybersecurity education
through the use of instruction, internships, workshops and seminars. This
project will use a multi-tier approach to increase capacity in cybersecurity
education, training, and awareness in the undergraduate curriculum by developing
relationships with academia, government and industry; developing an introductory
cybersecurity general education course; providing awareness of and training for
cybersecurity issues to middle school, high school, and college teachers, and to
the general public through lectures, seminars, workshops, and hands-on
experiences; developing a minor in cybersecurity; and providing the participants
access to an online cybersecurity laboratory. The project is guided by formative
and summative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.