* 1912913
* I-Corps:  Customer discovery to explore Wildflower Turf's rapid meadow technology for the US market
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Dennis vanEngelsdorp, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
more effective commercialization of a sustainable lawn alternative in the form
of wildflower sod. Grass lawns are ubiquitous in the continental US covering an
estimated 40 million acres of land, an area more than three times that of any
other crop, including corn, soy and wheat. While grass lawns are beloved by
American landowners, they are expensive, requiring more water, pesticide and
fertilizer inputs than any other crop. These inputs degrade waterways and create
biological deserts. In response, there is a growing call for sustainable lawn
alternatives with an emphasis on native wildflower meadows. Despite the demand
for meadowscapes, grass only turf continues to dominate the US landscape, in
part, because the United States (US) does not have dependable, effective tools
for meadow establishment. Introduction of wildflower sod/turf products to the US
market will contribute to desired societal outcomes; such as meeting objectives
mandated by state and federal water quality policies and initiatives, increasing
biodiversity and helping ensure the health of pollinating insect communities,
which provide food security through the pollination of wild and cultivated
crops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will advance the teams
knowledge of potential barriers to widespread adoption of wildflower meadows.
While the ecological benefits of wildflower meadows are fairly well understood,
few studies have investigated meadow implementation from the perspective of land
managers, landscape professionals and communities. Understanding the market
obstacles of replacing high input lawns with sustainable flowering meadows is
the first step in finding viable solutions. The technology being pursued is a
biodiverse meadow sod comprised of native grasses and wildflowers. Conceptually,
it is similar to traditional sod in that the turf is moveable and easy to
install. The US team has partnered with a UK company which developed the
production system on which the new technology is based, and has been the leading
supplier of wildflower turf in Great Britain since 2003. The new IP will include
adapting the UK growing system to 1) work with US plant species and climates,
and 2) development of native seed mixes that grow well in the production system
and that will provide the desired aesthetics for an urban
setting&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.