* 1912706
* Fast and Robust Algorithms for Signal Recovery from Underdetermined Measurements:  Generalized Sparse Fourier Transforms, Inverse Problems, and Density Estimation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Mark Iwen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to develop computational methods capable of quickly generating
best-possible simple solutions for several difficult computational problems of
wide interest. As an example, the developed computational methods will include
an algorithm for rapidly finding the best possible simple approximation of a
given function of many variables from just a few function evaluations. If, e.g.,
the function one cares about is the probability of having an extreme rain event
in Florida in two weeks as a function of current ocean temperatures, wind
speeds, atmospheric pressures, etc. then such a method could help to provide a
generic framework for quickly building up simple models to help predict such
extreme rain events based on a reduced number of costly weather observations and
climate simulations. A second example of the numerical methods to be developed
as part of this project include provably accurate methods for producing correct
pictures of, e.g., microscopic material features from realistic ptychographic
imaging data. Such methods can help guarantee that the images one can obtain
using well-planned ptychographic scans of microscopic object features (that are
too small to see with the naked eye) actually look like the true object one
scanned as opposed to, e.g., a distorted, fake, or even disguised version of the
true object which just so happens to produce similar scan results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More generally, this project will develop fast
computational methods, supported by rigorous theoretical guarantees, for several
problems that involve learning extremely large and high dimensional signals from
severely underdetermined measurements. The developed numerical methods will
include: (i) improved and generalized sublinear-time Sparse Fourier Transform
(SFT) algorithms capable of rapidly approximating any function of many variables
that exhibits sparsity in any given bounded orthonormal product basis, (ii) FFT-
time and provably accurate lifted phase retrieval algorithms for approximately
recovering compactly supported functions (up to a global phase factor) from
their spectrogram measurements as well as new and even faster SFT-based
compressive phase retrieval methods which run in only sublinear-time, and (iii)
the development of new, fast, low-memory, and highly-parallel distributed
density estimation algorithms for large multimodal datasets and tensors. A
common difficulty in developing all three sets of algorithms for the problems
above stems from the shear size of the memory and/or processing power required
by their standard solution approaches, which limits both their applicability as
well as one's ability to obtain fully determined sets of signal measurements for
their use in many settings. In all three cases, new and computationally
tractable algorithms will be developed that take advantage of hidden simplifying
structure in each application above (e.g., generalized Fourier sparsity in the
first case, intrinsically low rank data in the second case, and intrinsic low-
dimensional geometric structure in the third) thereby providing numerical
approaches capable of solving several types of large problems whose numerical
solution currently lies beyond our collective
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.