* 1912499
* Graduate Student Travel Support for 2019 International Conference on Microwaves for Intelligent Mobility (ICMIM)to be held in Detroit, Michigan, April 15-16, 2019.
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Chung-Tse Wu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/29/2020
* USD 16,000.00

The IEEE International Conference on Microwaves for Intelligent Mobility (ICMIM)
is a conference covering emerging research topics on autonomous vehicles and
unmanned aircrafts. It is sponsored by IEEE Microwave Theory and Techniques
Society, with technical co-sponsorships from IEEE Antennas and Propagation
Society and IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Society. The 5th annual IEEE
ICMIM will be held in Detroit, MI, on April 15-16, 2019. The conference attracts
researchers and engineers working on intelligent mobility facilitated by RF,
microwave, and millimeter-wave technologies from component, circuit, to system
level, for applications addressing autonomous vehicles (including land, sea, and
airborne), automotive radar and other sensing, navigation, localization, and
communication techniques. To support the training of the next-generation
scientists and engineers working on intelligent mobility, this NSF grant will
provide travel support for 20 graduate students to present their research papers
at the conference and learn the cutting-edge research and development of
microwave techniques for intelligent mobility. The travel grants will be awarded
competitively to graduate students from U.S. universities who will present their
accepted papers at the conference. The awardees will be selected by a committee
of the conference and the paper quality will be considered in the selection
process. The proposed travel support will have long-term and broad impacts on
the participating students' career developments and the
advancements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.