* 1912876
* Collaborative Research: Probing and Tailoring the Cathode-Electrolyte Interfacial Chemistries for Sodium Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Qilin Dai, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 124,804.00

There is a critical need for improved energy storage technologies for electric
vehicles and large-scale integration of renewable electricity grid storage to
improve domestic energy security. Currently, state-of-the-art energy storage
technologies such as lithium ion batteries are insufficient in providing the
performance requirements needed such as cost and energy density to enable broad
use. Alternative battery chemistries could provide an avenue towards gains in
energy density, durability, and cost for these applications. This fundamental
research project addresses the use of sodium ion batteries as a potential low-
cost and sustainable solution to large-scale electrochemical energy storage
systems. However, the inferior cycle life of cathode electrode materials for
this type of battery is a significant roadblock towards commercialization. This
project addresses the issue with a collaborative experimental program that
focuses on cathode electrode material synthesis methods and experimental
characterization tools that can measure the processes occurring at the interface
region of the cathode electrode and the battery electrolyte. Fundamental
knowledge will result on these processes and will enable rational design
strategies to increase the durability, energy density, and cycle life of this
battery type. For broader impacts, the project?s partners will establish an
energy storage research program at Jackson State University. An outreach program
at each project institution will be enriched with educational modules and hands
on activities for elementary school-age students with a learning disability in
dyslexia via summer camps and learning centers and with enhanced parent
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to elucidate the
interfacial degradation mechanisms of sodium cathode materials and to establish
experimental approaches for tailoring and strengthening the cathode?electrolyte
interface for sodium-ion batteries. The project will make use of advanced
synchrotron X-ray and electron characterization tools to probe the battery
chemistry in the temporally and spatially resolved environments. The project
will improve the electrochemical kinetics of active particles and surface
stability of cathode materials and thus their performance in sodium ion
batteries. There is a need for a holistic study to understand the formation and
evolution of the interfacial degradation as well as to quantitatively pinpoint
its relationship with the surface oxygen reactivity and bulk redox chemistry.
The doping approach will simultaneously mitigate the interfacial degradation and
accelerate the bulk electrochemical kinetics. The research will accomplish the
following objectives: (1) probing the multiscale interfacial chemical and
structural transformations and investigating the relationship between sodium
cathode surface chemistry, interfacial degradation, and electrochemical
kinetics, (2) conducting spectroscopic and imaging measurements to spatially
quantify the influence of the interfacial degradation on the bulk redox behavior
of sodium cathode particles as a function of the state-of-charge, cycling
history, and charging protocol, and (3) establishing approaches to tailor the
cathode surface chemistry for mitigating the interfacial degradation and
improving the sodium ion battery performance (e.g. energy density, cycle life,
rate capability).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.