* 1912154
* Microscopy of Ultracold Polar Molecules in Optical Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Waseem Bakr, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 471,002.00

The world of microscopic particles like atoms or molecules is governed by the
laws of quantum mechanics. While these laws describe phenomena unfamiliar in our
daily experience, they can be used to engineer revolutionary technologies.
Examples include very precise clocks or powerful computers that can solve
intractable problems in diverse fields ranging from drug discovery to artificial
intelligence. A key requirement for harnessing the power of quantum mechanics
for many applications is gaining microscopic control over large systems of
interacting quantum particles. This award supports the development of an
instrument, a "molecular quantum gas microscope" that will achieve this level of
control in a gas of thousands of molecules. Even the very simple molecules used
in this experiment exhibit rich behaviors compared to atoms. For example,
molecules tumble in space, and the constituent atoms vibrate relative to each
other. In addition, molecules made of different atoms are "polar," behaving much
like fridge magnets that interact strongly even at a large distance. By cooling
molecular gases down to very low temperatures, the quantum nature of their
motions and their strong mutual interactions play an increasingly important role
and lead to the rearrangement of the molecules into unusual states of matter.
These states will be directly imaged and controlled at the level of individual
molecules using the molecular microscope. The project will further our
understanding of interacting quantum matter, with a potential impact on
designing materials with new technological properties. It also holds the
potential for realizing a molecule-based platform for quantum computing. The
research will train graduate students in the burgeoning field of quantum
science, preparing them for future careers in academia, industry and national
labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultracold gases of polar molecules are promising for
many applications including quantum computation, precision measurements and
studies of state-controlled chemical reactions. One application that has been
the subject of much recent attention is the quantum simulation of many-body
phenomena. The long-range and anisotropic character of the interactions between
polar molecules enables quantum simulations that address a variety of areas of
contemporary interest in condensed matter physics including out-of-equilibrium
quantum dynamics, topological matter and quantum magnetism. An outstanding
challenge in this emerging field is the ability to measure and manipulate the
quantum state of individual molecules in an interacting array. This project will
develop microscopy techniques that enable the extraction of the positions of
individual ground-state molecules in an optical lattice with single-site
accuracy and the determination of their rotational state. To that end, molecules
will be dissociated in a state-sensitive way into their constituent atoms, which
will be subsequently detected using well-developed atomic quantum gas microscopy
techniques. The project will also study the evaporation of the bosonic molecules
to quantum degeneracy, using a large electric field to suppress inelastic
collisions. The strong dipolar interactions in a degenerate molecular Bose gas
are expected to lead to novel phases of matter, including self-organized
crystals and fractional Mott insulators. The molecular quantum gas microscope
will enable direct imaging and control of these phases and their
excitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.