* 1912414
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of Cyber Physical System Education and Research Training in the Undergraduate Curriculum in the College of Engineering at TSU
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2023
* USD 388,672.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Tennessee State University will enhance undergraduate
education by establishing an interdisciplinary Cyber-Physical System (CPS)
program and prepare students to meet the needs of the workforce or advanced
studies in CPS related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CPS program spans the
departments of computer science and electrical and computer engineering. The
project will develop a state-of-the-art Cyber Physical System Research and
Education Laboratory that will provide opportunities for research, education,
and outreach in CPS for students and faculty; and incorporate learning modules
into the programs at the undergraduate level to meet the needs of the technology
workforce and impart essential knowledge and skills to prepare a competitive
workforce in CPS. In developing such a program, the project will adopt, in
contrast to the commonly used 'bottom-up' learning approach, a 'top-down'
reverse-engineering paradigm for imparting knowledge that would seek to orient
students with the paradigm of a CPS from an early stage with students gradually
gaining detailed understanding of its building blocks both from a theoretical
and practical perspective. The project will provide important insights into the
effectiveness of the top-down approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.