* 1912419
* Research in Gravitation Theory and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Lee Lindblom, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

The research supported by this award has impacts in a wide range of scientific
areas that extend well beyond gravitational astrophysics. Studies on neutron-
star physics could lead to more accurate methods of measuring the neutron-star
equation of state, and this could have an important impact on nuclear physics in
addition to relativistic astrophysics. The gravitational-wave searches could
lead to the first detections of gravitational waves from the r-modes of rotating
neutron stars. Such observations could provide a wealth of new information about
the fundamental micro-physical processes operating in the high density cores of
these stars. This work will also develop new methods for performing simulations
of Einstein's equations on manifolds with arbitrary topologies. These methods
could have impacts on cosmology and pure mathematics, in addition to fundamental
gravitation theory. Some of this research will involve graduate students, and
will therefore contribute to the development of the next generation of
gravitational astrophysicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work supported by this
grant will develop better mathematical methods for using observations of neutron
stars and our understanding of strong gravitational fields to determine the
neutron-star equation of state in a way that is free from any assumptions about
the microphysics of neutron star matter. Other projects include searches in the
publicly available LIGO data for gravitational waves emitted by the r-modes of
rotating neutron stars and new research in numerical relativity that involves
developing techniques for solving Einstein's equations on manifolds with
arbitrary spatial topologies. These methods will be used to study a variety of
problems, including an effort to explore the gravitational analog of the
turbulent cascade seen in fluid systems and exploring cosmological models
numerically to determine whether and how non-trivial topology could be
recognized through observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.