* 1912813
* Particle Physics at CMS in the High Luminosity Era
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Peter Wittich, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2023
* USD 3,225,000.00

This research project aims to better understand the Universe at the smallest
scales by probing nature's basic symmetries and their relation to the origin of
mass. The 2012 discovery of a Higgs boson with mass close to 125 GeV represents
both the crowning achievement of the Standard Model of particle physics and a
hint beyond it - how can a light Higgs boson possibly survive huge,
destabilizing quantum effects without new, undiscovered physics? Furthermore,
dark matter is known to exist from astronomical observations; however, the
particle properties of dark matter remain shrouded in mystery. The combined
activities of the Cornell University group address such basic questions puzzling
science - the origin of mass and the particle nature of dark matter - and have
the potential for surprising discoveries that may change the way we understand
our physical world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support
Cornell's work on the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN,
a particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. During the three-year
timeframe of this award, CMS will complete instrumentation upgrades and resume
data taking. Additionally during this period, the R&amp;D phase for the advance
upgrades of CMS for high luminosity HL-LHC operation will be completed, and
major construction of new detector subsystems will be initiated. The Cornell
group serves as a project leader of the broader HL-LHC effort of the US groups
on CMS, and has its own specific interests, including in the upgrade of the
forward pixel tracking detector and track-triggering for the experiment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the notable broader impacts activities of the
Cornell group, many include significant outreach to students and the public in
the upstate New York region through Xraise, the outreach office of the Cornell
Laboratory for Accelerator-based Sciences and Education. Xraise has developed a
significant number of teaching units and science kits for a "Lending Library"
that can be taken to schools or used in after-school programs to bring exciting
hands-on activities to hundreds of local children. The requests for teacher
training in support of such activities have far outnumbered the availability of
training opportunities. To increase the reach of this valuable program, the
Cornell group will produce videos to further expand upon the materials that are
available to support the Lending Library. This work and content development will
be done in close coordination with the Xraise professional staff, to identify
topic, length and target audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.