* 1912135
* Meeting: Plant Vascular Biology 2019 - Promoting Collaborative Research Across Disciplinary Boundaries, June 17-20, 2019, Monterey, California
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Mechthild Tegeder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

Plants are essential of our ecosystem and environment. They deliver the oxygen
and the food that humans and animals need to survive and provide many materials
for the everyday life including medicine, furniture, building supplies and
clothing. Crop plants as well as trees produce most of these resources, but the
future increase in human population, reduction of usable land and environmental
stresses impose a major challenge to agriculture and forestry. For example,
prolonged drought periods reduce crop yield and increase the risk of forest
mortality and wildfires. Plants have a vascular system that serves as the main
path for transport of water, mineral nutrients, and many other compounds
throughout the plant body. The vasculature is also essential for the
communication between shoot and root, and its structure and function directly
influences plant growth and productivity. The Plant Vascular Biology Conference
will address how plants respond to water deficient and drought, how nutrients
are taken up and transported from the soil to aerial portions of the plant, how
cell walls that are the bulk of biomass for bioenergy applications and forestry
are produced, and how plants survive environmental stresses such as nutrient
limitations and pathogen attacks. The meeting will facilitate an open forum for
sharing exciting innovations and foster new collaborative research. Participants
will learn about novel conceptual advances, latest techniques and technologies,
and major breakthroughs essential to produce food and other biological
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 5th International Conference on Plant
Vascular Biology will be held June 17-20 of 2019 at the Asilomar Conference
Center near Monterey, California. The triennial meeting has emerged as a highly
relevant and impactful event for the plant vascular biology community. It
encompasses multiple disciplines and addresses topics that are fundamental to
plant biology, ecological physiology, agriculture and forestry. Basic and
applied problems surrounding plant vascular biology will be addressed, and
technological and conceptual breakthroughs will be discussed in an encouraging
environment. The meeting will bring together about 150 scientists from around
the world, including the top research experts in the field. This meeting is a
primary conduit for introducing junior researchers to the diverse fields of
plant vascular biology. It fosters exchange of scientific knowledge and supports
collaborations between scientists of different career stages, gender, ethnicity
and nationality. The NSF funds will primary be used to support students,
postdocs and early-career scientists from underrepresented groups who might
otherwise not be able to attend the meeting. This award was co-funded by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the Integrative Ecological
Physiology Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.