* 1912256
* Implementation Project: Data Driven, Engagement Based, Adaptive Learning, Growth Mindset Pedagogy Informed Course Redesign with Early Research Experiences for STEM Student Success
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Eric Mintz, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,248,741.00

Implementation Projects provide support to Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs) to design, implement, study, and assess comprehensive
institutional efforts to increase the number of students receiving undergraduate
degrees in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) and enhance
the quality of their preparation by strengthen education and research. The
project at Clark Atlanta University seeks to build on previous successful
efforts to increase participation of African-American students in STEM
disciplines. The goal of the project is to provide students with cognitive and
non-cognitive skills development and early undergraduate research immersion,
while offering professional development opportunities to the faculty. The
project will impact all STEM majors at the institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will redesign and implement foundational STEM courses with adaptive
learning courseware and supplemental instruction; conduct workshops for students
on self-efficacy and growth mindset pedagogy; conduct faculty development
workshops on mentoring undergraduate students, new teaching pedagogies, self-
efficacy and growth mindset pedagogy; and provide STEM students with early
research experiences. Faculty from the School of Education will assess which of
these interventions or combination thereof are most effective. A research study
will be conducted to investigate the effect of these interventions on student
outcomes in STEM courses, as well as retention, persistence, and graduation
rates. The project will be guided and evaluated by advisory boards and
evaluators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.