* 1912871
* Acquisition of a Laser Flash Apparatus to simultaneously measure thermal diffusivity and heat capacity from 173 to 773 K
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2020
* USD 97,573.00

The flow of heat affects everyday activities such as cooking food, and is
important to engineering problems such as manufacturing small cell phones that
do not overheat. This award will provide funding for a new laser flash apparatus
for determining heat flow. This new instrument will add to the infrastructure
needed to advance fundamental issues in Earth and other physical sciences. It
will have many practical applications to problems involving heat
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award funds the acquisition of laser flash
apparatus, which will improve the database on heat transport, further
understanding of dynamic processes over a wide temperature range, and advance
thermal models used to address diverse problems in Earth and planetary science.
Problems possible to address include cooling of dust grains in meteorites,
crystallization and evolution of plutons, dissipation of friction during plate
motions, melting of the core, and deducing the thermal structure and evolution
of rocky and ice planetary bodies. These new data will permit addressing the
thermal structure and evolution of Solar System objects and exoplanets. Accurate
heat flow data also bear on engineering problems, since ceramics and glasses are
closely related, and sometimes identical, to the materials being
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.