* 1912550
* Physics and Astrophysics of Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Emanuele Berti, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2022
* USD 360,000.00

The principal objective of this award is to exploit gravitational-wave
observations to gain a deeper understanding of gravity and compact objects. Its
long-term goals are: (1) to maximize the scientific payoff from gravitational-
wave observations: what can we learn about fundamental gravitational physics,
and how will compact binary detections contribute to our understanding of the
Universe? (2) to improve our theoretical understanding of compact objects,
whether isolated or in binaries, in general relativity and in modified theories
of gravity. With the expected increase in volume coverage of LIGO/Virgo and the
operation of KAGRA in Japan, this work is timely, geared at enhancing the scope
of the physics and astrophysics enabled by ground-based interferometers. The
project will train a student in a highly interdisciplinary field that requires
expertise in general relativity, astrophysics, data analysis and high-energy
physics. The PI's newly established group at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) in
Baltimore has long-standing collaborations with groups in the US and in the EU.
This network of collaborations will ensure that the student funded by this
project will be trained in a vibrant international environment. A key goal of
the project is to strengthen collaborations between the gravitational physics
community and the larger physics and astrophysics communities at a crucial time
for the nascent field of gravitational-wave astronomy. JHU has formal
collaborations with the Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI) and NASA
Goddard (GSFC) and it is home to many world-leading experts in cosmology and
astrophysics, so this task will benefit enormously from the group's daily
interactions with JHU faculty and STScI astronomers. The PI has a strong track
record of training students and postdocs who developed into leading experts
working at the interface of these different fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first gravitational-wave detections by the LIGO/Virgo collaboration were a major
milestone. Large financial resources have been invested in detector design and
in compact binary detection templates, but for gravitational-wave science to
make even more groundbreaking contributions we must be able to go beyond
detections, extracting fundamental physics from the strong-gravity dynamics of
the sources. The PI will investigate the structure and dynamics of compact
objects in general relativity and in some well-motivated modified theories of
gravity. The theoretical insight gained from these investigations will be used
to devise a parametrized, theory-agnostic gravitational-wave data analysis
framework to quantify dynamical deviations from general relativity for compact
binary mergers in the strong-field regime. To address this problem, the PI's
group will adopt the following strategy: (1) identify the simplest, best-
motivated modified theories of gravity and physics beyond the Standard Model
that would produce black hole spacetimes and/or binary black hole gravitational
waveforms that differ from general relativity; (2) compute the corresponding
black hole solutions and (whenever possible) the gravitational waves emitted
during binary merger and ringdown using a combination of perturbation theory
and/or numerical relativity; (3) use these results to learn lessons on how to
parametrize strong-field deviations from general relativity in a theory-agnostic
way, and implement these parametrizations in gravitational-wave data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.