* 1912607
* Cooperative and Subradiant Phenomena in Quantum Optical Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Susanne Yelin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum optical systems, consisting of ensembles of atoms that can be probed by
laser light or by single light quanta, constitute a versatile platform for
quantum technologies, with broad potential applications ranging from long-lived
quantum memories for secure communication and robust quantum networks to quantum
computation. The implementations resulting from the novel models in this project
are relevant for applications such as atomic clocks or quantum simulation and
quantum information processing, long before an impact from so-called "universal
quantum computers" can be expected. Education of students from high school
through doctoral level can particularly benefit from delving into these topics:
quantum effects in general and quantum information science in particular are
well-proven magnets for student learning and research involvement. This appeal
will specifically be used to attract and retain underrepresented groups into
academic research on quantum technologies. In addition, new teaching techniques
that are largely based on recent physics education research will be tested on
advanced physics classes to improve learning outcomes for classes that are not
primary recipients for additional teaching resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
ensemble-based quantum optics, the spontaneous emission of atoms into the vacuum
modes of the environment and the subsequent loss of information into these
undesired channels sets a fundamental performance limit. Such spontaneous
emission is typically assumed to be an independent process for each atom. The
goal of this project is to challenge this assumption; indeed, dissipation must
be correlated to account for the interference between light emitted by different
atoms. The nature of this correlated dissipation can be exquisitely controlled
and engineered in systems such as gases in different geometries and ordered
atomic arrays. For instance, it could lead to entire manifolds of protected -
so-called "subradiant" - states whose decay rates approach zero with increasing
system size. Alternatively, controlling the response of the atomic medium by
combining spontaneous emission with strong, long-range interactions could enable
the realization of collective or entangled many-body states across distant
atoms. This project will address the following questions: (i) How can one
efficiently describe such states, characterize them for various geometries, and
how can one modify the calculation depending on system parameters and degree of
entanglement? (ii) Looking at the particular example of two-dimensional arrays,
how can subradiant states be accessed, used in the context of topological
states, and how can this knowledge be potentially transferred to (experimentally
easier-to-access) single-layer semiconductor states? (iii) How can this research
be applied in order to control and probe cooperatively narrowed clock states, to
create resource states for quantum information processing, or to utilize
cooperative effects for molecule cooling?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.