* 1912194
* CRCNS Research Proposal:Topological and Dynamical Structures of Brain Development and Sexual-Dimorphism in C. Elegans
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Liam Paninski, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 03/31/2023
* USD 999,993.00

The development of the nervous system, specifically the dynamics of neuronal
development and wiring to build brain architecture and their constructive role
in emergent brain activity, constitutes a central unexplained phenomenon in
living systems. The study of developing brains requires a comprehensive and
systematic characterization of the brain of an organism at different ages and a
suitable mathematical framework, able to capture the structure of the growing
nervous system and the emerging networks therein. We propose to address this
fundamental challenge by developing such a mathematical framework capable of
characterizing underlying network changes in living brains and their
consequences for functional neural activity and resulting behavior. This
mathematical framework will be applied to analyze the complete nervous system,
at single-cell precision, of the model organism C. elegans. To address these
important challenges, we have assembled an interdisciplinary team with expertise
in topology, computational biology, statistics, theoretical physics,
neuroscience and biology of the model organism. Our group will develop new
mathematical, statistical, and computational tools to characterize the structure
of developing brain networks. This analysis will reveal shared-organizational,
emergent principles of nervous-system development and function. Based on the
widespread representation of biological data as complex networks and the
universality of the mathematical, statistical, and computational methods we will
develop, we expect wide applicability beyond the original
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aforementioned approach will be led by
experiments that aim at providing multiple views of a developing network and
their functional consequences to whole-brain activity. We will analyze the brain
at two levels: changes to the underlying network as a consequence of extensive
neural additions and connective neural (re-)wiring. We will compare the
developing network at two transition periods: early maturation from the first to
the second larval stage and, later, maturation of the two different sexes. In
both of these developmental periods, newborn neurons grow the existing brain
network, considerably, by roughly a third in size. In order to characterize the
global properties of the data collected from these two different layers (neural
network and brain activity) and to study the maps between them, we will develop
tools based on topological data analysis (TDA) and Bayesian inference
techniques. TDA provides methodology derived from algebraic topology that can be
used to extract global features in large datasets. As a relatively new field,
there are several major roadblocks that obstruct the wide applicability of TDA
to biological systems, including the development of statistical approaches,
comparison (homomorphisms) of networks (simplicial complexes), and time-series
analysis. These tools will be then applied to study biological datasets that
describe the developing brain network and changes to neurobehavioral activity
therein. In particular, we will characterize basal networks and those for
attractive and aversive behavior, for whole brains at a single-cell level,
during developmental transitions that are known to restructure this behavioral
network at both the level of input and output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.