* 1912522
* Nucleon Structure and Hadronization Beyond the Collinear Leading Twist Parton Model
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Matthias Burkardt, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2023
* USD 211,036.00

It has been a long-standing question in nuclear physics of how the nucleon, the
main building block of the matter that we are made of, is built from fundamental
strongly-interacting elementary particles, the quarks and gluons. This project
will address this question by studying correlations and 3-dimensional momentum
distributions of quarks and gluons in the nucleon. To this end experimentally
measurable observables are theoretically analyzed for nuclear reactions that can
be realized at US-based facilities like the Jefferson Laboratory (JLab), the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), and the future Electron-Ion Collider
(EIC), as well as other facilities worldwide. The underlying microscopic theory
on which this research is based is Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). Several
observables that are of interest for this project need spin polarization of the
beam or the target, or even the produced final state particles. The theoretical
analyses of those spin observables require methods and precision calculations
that go beyond the common standard theoretical approaches for unpolarized
nuclear reactions. The PI will mentor graduate students and include an
undergraduate student in this research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
goal of this project is a theoretical investigation of the nucleon structure as
well as parton fragmentation within perturbative QCD. It is intended to study
observables of high-energy nuclear processes beyond the standard leading twist
collinear factorization approach. The focus is on two key areas: 1) Transverse
spin effects in single-inclusive nuclear processes within the collinear twist-3
formalism. 2) Transverse momentum dependent gluon distributions in polarized and
unpolarized proton collisions. The outcome of these studies will have direct
impact for experimental programs at JLab, RHIC, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
and a future EIC. The main thrusts of the project are: i) Theoretical analyses
of transverse spin-polarized observables in single-inclusive nuclear reactions
in the framework of collinear twist-3 formalism: The goal is to perform next-to-
leading (NLO) calculations for transverse-spin observables and to study the
scale dependence of three-parton correlation functions. Furthermore, the PI will
investigate the feasibility of photonic final state in lepton-nucleon collisions
at JLab and EIC; ii) Exploration of the gluonic substructure of the nucleon
within Transverse Momentum Dependent (TMD) factorization: TMD analyses of
various gluon-induced spin observables in proton-proton collisions at RHIC with
Heavy Quarkonia in the final state are considered including implementation of
TMD evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.