* 1912313
* Targeted Infusion Project: Academic Enhancement of Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering Program at Tennessee State University through IoT Research and Integrated Learning Environm
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Leehyun Keel, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,170.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Tennessee State University will enhance undergraduate
education in the Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) department to prepare
students to meet the needs of the workforce related to the Internet of Things
(IoT) or advanced studies in IoT. Undergraduate students are involved in the
project as researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key goal of this project is
the utilization of cyberlearning or technology tools to supplement and
facilitate learning experiences to prepare students with the knowledge and
skills required to meet the demand of the industry and the R&amp;D community
related to IoT. The project has the objectives to: improve the undergraduate
curricula in several courses in the ECE program by integrating IoT theory and
concepts; utilize technology tools to facilitate student IoT cyberlearning
experiences to supplement curricular knowledge; and provide research experiences
to undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.