* 1912594
* Gravitational-Wave Data Science with a LIGO at Caltech
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alan Weinstein, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational wave detector commissioning and
characterization, as well as data analysis and it addresses the priority areas
of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. Gravitational-wave (GW) astronomy
has entered a new era, when detected events (so far, from the merger of compact
binary systems: binary black holes and binary neutron stars) will become
frequent. The Advanced LIGO detectors are continuously improving their
sensitivity to GWs; this will result in unprecedented rates of discoveries of
compact object mergers, and the potential for many discoveries of GWs from other
astrophysical sources. Whole new classes of sources may be discovered. These
observations will enable a wealth of studies and new scientific results in
astronomy, cosmology, and fundamental physics. Observations of binary black hole
mergers are used to understand stellar evolution and the formation, evolution
and death of binaries. They enable uniquely powerful tests of general relativity
as a theory of gravity in the strong-field, highly-relativistic regime where
detectable GWs are produced. Observations of binary neutron star mergers enable
constraints on the nuclear equation of state, unique measurements of the local
Hubble-Lemaitre parameter, studies of gamma-ray burst physics, and insights into
the origins of the heavy elements in the universe (including gold, platinum and
uranium). All of these studies are made possible through the construction and
operation of the incredibly sensitive LIGO and Virgo detectors. The Caltech
group, working with the LIGO Laboratory and LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC),
continuously improves the detectors' sensitivity, precisely calibrates the
strain data, characterizes detector behavior to evaluate and improve data
quality, and releases the data to the public. These studies also depend
crucially on the ability to identify weak GW signals from astrophysical sources
in the noisy data, using highly optimized search pipelines. We also use the
scientific computing required to analyze LIGO data as a tool to engage high
school juniors and seniors in the local area in gravitational-wave physics and
astronomy, introducing programming and more broadly applying the scientific
method through hands-on GW data science projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our work
is devoted to discovering and analyzing gravitational-wave (GW) signals in the
LIGO, Virgo and KAGRA detectors during LIGO's observing runs O3 and O4. The
proposed work focuses on: (a) Identifying GW signals from compact binary mergers
in data from LIGO, Virgo, and KAGRA, using both of the LSC ``flagship'' search
pipelines, PyCBC and gstlal; (b) using the Hidden Markov Model Viterbi algorithm
to search for long-duration burst GWs from compact binary mergers, continuous
GWs (CGWs) from newly-formed, rapidly spinning neutron stars in our galaxy, and
other sources that produce narrow-band signals with potentially wandering
central frequency; and (c) validation of candidate events (including CGW
candidates) found by these pipelines, with special attention to data quality,
calibration, and search pipeline specifics. We will build on our existing
expertise and experience in all of these efforts, and extend them to the era of
frequent detections by automating routine tasks. We will exploit our expertise
in low-latency data handling, strain calibration, detector characterization and
data quality evaluation, and search pipelines. The results of these efforts will
make it possible to make confident detections of GW events as they become
frequent, and make the information obtained available to the LSC, to the
astronomical community, and to the public, promptly, so that they can be fully
exploited by those communities to advance gravitational-wave
astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.