* 1912827
* I-Corps:  Team HexaFeast National
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Goggy Davidowitz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to create an
integrated food-energy-water system that uses agricultural waste to generate a
high-protein food product. Large-scale use of agricultural waste (mostly leafy
greens) as a food source for mealworms, which are a dry-goods pests and do not
survive on wet foods. This project will develop a passive solar dryer to dry
agricultural waste on a large scale with very little energy input and high
efficiency so that it can be set up any where in the world near agricultural
fields. This system for producing protein for human consumption is designed to
have a water-use footprint close to zero. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will develop the large-scale use of agricultural waste (mostly leafy
greens) as a food source for mealworms. Second, mealworms are dry-goods pests
and do not survive on wet foods. This project will develop a passive solar dryer
to dry agricultural waste on a large scale with very little energy input. It is
the company's intent to develop the dryer with minimal moving parts and high
efficiency so that it can be set up any where in the world near agricultural
fields. Third, this system for producing protein for human consumption is
designed to have a water-use footprint close to zero. Mealworms growth
performance increases dramatically at high relative humidity. The passive solar
dryer will dehydrate the agricultural waste to a dryness appropriate for the
mealworms. The water released during desiccation will be recaptured and reused
to humidify the mealworm rearing facility. Together, the intellectual merit lies
in an integrated system to produce a high quality food source with minimal
energy and water need, that can be set up relatively inexpensively anywhere in
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.