* 1912575
* Novel Quantum Phase Transitions and Non-Equilibrium Dynamics in Lattice-Confined Spinor Condensates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Yingmei Liu, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 363,490.00

This project is targeted towards applying a sodium spinor Bose-Einstein
condensate (BEC) to study the interplay and applications of superfluidity,
strong correlations, and quantum magnetism. BECs are ultra-cold gases in which
all atoms have a single collective wavefunction for their spatial degrees of
freedom. With an additional spin degree of freedom, these BECs constitute a
fascinating collective quantum system offering an unprecedented degree of
control over such parameters as spin, density, temperature, and the
dimensionality of the system. The aims of this project are both of fundamental
interest for advancing our understanding of quantum physics, and of
technological significance. Beyond these specific research goals, this project
provides opportunities to integrate research and teaching by involving
undergraduate and graduate students in research projects. The principal
investigator (PI) will endeavor to broaden the participation of under-
represented groups, including Native American students, women in physics, and
potential "first-generation" college students. The PI will organize workshops
for local high school teachers and their students to get hands-on experience
with state-of-the-art laser cooling techniques, and to develop physics projects
matched to the students' level. This project will enhance the infrastructure for
science education in the region and encourage more students to pursue a career
in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will perform important studies on
an antiferromagnetic sodium spinor BEC confined in three-dimensional optical
lattices and microwave dressing fields, i.e., investigate the dynamics of first-
order superfluid to Mott-insulator quantum phase transitions, reveal a quantum-
phase-revival spectroscopy driven by a competition between spin-dependent and
spin-independent interactions, precisely determine various scattering lengths of
spinor gases, and demonstrate an experimental signature of spin-dependent three-
body interactions. Advantages provided by a bichromatic optical super-lattice
will also be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.