* 1912930
* Collaborative Research: Massively Parallel Simulations of Compact Objects
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Hari Sundar, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
LIGO and VIRGO gravitational wave detectors are beginning to make new
discoveries on a weekly basis. The gravitational waves that they detect are
generated in the mergers of two compact objects, such as black holes or neutron
stars. Gravitational waves carry important information about their origin that
can extracted through careful comparisons to theoretical calculations, such as
full-scale computer simulations of binary mergers. This project will study
mergers of binary neutron stars and black holes using computer simulations
created by Dendro-GR, a new computer code that runs very efficiently on the
largest supercomputers. This work will also help push forward current
computational capabilities to permit better and faster waveform calculations to
be made. These efforts will aid in expanding the use of gravitational wave
detections from confirming general relativity to providing additional, even more
stringent tests of both the theory and other possible competing theories.
Combining data from computer simulations with both gravitational and
electromagnetic observations will allow us to probe, in a manner heretofore
impossible, the physics of black holes and neutron stars, of gamma-ray bursts,
of kilonovae and supernovae, and of even the formation of the heaviest elements
on the periodic table. Work done for this project will promote the progress of
science and contribute to undergraduate and graduate training in multiple STEM
fields including computer science, mathematics, and physics. Finally, Dendro-GR
is an open source project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching purpose of this
project is to study the dynamics of merging binary compact objects at the
frontier of current computational capabilities. The wavelet-based refinement and
computational efficiency of Dendro-GR allows the modeling of a wider variety of
possible merger scenarios, enhancing the ability to both detect and understand
these high-energy events, as well as search for possible new physics beyond our
current gravitational models. The efforts will be directed primarily at the
following goals: (1) Deploying new computational algorithms and abilities to
determine gravitational waveforms for binary neutron star inspirals and mergers
of sufficient accuracy that they are usable in improved waveform catalogs. (2)
Investigating binary black hole inspirals and mergers with large mass ratios
both to understand this class of largely unexplored binaries and to expand the
range of current waveform catalogs. (3) Calculating waveforms from binary black
hole mergers within a family of alternative gravitational theories in order to
probe possible deviations from the predictions of general relativity and to
search for new physics beyond our current model for
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.