* 1912915
* CAREER:  Unlocking Microbial Condensed Tannin Resistance Mechanisms: Scaling from Enzymes to Biomes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Kelly Wrighton, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 884,654.00

Compounds known as condensed tannins (CTs) impact the ability of microbial
communities to synthesize biofuels, detoxify industrial waste streams, perform
critical carbon cycling in soils, and fuel nutrition in humans and animals.
Despite their global importance, microbial responses to CTs are currently a
mystery. This research project targets this substantial knowledge gap to
identify the microorganisms and their enzymes that degrade CTs across a range of
ecosystems. Beyond scientific advances, this project will also support
significant curricular development in the introductory microbiology course at
The Ohio State University. Through the development of a Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE), this project will allow hundreds of
undergraduate student-scientists to perform authentic research; experiences
shown to enhance scientific education and boost retention of students in
scientific disciplines. This project will create a modified undergraduate
laboratory class where CURE students participate in the discovery and
classification of CT degrading microorganisms new to science, generating data
that will be integrated into the research aims of this project. Additionally,
the scientific data generated here will be transmitted more broadly to the
scientific community via the production of an interactive, web-based
bioinformatics platform. As part of the integrated research and educational
objectives, this research will generate fundamental knowledge of CT-microbe
interactions with direct applications to agricultural, industrial, and health
resource management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today the diversity of
microorganisms, enzymes, and pathways mediating microbial CT degradation are
currently unknown. The overarching goal of this research project is to test the
central hypothesis that mechanisms for tolerance and degradation of CTs are
widely encoded in microbial genomes across ecosystems, yet currently represent a
cryptic microbial metabolism. This project tracks CT metabolism from organismal
to ecosystem scales, identifying the enzymatic catalysts of organismal CT
tolerance and degradation, the coordinated responses to CT perturbation in
microbial communities, and the extent of CT metabolisms across ecosystems. Here,
parallel isolate and community genomics paired to expression analyses and high-
resolution CT metabolite data will elucidate the organisms, enzymes, and
metabolisms mediating CT degradation and resistance. Outcomes from this research
project include (1) knowledge of the microbial physiology and ecology of CTs,
(2) discovery of novel degradative enzymes that are likely common to anaerobic
microorganisms, (3) development of a CT library of biological and metabolite
signatures resulting in the identification of microbial polyphenolics and their
degradation products.