* 1912719
* Flavorful New Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Wolfgang Altmannshofer, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2020
* USD 133,064.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Wolfgang Altmannshofer at
the University of Cincinnati.

Particle physics has reached a pivotal point. The Standard Model of particle
physics provides a remarkably successful description of the fundamental building
blocks of Nature and the forces acting among them. The absence of clear
experimental evidence thus far for physics beyond the Standard Model challenges
the idea of "naturalness" as the guiding principle in the search for new
physics. It is therefore becoming more and more crucial to broadly explore new
regimes of physics beyond the Standard Model. The research of Professor
Altmannshofer will serve the national interest by advancing our understanding of
the basic building blocks of matter and their interactions. In particular, his
research aims to address the following fundamental questions: Is the Higgs boson
the origin of mass of all the known elementary matter particles? Are there new
fundamental forces among elementary particles beyond the strong, the weak, and
the electromagnetic interactions? Do elementary matter particles posses
characteristic properties other than their mass and interactions that allow us
to distinguish them? As part of the proposed program, Professor Altmannshofer
will also strengthen and extend the existing particle-physics outreach program
at the Physics Department of the University of Cincinnati. Students and teachers
from local high schools will be invited to the department to participate in
hands-on activities and to learn about the latest cutting-edge developments in
particle physics. More technically, Professor Altmannshofer will construct and
classify novel frameworks of mass generation for the light quarks and leptons
and identify their characteristic signatures at high-energy and high-intensity
experiments. He will also develop new ways to search for feeble interactions
among leptons and neutrinos at current and future neutrino facilities at
Fermilab. Furthermore, he will develop sophisticated methods to search for new
sources of flavor and CP violation using rare b hadron decays that largely
eliminate hadronic uncertainties. Without such methods, the new physics
sensitivity of rare b decays is limited by poorly understood hadronic
contributions, and current hints for anomalies in the rare b decay data cannot
be clarified. Professor Altmannshofer's research program will provide several
new and improved search strategies for physics beyond the Standard Model that
are critical in enhancing the prospects for discovery at the energy and
intensity frontiers.