* 1912293
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Neural Computations Underlying Mechanical -Flow Sensing in Zebrafish
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Florian Engert, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sridhar Raghavachari
* 11/30/2022
* USD 507,000.00

In recent years, the zebrafish has emerged as an important model organism as
researchers have become able to obtain detailed information about the
connectivity and activity of its brain. The laboratory of the Principal
Investigator recently presented work that makes use of this wealth of available
information to better understand zebrafish behavior at the level of specific
neural circuitry. To that end, a realistic network model, composed of
experimental verified functional cell types, was developed that accurately
models the fish's tendency to swim in a particular direction in response to a
moving visual stimulus. The purpose of this collaboration project is to develop
a similar theoretical circuit model for mechanosensory-based rheotaxis, a more
sophisticated behavior that also is displayed readily by larval zebrafish. The
project combines experimental and computational approaches, and constitutes a
significant step towards establishing the larval zebrafish as a vertebrate model
where whole-brain imaging can be combined with whole-brain circuit modelling in
order to generate a unified theoretical basis for the holistic study of neural
circuits. The project also provides undergraduate and graduate students from
diverse backgrounds opportunities to receive hands-on laboratory
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step towards the scientific goal of
the project, the investigators demonstrated that larval zebrafish can perform
efficient rheotaxis in complete darkness and in the absence of any other direct
cues from the external reference frame. Furthermore, the investigators showed
that this behavior requires the presence of a flow velocity gradient, and
presented behavioral data that support a novel algorithm that fish use to
efficiently navigate laminar flow: detailed behavioral analysis shows that fish
use the hair-cells of their lateral line to measure (1) the curl of the local
velocity vector field to detect the presence of flow, and (2) the temporal
change in curl magnitude following swim bouts to deduce flow direction. As such,
a precise and predictive algorithm is presented, whose quantitative description
allows to examine its neural implementation, and eventually to generate a
realistic and testable circuit model of all brain areas involved in executing
this computation. The complementary expertise of the researchers of the two
participating laboratories allows testing, verification, and refinement of this
model-circuit based on an iterative combination of whole-brain imaging, genetic
perturbations and quantitative modeling. A companion project is being funded by
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.