* 1912704
* Direct and Inverse Scattering Problems in Elastic Waves: Analysis and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Peijun Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 12/31/2022
* USD 149,782.00

Scattering problems are concerned with the effect that an inhomogeneous medium
has on an incident field. Driven by significant applications in diverse
scientific areas such as radar and sonar, geophysical exploration,
nondestructive testing, medical imaging, near-field optical microscopy, and
nano-optics,&lt;br/&gt;the scattering problems have been extensively studied by
many researchers, especially for acoustic and electromagnetic waves. However,
many theoretical analysis and numerical computation are left undone for elastic
waves due to the complexity of the underlying model equations. The research is
multidisciplinary by nature and lies at the interface of mathematics, physics,
engineering, and materials sciences. It will contribute towards better
understandings of the complex physical and mathematical problems in scattering
theory of elasticity. It has significant potential for advancing the frontiers
of applied and computational mathematics, and for evolving new mathematics and
science. The results of the proposed research activities will be disseminated
through publications, seminars, minisymposia, conferences, and workshops. The PI
will introduce an advanced graduate course and a graduate seminar series. These
will aid in the recruitment and retention of talented students with diverse
backgrounds throughout the academic pipeline. The software codes and new course
materials developed in the project will be disseminated on a public website and
will be available for download by the scientific community. The research and
educational components will be integrated together to help to train a new
generation of researchers and foster greater awareness and interests in applied
and computational mathematics with particular applications to scattering theory
among graduate students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
outlines a three-year research plan for developing effective mathematical
models, examining fundamental mathematical issues, and designing efficient
computational methods for new and important classes of direct and inverse
scattering problems in elastic waves. The proposed research builds on the PI?s
prior research accomplishments in the area of scattering theory for acoustic and
electromagnetic waves. It concerns the following three topics: (1) time-domain
obstacle scattering problem; (2) time-harmonic medium scattering problem; (3)
inverse random source scattering problem. The mathematical modeling and analysis
techniques and computational methods developed in this project will address
several key scientific challenges and open problems in direct and inverse
scattering theory for elastic waves, which include modeling and computation of
the elastic wave propagation in an inhomogeneous medium, numerical solution of
the elastic wave equations and well-posedness of the associated model,
uniqueness and stability of stochastic inverse source scattering problem. The
proposed computational models and tools are highly promising for quantitative
study of the complex physical and mathematical problems in elasticity. They have
great potentials to provide inexpensive and easily controllable virtual
prototypes of the structures in the design and fabrication of novel elastic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.