* 1912410
* Quantitative microfluidic NAT-on-USB: towards routine HIV viral load testing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Weihua Guan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,493.00

HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, continues to be a significant public health
issue. Fortunately, HIV can be effectively managed if people of HIV can be
identified and their virus is controlled to undetectable levels by
antiretroviral therapy. Increasing access to routine viral load testing can help
reduce the treatment failure rate by early detection of viral rebound caused by
either drug resistance or poor therapy adherence. To this end, HIV self-testing,
a process in which individual who wants to know HIV status collects a specimen,
performs a test and interprets the result in private, has become an empowering
and innovative approach. Existing HIV self-testing methods rely almost
exclusively on lateral flow based test to detect host antibody response to HIV
infection. They could miss a significant portion of asymptomatic individuals
during the 6-12 weeks of early infection window; they also lack the ability for
detection of viral rebound. Nucleic acid testing is currently the only method
for viral load quantification. Nevertheless, its use by laypersons is limited
due to the sample handling and assay complexity. The proposed research has the
potential to significantly enhance the treatment outcomes for individuals of HIV
under antiretroviral therapy. In addition, with educational and outreach
activities, the proposed research is well positioned to enhance the integrative
learning experience and to engage multidisciplinary students at many
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research objective of this proposal is
to explore an ultra-compact quantitative nucleic acid testing (NAT) on a
disposable microfluidic chip with a USB analyzer to detect HIV-1 viral rebound
that is simple enough for laypersons to test themselves to monitor treatment
adherence. The goal is to develop and validate a whole blood-based test that can
semi-quantitatively assess the presence of HIV-1 RNA at cell concentrations as
low as 1000 copies/ml. The test can be performed similarly to a home blood
glucose test with a single step of finger-prick blood loading. To this end, four
research tasks regarding the microfluidic sample preparation, amplification
assay, USB analyzer integration, and analytical validation will be pursued. Task
1. Automated microfluidic sample preparation. A streamlined microfluidic chip
for automated plasma separation and RNA extraction from whole blood will be
developed. Task 2. An HIV-1 Real-time reverse transcription loop-mediated
isothermal amplification assay will be optimized and the lowest possible limit
of detection will be explored. Task 3. Analyzer integration and small-scale
prototyping. The analyzer hardware and software will be developed and integrated
for easy and robust operation. Task 4. Laboratory validation with control
samples. The prototyped device will be validated in lab settings using HIV-1
plasma samples spiked into whole blood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.