* 1912408
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Research for Social Justice - Broadening Participation through Data Science
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Alade Tokuta, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 349,957.00

Researchers at North Carolina Central University propose to examine the impact
of incorporating social justice projects in data science courses to improve
students? understanding of data science and increase STEM persistence among
underrepresented minority students. The assumption is that STEM can serve as a
vehicle for addressing social inequities, a topic of interest to the targeted
population. The project aims also to produce a pool of fifteen well-vetted and
rigorously developed data science projects that infuse social justice issues
aligned with the interests of underrepresented students. The project will
document the process of integrating the projects into the curriculum and will
make accessible through a website the materials, facilitator guides, and
accompanying resources to enable replication and scalability of the research
outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use a mixed-methods design-
based approach to build the evidence base for the pedagogical innovation and
examine the efficacy of the implementation process. The broad framework of
Contextual Teaching and Learning and problem-based Learning frameworks will
guide the following research questions: (1) To what extent does the application
of data science projects grounded in social justice influence enrollment and
retention outcomes at an HBCU and its affiliated Early College High School? (2)
How does the application of data science projects grounded in social justice
impact the socio-cognitive factors known to mediate and moderate STEM
enrollment, persistence, and success? and (3) What are the key features of this
pathway model that will guide replication efforts by other STEM programs at
institutions? The content of data science grounded in social justice projects
will be delivered through an existing project-based course that is required for
all students. The Successive Approximation Model or iterative design-develop-
test process will guide the collection and analysis of data to assess the degree
to which the project materials are usable, of high quality, and endorsed. The
project is expected to provide empirical evidence of an effective model to
address underrepresentation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.