* 1912188
* Targeted Infusion Project: Engaging Undergraduates in STEM using Drosophila Behavioural Genetics (EUSTEM-DaBuGs TIP)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Tanina Bradley, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,501.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students in STEM graduate programs
and/or careers. The project at North Carolina Central University (NCCU) will
develop an integrated undergraduate education, training, and research initiative
in behavioral genetics and engineering design by creating Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) in two courses: a sophomore elective
and a junior required course. The infusion of cross-disciplinary CUREs into two
biology courses, development of a cross-disciplinary summer research experience
and the strengthening of the existing relationships with surrounding Research
institutions will have a direct impact on students and faculty at NCCU. The
project will facilitate student retention and motivate underrepresented minority
students (URM) to pursue graduate studies and/or careers in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to educate,
train, and provide cross-disciplinary research experiences to URM students at
NCCU; thus, facilitating a successful undergraduate matriculation within STEM
majors and into graduate programs at nearby Research-1 institutions (Duke, UNC-
Chapel Hill and NC State University). The specific goals are: 1) to infuse real-
world research experiences including engineering design challenges and measuring
Drosophila Behaviours and relating these behaviors to Genetics (DaBuGs) through
two CURE courses and 2) to have sophomore/junior-level research fellows
participate in a cross-disciplinary, summer research experience tied to a
research mentoring course with the primary goal of completing authentic research
and design projects begun in the two CURE courses. The long-term goal is to
create an integrated engineering and DaBuGs education, training, and research
initiative at NCCU. This is expected to increase student performance and
enthusiasm in STEM, and expose URM students to engineering design and behavioral
research through the sophomore- and junior-level biology
CUREs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.