* 1912932
* Collaborative Research: Do improved absolute plate motion models based on Cretaceous Western Pacific seamounts relate Louisville to Ontong-Java?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Anthony Koppers, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 424,293.00

Earth’s oceans contain a significant number of volcanic structures, many of
which remain unexplored and/or unexplained. Some of these structures form chains
of progressively older volcanoes, known as seamount trails, which were
originally thought to result from Earth’s tectonic plates moving over a fixed
“hot” spot in the mantle, producing melt that builds the volcanoes in sequence
over time. In the commonly accepted explanation for this volcanic activity, a
rising mantle plume delivers material and heat that produce the melt that
constructs the volcanoes. In modeling such dynamics, the initial arrival of the
plume “head” generates an unusually large amount of melt represented by a large
igneous province, while the plume tail generates an age-progressive chain of
volcanoes that record the motion of the tectonic plate since the initial
eruption of the hotspot. This understanding has led to the fundamental
definition of the motions of Earth’s plates. However, in the case of the most
voluminous large igneous province - the Ontong-Java Plateau in the western
Pacific - a volcanic seamount trail that should be created by a plume tail has
not yet been confirmed. The Louisville hotspot has been proposed as a possible
candidate hotspot emerging from the Ontong-Java Plateau and generating the
Louisville seamount chain, however current models for plate motion suggest a
mismatch between the two. A close look at the way plate motion models for the
Pacific Plate have been constructed back to the age of the Ontong-Java Plateau
(~120 Ma) suggests that some of the volcanic structures, and assumptions used,
introduce sufficient uncertainty to merit a reassessment of plate motion models
prior to 70 Ma. Alternative plate motion models may allow for a Louisville and
Ontong-Java Plateau relationship. This model is testable by studying an
alternative hotspot track—with a continuous record of volcanism extending back
to 120 Ma—that has recently been recognized. Results have significant
implications for understanding tectonic plate motion, as well as the
relationship between large igneous provinces and hotspot tracks. This project
will have a significant training component for future scientists: the project
will include an at-sea rock sampling expedition that will provide seagoing
experience to 7 undergraduates from 3 institutions with significant under-
represented student populations, 2 graduate students, 1 postdoctoral
investigator, and 3 early career scientists. Post-expedition analytical work
will define a significant part of the graduate students’ advanced degree work
and an important part of the work of one postdoctoral investigator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this study is to improve our
understanding of (absolute) plate motion and the relation to and evolution of
plume-derived hotspot tracks. In current absolute plate motion models, the time
period prior to 70 Ma heavily relies on atypical volcanic structures that do not
clearly relate to long-lived hotspot tracks, including: 1) Mid-Pacific
Mountains, Line Islands; 2) Shatsky, Hess Rise, Musician Seamounts, Wentworth
Seamounts; and 3) Wake Seamounts, Marshall Islands, Magellan Seamounts.
Reassessing new and existing data from the Mid- and West-Pacific suggests only
the last of these groups may faithfully represent absolute plate motion. A
preliminary (based on sparse existing data) absolute plate motion model suggests
that these seamounts could be related to the current South Pacific hotspots of
Samoa and Rurutu (Arago). In this project, we will test the hypotheses that 1)
Wake-Marshall-Magellan relate to Samoa and Rurutu (Arago) hotspots, and that 2)
the plate motion model that can be derived from the new data relates Louisville
with the Ontong-Java Plateau. These hypotheses will be tested by sampling the
Wake-Marshall-Magellan seamounts with a 37-day dredging expedition. Rock samples
will be analyzed for their major, trace element and isotopic compositions, and
their ages will be determined, in order to properly trace the Samoa and Rurutu
(Arago) hotspots into the West Pacific. The resulting hotspot tracks will be
used to construct a new (absolute) plate motion model, particularly for the
period prior to 70 Ma, and this model will be used to evaluate the potential
connection between Louisville and the Ontong-Java
Plateau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.