* 1912057
* GRC Environmental Nanotechnology: Preventing and Solving Problems with Environmental Nanotechnology
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Rebecca Klaper, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 11/30/2019
* USD 49,400.00

Nanomaterials are being developed for use in several applications including
coatings, antimicrobials, components in sunscreens, electronics, catalysts, and
other products. With their growing use is the potential that these materials may
cause environmental harm. However, other uses of nanomaterials include
technologies for monitoring the health of the environment, environmental
cleanup, and water treatment which will ultimately positively impact the
environment. This 5th Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Nanotechnology
will focus on advancing the understanding of how nanomaterials may interact with
environmental systems and how they may be developed toward beneficial uses to
help manage our water and environment. The Environmental Nanotechnology GRC is
one of the most interactive conferences on this topic, and often is a platform
for the generation of new ideas that go on to heavily influence the field.
Participants include researchers from graduate students to professors, industry
and government representatives, and international scientists which encourages
stimulating discussions concerning the latest developments in the field from
across the globe. The research presented and developed in relation to the
Environmental Nanotechnology GRC is key to the sustainable development of this
technology. The open exchange of ideas is a GRC hallmark and the collaborations
and ideas that originate at this conference is fundamental in advancing the
science of the biological and environmental interactions of nanoscale materials.
The activities of the GRC and the affiliated Graduate Research Seminar build
opportunities for early-career scientists by integrating these new scientists
into a non-intimidating environment to discuss their current research and build
informal networks with their peers that may lead to a lifetime of collaboration
and scientific achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 5th GRC on the topic will
discuss the next steps in the field and focus on topics such as advances in
nanomaterial design, developments towards creating the next generation of
materials, as well as new, advanced applications related to the environment
including nano- enabled sensing technologies, environmental cleanup, and water
and wastewater treatment. The potential environmental impacts of the use of
nanomaterials continues to be a theme in this meeting with special attention to
the interaction at the interfaces of nanomaterials and biological components.
The 2019 GRC will also include a session on modeling and the development of
predictive tools that probe nanoparticle behavior, transport and transformation.
In addition, the development and application of in situ characterization
techniques to reliably measure nanomaterial presence, transport, and interaction
in the often-complex surrounding environment, will be explored. The meeting will
be held from June 2-7, 2019 in Newry, Maine (Sunday River Ski Resort). This will
also be the third time we develop and promote the associated Graduate Research
Seminar (GRS), which brings together graduate students, and early career
scientists to engage in discussions concerning the scientific advances in
research and development. Opportunities for career development and mentoring
will also be available at the seminar.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.