* 1912371
* Community Policing, Governance, and Security
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Laurence Ralph, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 113,200.00

This project seeks to explore how different stakeholders grapple with national
debates about community policing and enforcement by examining the problems
articulated and the solutions proposed in New Orleans, Louisiana. As the city
with the highest rate of incarceration in the world, New Orleans is an ideal
site to understand policing. It also has a community policing program in place
that allows the researchers the opportunity to methodologically evaluate police-
citizen relationships. The current climate of heightened awareness around
policing demands a comprehensive study of policing, rooted in rigorous,
historical, ethnographic analysis. The project would train graduate students in
methods of scientifically-grounded and empirical data collection. Project
findings will also be presented to non-academic audiences, improving efforts to
communicate science to the public. The project has clear plans to engage with
the policy community, police organizations, and community organizations on this
topic, engaging stakeholders in policy-relevant collaborations. Lastly, the
project would broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Laurence Ralph and Dr. Aisha Beliso-De Jesus
of Harvard will conduct and ethnographic study of police-citizen relations in
New Orleans, Louisiana. How do different stakeholders understand what
constitutes effectives methods of policing, security, and governance in this
community? Through a mixed-methodological approach that employs qualitative
surveys, participant observation, in-depth interviews, social media analysis,
ethnographic mapping, and team-based qualitative data coding, this research has
the potential to transform the way police enforcement is scientifically measured
and understood. This research will advance anthropological theories of policing,
force, and governance. The project promises coherent generalizable model that
deals with the complexities of police force and will be useful to
anthropologists, political scientists, social psychologists, sociologists, and
criminologists who study the racial and social disparities in policing, racial
bias among police officers, and others who have expressed difficulty in
standardizing data on police use of force.