* 1912484
* Quantum Field Theory and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Richard Woodard, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

This award supports work at the interplay between quantum field theory and
cosmology. A central prediction of quantum mechanics is that every degree of
freedom has an irreducible minimum amount of motion. Under ordinary conditions
quantum fluctuations emerge at random locations in space, persist for a brief
time, and then disappear as new fluctuations emerge at other locations. However,
a central prediction of cosmology is that the very early universe underwent a
phase of accelerated expansion known as "primordial inflation". Quantum
fluctuations of gravitational fields which emerge during primordial inflation
persist indefinitely, and their strength builds up as new fluctuations emerge.
These fluctuations change how particles propagate, how forces depend on space
and time, and even how fast the universe expands. Although exact computations
are not possible, the standard method of successive approximations shows that
these effects grow with time, and with separation in the case of force laws,
until they become so strong that standard computational techniques break down.
Some researchers doubt the reality of this conclusion because gravitational
fields can give different results in different coordinate systems, like the
famous Schwarzschild singularity at the event horizon of a black hole, which is
really an artifact of bad coordinates. Establishing that the effects of quantum
fluctuations from inflation are real, and devising a procedure for extrapolating
them to regimes in which they are strong, has the potential to revolutionize
fundamental theory. In particular, this project will establish whether or not
some of the outlandish parameters (e.g., less than 5% of the current energy
density composed of normal matter) that seem to describe our current universe
can be explained by quantum effects which became strong during the phase of
primordial inflation. This project will also promote teaching, training and
learning. Although the PI's current and past graduate students were selected for
proven ability, it is worth noting that half of them are either female or
Hispanic.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During the course of this project the PI and his
graduate students will collaborate with Professors Shun-Pei Miao (Taiwan),
Tomislav Prokopec (Holland) and Nikolaos Tsamis (Greece) on (1) demonstrating
that the effects of gravitational fluctuations are not coordinate artifacts; (2)
developing a technique for extrapolating them to regimes where they become
strong; (3) modeling these phenomena using low energy effective field theory in
the sense of Donoghue; and (4) studying comparable effects from other fields.
Although there will be some numerical work, most of the analysis will be
analytic and will employ the Schwinger-Keldysh formalism, the renormalization
group, Starobinsky's stochastic formalism and cosmological perturbation theory.
Establishing that quantum gravitational fluctuations from primordial inflation
induce measurable effects during the current epoch would revolutionize
fundamental theory. Among other things, this has the potential to explain what
caused primordial inflation, why the current universe is undergoing accelerated
expansion and why Milgrom's MOdified Newtonian Dynamics (MOND) gives such an
accurate description of galactic structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.