* 1912259
* Design and Engineering of Enhanced Ribosomes with Universal Protein-Folding Capabilities
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Silvia Cavagnero, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 441,253.00

If proteins are overproduced, they may fold incorrectly. This often results in
the formation of an insoluble protein mass called an inclusion body (IB).
Harvesting functioning protein from IBs is difficult. Avoiding their formation
is important and might be achieved by modifying the protein synthesis machinery,
the ribosome. Computer simulations will suggest effective changes in the
ribosome, and those changes will be made and evaluated. Graduate and
undergraduate students will perform simulations and experiments. The PI and some
graduate students will also be heavily involved in a conference which fosters
participation of Chicanos and Latino Americans in science. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The production of large quantities of soluble bioactive
proteins in bacteria is still problematic. The goal of this research project is
to overcome the protein folding problem by reengineering the bacterial (E. coli)
ribosomal machinery. Specifically, slowing the rate of translation termination,
thereby reducing the rate of fully-synthesized protein ejected from the
ribosomal exit tunnel. Intrinsic chaperone-like properties of the bacterial
ribosome will be enhanced. A combination of computer simulations, CRISPR-
Cas9-assisted recombineering, and fluorescence-based and colorimetric solubility
assays will be employed. Accomplishing the goals of this project will benefit
science and engineering alike. It will provide a vector for training the next
generation of genetic engineers and chemical biologists. They will be able to
combine rational and stochastic approaches, and integrate kinetic simulations,
computational design and experimental genetic
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.