* 1912164
* Conference: GRC Bioelectronics: Probing, Manipulating and Understanding Cell-Materials Interfaces to Achieve Electrical Continuity; June 16-21, 2019; Andover, NH
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Jonathan Silberg, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2020
* USD 5,520.00

The 2019 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) in Bioelectronics - the first GRC on
this topic - establishes a community of interdisciplinary researchers.
Bioelectronics is a multi-disciplinary scientific area and it includes
researchers from diverse fields, such as biochemistry, molecular biology,
chemistry, physics, materials sciences, medicine, electrical engineering, and
synthetic biology. These areas remain poorly connected, and there is no current
meeting that brings together the broad spectrum of researchers actively involved
in the development of Bioelectronics technologies across a range of length
scales. The 2019 GRC on Bioelectronics fosters new interdisciplinary
collaborations across the physical sciences, engineering, and biological
sciences and provides a forum for sharing the latest advances, communicating
grand challenges, and building collaborations to develop transformative
bioelectronics technologies. Research topics are multi-disciplinary, spanning
both the physical sciences and biological sciences The Conference includes the
participation of graduate students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key,
unifying element in the advancement of Bioelectronics is merging biomolecules,
cells, and materials across a spectrum of length scales. Fundamental questions
in the field include understanding electron flow in biochemical pathways,
elucidating electron transfer at interfaces between synthetic and natural
systems and establishing efficient pathways for electrical and ionic
communication between devices and cells using advanced materials and synthetic
biology. The meeting addresses and establishes grand challenges in the field of
Bioelectronics including: (1) understanding how to integrate living/organic
materials with synthetic materials, including natural and synthetic light
harvesting systems, (2) finding new ways to control and re-program electron
transfer in biology to accomplish nanoscale synthesis in a targeted manner, (3)
achieving specificity in read/write interfaces, (4) designing materials with
sufficient longevity and long-term degradability, and (5) translating this
knowledge to macroscopic phenomena and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.