* 1912306
* Implementation Project: Increasing Degree Production through STEM Entrepreneurship and Career Development Activities
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Dwayne Smith, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,250,000.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP) provide support to design, implement, study and
assess comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students
and the quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation
project at Harris-Stowe State University (HSSU), a small, public, open-access
HBCU, provides a multilayered approach to broaden opportunities for African-
American students to succeed in STEM majors. The project has a strong focus on
STEM careers and workforce development pathways to provide students with
entrepreneurial competencies and skills that are adaptive and flexible enough to
respond competitively to changing STEM workforce needs as well as graduate
school preparation. The project is guided and informed by an on-going evaluation
and a research study, as well as by internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on two very successful
previous implementation projects that established STEM programs at the
university. It will implement a variety of activities designed to instill an
entrepreneurial mindset, introduce real world STEM experiences and build
important non-cognitive skill sets for STEM students with the goal to increase
retention, graduation and graduate school or workforce readiness. This will be
accomplished by the objectives to: introduce reimagined curriculum and co-
curricular activities designed to expand students' understanding of STEM career
paths and introduce and promote an entrepreneurial mindset and skills; have
activities to onboard cohorts of students that transfer to HSSU from community
colleges; and promote cognitive and noncognitive skills critical for success in
the contemporary STEM workforce or graduate school. This project promises to
have wide-reaching broader impacts at the university and in the surrounding
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.