* 1912481
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Optimization of Infrastructure-Scale Thin-Walled Tube Towers including Uncertainty
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Schafer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 448,965.00

Thin-walled tube is a high-performing and efficient structural element with
versatile applications in mechanical systems and civil infrastructure. Such
tubes, however, can be fragile: when made of stiff materials and subjected to
compression, their failure is acutely sensitive to imperfections that inevitably
arise during manufacturing and to complex loading that inevitably occurs in the
field. A lack of understanding of the fundamental nature of this sensitivity has
been a longstanding barrier to advancement of structural engineering and
manufacturing. The enormous scale of civil infrastructure and some mechanical
systems present additional challenges, as tubular elements can be too large to
be prototyped, iteratively designed and tested at full-scale. For these reasons,
structural strength is estimated using unsatisfactory methods, either
extrapolating test results with overly conservative or inaccurate
simplifications of the governing mechanics or using computational methods that
are unreliable. Both approaches mostly ignore the strong links between
manufacturing, material selection, and structural behavior and this restricts
the potential for structural innovations that are coupled with innovations in
manufacturing. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Program award provides a path to overcome these limitations; the
outcomes of this award will serve to improve mechanical system efficiencies, to
foster innovations to strengthen and rebuild civil infrastructure, to revitalize
domestic manufacturing, and to educate high school, undergraduate and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging first-of-its-kind factory access,
this project will yield a seminal dataset, coupling measurements of
imperfections and structural behavior of thin-walled tubes, including
uncertainty, with simulations across nearly two orders of magnitude of scale for
a broad range of inelastic steel properties. The research combines experimental
and numerical methods, including detailed measurements of the inelastic behavior
of thin-walled tubes under complex loading with multiple cross-sectional
actions, high-resolution measurements of geometric imperfections and residual
stresses, shell finite element simulations of manufacturing and collapse
behavior, and hybrid data/physics-driven random field models that are integrated
into a simulation-based optimization process. The multi-scale series of physical
tests provides understanding of the mechanics of thin-walled tubes in the
presence of complicating and consequential phenomena: geometric imperfections,
residual stresses, inelasticity, and complex loading. These tests then inform
simulations that will enable stochastic optimization methods to transform design
practice for civil infrastructure and mechanical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.