* 1912471
* Effective Teaching Strategies Workshops and Sessions for the 2019 Earth Educators? Rendezvous
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Katherine Ryker, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 04/30/2020
* USD 49,984.00

Since geoscience content is not readily found as a core science in most U.S.
K-12 schools, students are often not exposed to the geosciences until later in
their pre-college matriculation if at all. Even when students encounter
geoscience courses or departments as undergraduates, the foggy line to career
opportunities and dated teaching methods could be primary causes of high
attrition rates. A major way to revamp the undergraduate experience in the
geosciences (with increased student retention) is through faculty development
efforts that focus more on creating active learning environments than
perpetuating unsuccessful traditional educational models. Engaging the
geoscience community in rich conversations about the goals and content of
geoscience and other courses, has the potential to impact many thousands of
students across the US. As more faculty attempt reformed teaching practices in
their classrooms, the community of faculty using active learning practices in
their classrooms will become more common.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed suite of The Effective Teaching Strategies workshops has been designed
in response to the stated needs of the geoscience education community attending
the EER, as well as anecdotally by science colleagues, especially those in non-
geology disciplines such as atmospheric sciences who have historically not been
as well represented at the EER. The proposed workshops and activities will
promote&lt;br/&gt;the use of active learning strategies in the geosciences
through the sharing of best practices and promoting dialogue between like-minded
colleagues. The goals of the workshop are to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Share best teaching
practices for geoscience courses, including geologic, atmospheric and
ocean&lt;br/&gt;Sciences,&lt;br/&gt;2. Engage geoscientists from multiple
institution types (i.e. HBCUs, community colleges,
primarily&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate or research) in conversations about improving
introductory and majors courses,&lt;br/&gt;3. Promote networking among
participants to broaden perspectives and connect beyond EER,&lt;br/&gt;4.
Nurture a community of future leaders for the geoscience education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.