* 1912948
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving in vitro prediction of oral drug permeability and metabolism using a novel 3D canine organoid model
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Kimberly Dao, 3D HEALTH SOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I Project is to provide the pharmaceutical industry with
improved pre-clinical screening assay for oral drug absorption. Current in vitro
methods for characterizing gastrointestinal absorption are based on unreliable
assays, with 90% of all drugs developed ultimately failing to enter the market.
Practically, these limitations delay the development of critically needed
therapeutic drugs and dramatically increase drug prices and health care costs.
There is, therefore, a critical need to develop more predictive in vitro testing
assays that will allow for early selection of the most promising drug candidates
to reduce the number of live animal studies and their associated costs, while
accelerating transition from pre-clinical research to early drug development.
The technology is based on the discovery, fundamental characterization and
bioarchiving of adult canine intestinal stem cell lines, called 3-dimensional
(3D) canine intestinal organoids. These miniguts emulate the physiology of the
functional intestine much more closely than currently available methods and have
the potential to provide superior drug screening over currently used assays.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I is a proposal to establish that in vitro
predictability of oral drug absorption can be improved using canine intestinal
organoids vs. standard 2D in vitro assays, such as Caco2 and MDCK cell lines. In
Aim 1, the goal is to determine intestinal absorption and permeability of
therapeutic drugs as a function of disease and intestinal segment as compared
with conventional in vitro models. This will be achieved by quantifying passive
and active permeability of drugs, as well as drug transporter expression and
function in 3D canine organoids vs. conventional cell systems. In Aim 2, the
goal is to determine intestinal metabolism of therapeutic drugs as a function of
disease and intestinal segment in canine organoids compared to standard in vitro
models. Ultimately, quantitative data generated through these experiments will
be imported into a commercial software to simulate the disposition kinetics of a
predefined set of candidate drugs. Performances of the model predictions will be
evaluated by comparing simulated vs. observed drug kinetic plasma data from the
literature for validation purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.