* 1912278
* Loop Quantum Gravity with Cosmological Constant
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Muxin Han, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2023
* USD 152,344.00

Einstein's General Relativity (GR) is the theory describing the physics of the
classical gravitational field. The theory of GR has made tremendous progress in
understanding the fundamental aspects of space and time and has been successful
in making predictions for the evolution of the universe and various
astrophysical phenomena. However it is well-known that the theory of GR is
incomplete. It loses its capability of making predictions in extremely strong
gravitational fields, e.g. inside a black hole or at the very early stage of the
universe near the big bang. One of the most fundamental open questions in
physics is how to complete GR in order to predict physics in an extremely strong
gravitational field. The complete theory of gravity that we are searching for is
called "Quantum Gravity". The theory of Quantum Gravity should play a crucial
role in describing the physics inside black holes and helping us to understand
the early universe near the big bang. Eventually Quantum Gravity will lead us to
a revolutionary understanding of space and time. This award supports the
development of a candidate Quantum Gravity theory known as "Loop Quantum
Gravity" (LQG), which offers significant promise in addressing the questions
posed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work supported by this award focuses on
developing the theory of LQG with a cosmological constant in 4 dimensions, in
particular the spinfoam formulation of theory. The main objectives of this
project are: (1) Investigating the continuum limit of the theory, in particular
the emergence of smooth spacetime geometries and Einstein equations from the
spinfoam amplitude, and relating the spinfoam formulation to the recent program
of emergent gravity from quantum information, (2) analyzing the quantum effects
of curvature singularities in the framework of spinfoams, and to extract
physical observables, and (3) developing a canonical framework closely related
to the spinfoam formulation with a cosmological
constant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.