* 1912098
* Infusing Learning Initiatives for Improving the Programming Proficiency of Computer Science Majors at Morgan State University
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Edward Dillon, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 12/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program
provides support to design, implement, study and assess efforts to increase the
numbers of students and the quality of their preparation by strengthening
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education and research.
This project at Morgan State University provides a strategic approach to infuse
learning initiatives into two computer science courses to increase students'
proficiency and success in programming skills with the goal to retain them as
computer science majors. Undergraduate students are involved in this project as
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year pilot project seeks to
implement problem solving strategies involving programming to develop strategies
that can enhance the students' ability to develop proficient critical thinking
skills as they learn to program. The project will study the psycho-
social&lt;br/&gt;attributes that students exhibit towards programming using
qualitative and quantitative measures. The project is guided by formative and
summative evaluation and an advisory committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.