* 1912105
* Quantum Control of Single Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* David Patterson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 541,268.00

The molecules which surround us typically occupy millions of distinct quantum
states - for example, individual molecules in the air are moving and spinning in
many different directions. In order to take advantage of the quantum properties
of these molecules, one needs to learn how to prepare individual molecules in a
single quantum state, and to measure which state they are in. This will require
absolute control over the movement and rotation of the molecule. Today,
physicists can prepare atoms in single quantum states, and measure which state
they are in with high fidelity. This ability underpins many of the recent
advances in atomic physics. The ability to prepare and measure the state of
molecules lags far behind, and no molecule containing more than two atoms has
ever been prepared in a single quantum state. This project, funded by the
Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics Program of the Division of Physics, and
the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A Program of the Division of
Chemistry, develops the tools for this goal. An important application of this
work is that it will enable the identification of individual molecules without
destroying them, including identifying the chirality of these molecules.
Chirality is the subtle difference between left-handed or right-handed molecules
that can play a big role in how the molecule functions, for example in
pharmaceuticals. This work will be done by graduate and undergraduate students
at the University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB), including financially
disadvantaged students enrolled in UCSB's EUREKA program. The program will allow
these students to gain valuable, hands-on scientific skills while earning
stipends that allow them to stay in school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientists
leading this research have proposed a set of methods that will allow them to
control a broad range of molecular ions at the single quantum state level. The
centerpiece of this proposal is a new state readout method, quantum bolometry,
which leverages the rich internal level structure of these molecules to provide
high-fidelity quantum state readout of individual molecules. A single molecular
ion will be trapped in a hybrid Paul trap/optical lattice, along with a single
laser-cooled strontium ion. The molecular ion's motion will be driven via a
combination of a state-dependent optical lattice and rotational transitions
within the molecule which are driven directly via microwave-frequency electric
fields. The method does not require sideband resolution or ground state cooling,
in contrast to related quantum logic spectroscopy methods. Quantum bolometry can
be applied to most reasonably small (4 - 15 atoms), nonspherical polyatomic
ions. These methods will allow for non-destructive measurement of the isomer and
enantiomer of individual molecules for the first time, and allow for
spectroscopy with a resolution significantly greater than existing ensemble
molecular spectroscopy techniques. Spectroscopy at this level would represent
our most accurate determination of molecular
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.