* 1912165
* I-Corps Teams: Application of in situ Shallow Subsurface Soil Spectroscopy (S4) to the Discovery of Clandestine Human Burials
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,06/30/2021
* David Perry, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be quicker
and more reliable discovery of human burial sites. The proposed product will
help law enforcement officers at municipal, county, state and federal levels
discover clandestine human burials thereby aiding in the solution of crimes and
enhancing public safety. Likewise, applications in the military arena would
enable discovery of the remains of soldiers missing in action (MIAs), mass
graves created during genocide, and other casualties of conflict. Because the
technology of the product has a very general capability, a product based on the
same hardware and software may be customized for a variety of commercial
applications. These include: (1) environmental mapping and remediation efforts;
(2) cultural resource or heritage management, e.g., by documenting Native
American burial grounds; (3) characterization of soil chemistry for agribusiness
applications; (4) mapping of sites in archaeology. All of these applications
would create greater demand with resulting commercial and employment
opportunities. Finally, since successful applications will receive media
attention, they will provide the opportunity to educate the public about the
nature of the science, the value of scientific research to the public good, and
technology involved in the product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
involves a novel adaptation of existing technologies (spectroscopy, push-probe
soil tests) to a new application within forensic science. The basic concepts of
the technologies are well-established. The product, a robotic mobile device,
pushes a probe into the ground at the test locations. The probe has a window
that allows the soil to be illuminated with visible and near infrared light.
Reflected light is collected by fiber optics which carry the light to the
surface to be analyzed. The fraction of each color of light that is absorbed by
the soil carries the signature of the chemical content of the soil at each
underground location. These data are then interpreted in terms of the decay
products (mainly fatty acids) that indicate the presence of human cadavers. PI?s
earlier research was successful in identifying burials in both controlled mock
crime scenes and in real forensic contexts involving disturbed human graves. The
proposed product will provide real-time, reliable interpretation of the data to
indicate the presence of a 'hit', an essential part of the value proposition of
the product for law enforcement applications. This marks a very significant
improvement over current lab-based analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.