* 1912679
* GOALI: Mm-Wave Reconfigurable Additive Manufactured Packaging Systems (RAMPS) using Pulsed Picosecond Laser Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/31/2018,08/31/2021
* Thomas Weller, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2021
* USD 308,459.00

The aim of this project is to investigate packaging technologies for high
frequency microelectronic circuits that will provide critical performance
enhancements for next generation wireless systems. The approach is based on the
use of low cost additive manufacturing or 3D printing processes, and will
require advances in areas such as minimum feature size, reconfigurable
electronic and mechanical structures, and millimeter-wave frequency circuit
design. The proposed approach of integrating the functionality needed to
dynamically reconfigure a mm-wave system directly into the 3D-printed packaging
is a new concept, since current packaging technologies predominantly serve only
to provide environmental protection with no electronic purpose. The new
structural electronic packaging concept could therefore significantly disrupt
the microelectronics packaging industry, as the functional packaging would
provide the ability to perform actions such as changing operating frequencies
and steering antenna beams in real-time. The technology could impact important
emerging applications such as 5G wireless, the internet of things and autonomous
and connected vehicles. It could also expand into fields such as wearable
electronics, bio-electronic devices, and artificial organs.

In addition to training graduate students the project will impact K-12 education
by offering training opportunities to high school teachers and students.
Undergraduate students will also be involved through Research Experience for
Undergraduates projects and multi-disciplinary Senior Capstone Design projects
that are outlined by the industry partner. The principal investigators will
continue to emphasize the participation of students from diverse backgrounds and
underrepresented groups in engineering, and include a focus on the attainment of
global perspectives and leadership skills as part of their training.



The technical goal of the project is to advance the state of the art in
millimeter wave packaging technology by demonstrating new approaches for direct
integration of low temperature on-package and on-chip structural electronics.
The aim is to study concepts for reconfigurable packaging using dynamic
structures that are fabricated using additive manufacturing. Specifically, the
research will involve a hybrid, direct print additive manufacturing strategy
that combines fused filament fabrication and micro-dispensing to form the
package foundation in a conformal manner directly onto the microelectronic
device or component. The critical electronic and mechanical features will be
defined using pulsed picosecond laser machining with a targeted minimum feature
size of 3-5 microns. Performance goals include variable reactance devices with
greater than 5:1 tuning in the upper Ka-band and interconnects with less than
0.7 dB/cm loss in the V-band.

The proposed work has potential to make significant contributions in the area of
functional electronic packaging, which may prove to be one of the most
economically and technically important applications of direct print additive
manufacturing. To date, no additive manufactured tunable devices have been
demonstrated at millimeter wave frequencies. Furthermore, there are no existing
packaging technologies that can combine the advantages of low temperature
processing, conformal integration and dynamic real-time reconfigurability.
Finally, since the proposed approach is generic in nature it will be broadly
applicable to a wide range of microwave/mm-wave communications and sensing
systems. The project's industry partner brings expertise in microwave packaging
and manufacturing and will play a critical role in steering the investigations
to maximize future commercial impact.