* 1912028
* Controlling Liquid Wetting of Textured Surfaces using Ultrasound
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/31/2018,12/31/2019
* Nathan Crane, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2019
* USD 152,636.00

Successful implementation of many common manufacturing processes rely on
controlling when, where, and how fluids and liquids wet a solid. This includes
processes like painting, bonding, cleaning, soldering,and brazing. This ability
to control if and when a liquid wets a surface is also of importance in self-
cleaning and stain resistant surfaces. Such surfaces can provide important
technological and economic advantages in a variety of applications by, for
example, reducing maintenance and cleaning costs of equipment and buildings such
as naval ships, improving efficiency of solar cells by preventing haze and dirt
buildup on their surfaces outdoors, and lowering the friction of objects moving
through a liquid. This project examines how high frequency vibrations, i.e.,
ultrasound, can be used to change the wetting state of a liquid on a surface
based on the relationship between the size scale of the surface texture and the
vibration frequency. The combination of texture and applied vibration will
enable new control over where and when a liquid wets a surface or de-wets from
it. Potential applications include controlling bonding locations, facilitating
separation of bonded components for recycling, and improving the wetting of
powders by liquids. The research efforts will be integrated with the education
of both graduate and undergraduate students. The project will also be used to
enhance outreach programs with local K-12 schools through new educational
activities on vibration and acoustics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Textured surfaces
(ones with surface roughness) can be stable in multiple wetting states. The two
extreme conditions occur when a fluid or liquid penetrates into the recesses of
the texture (Wenzel state) and when the fluid rests on top of the peaks of the
texture (Cassie state). The Wenzel state has much stronger adhesion due to the
larger contact area. For each fluid/substrate combination, one state will
typically have lower energy, but there is an energy barrier that must be
overcome in order to transition to the lower energy wetting states. Prior work
has demonstrated that transitions can be achieved by vibrating a droplet at its
characteristic frequency. However, this is impractical in many applications
because every droplet has different vibration frequencies. This project will use
frequencies that are characteristic of the surface structure so that they can
work on droplets of arbitrary sizes. Specifically, the project will identify the
energy required at different frequencies, compare the effectiveness of different
vibrational modes, and evaluate the impact of asymmetric vibrations on the fluid
wetting. These objectives will be accomplished by both experimental measurements
of the pressure to move the wetting front of a liquid on a patterned surface and
numerical modeling of the contact lines subjected to vibration.