* 1912897
* Geometry of Banach spaces and their spaces of operators
* MPS,DMS
* 08/16/2018,07/31/2022
* Timur Oikhberg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2022
* USD 12,707.00

The research project is comprised of a broad class of problems in the geometry
of Banach spaces and operator theory. Banach spaces, in particular function
spaces and sequence spaces, are an important tool used either directly or
indirectly in scientific fields such as engineering and physics. Hilbert spaces,
which are a special type of Banach spaces, and operators acting on such spaces,
provide a theoretical framework that can be used to study problems in quantum
mechanics and computer science. Therefore, there exists potential practical
value in studying the fairly abstract notion of a Banach space and its space of
operators. The project is centered around the study of old problems, as well as
ones that have emerged from recent developments in the theory. Although it is
formulated in terms of Banach space theory, many of the problems studied are
related to other areas of mathematics, such as descriptive set theory and
operator theory. The solution of those problems will require the combination of
techniques from such areas as combinatorics, set theory and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project revolves around the investigation of
a variety of problems. Emphasis is given on the local and asymptotic behavior of
basic sequences, which can in fact have far reaching implications in the
properties of operators on certain spaces. Some notions that are studied are
those of spreading models, finite block representability, and script-L-infinity
spaces. As already mentioned, one of the main intentions is to deduce properties
of operators. There are two main approaches that can be used in this setting.
The first one is the construction of spaces with hereditary heterogeneous
asymptotic structure. This method was previously used by the principal
investigator and S. Argyros to construct the first example of a separable
reflexive Banach space with the invariant subspace property. The question as to
whether the separable Hilbert space has this property as well, is one of the
central problems of operator theory, in fact of mathematics. Further study of
this method can possibly yield further examples of spaces which resemble Hilbert
spaces, for example uniformly convex spaces, with the invariant subspace
property. The second approach is related to the study of script-L-infinity
spaces. This approach is based on the method developed by S. Argyros and R.
Haydon to construct the first known Banach space with the scalar-plus-compact
property. This means that every bounded linear operator on this space is a
compact perturbation of a scalar multiple of the identity. This method has its
roots in a construction of J. Bourgain and F. Delbaen. Further study of this
method may lead to the characterization of spaces with the aforementioned
property.