* 1912999
* Sub-Linear Complexity Methods for Multiscale Problems Without Scale Separation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Yoonsang Lee, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 01/31/2023
* USD 99,839.00

Many problems in science and engineering involve complicated interactions
between a wide range of scales in space and time, which are computationally
challenging to solve for all relevant scales due to a huge simulation cost. The
proposed work aims to extract salient features of multiscale problems with a
significantly reduced simulation cost. This research will enable fast simulation
methods for large-scale computational problems, including optimal design of
material properties such as conductivity, elasticity, and long-life cycle of
batteries, etc. Also, seismology and acoustic scientific communities will
benefit from the proposed work in investigating and studying underground and
underwater physics such as object detection, localization, material
classification, etc. The project also considers applications in numerical
weather forecast methods that significantly improve the prediction accuracy
using a large number of samples to quantify uncertainties in the weather
forecast models. This project will fund one graduate student in year 2 of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is novel sub-
linear complexity methods that apply to non-separable multiscale problems. The
sub-linear complexity provides a significantly improved efficiency that extracts
essential and salient features of the problems without computationally resolving
all active scales. The basis of the project is the extraction of effective
behaviors through a seamless application of the standard method for separated
scale problems. The proposed research offers a unique way to tackle non-
separable scale problems without ad-hoc parameter tuning while maintaining a low
simulation cost. The mathematical methods to be developed allow judicious
applications of the homogenization theory for two-scale problems. Thus, the
project has a significant potential to enhance the applicability of the standard
computational methods developed for two-scale problems to a wide range of
problems. Also, the application and validation in the context of the numerical
weather forecast will contribute to connecting deterministic and stochastic
multiscale modeling frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.