* 1912180
* Collaborative Proposal: Testing mechanisms and consequences of W chromosome turnover in a dynamic plant system
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 925,953.00

This research will test theories of the evolution of the genes and chromosomes
that determine whether individuals are male or female. The project will identify
processes that lead to changes in the chromosomal location of sex-determining
genes in wild ancestors of the cultivated strawberry. The work will advance our
knowledge of how these changes affect gene function and whole-plant growth and
reproduction. Understanding how genes are arranged on chromosomes will expanding
our knowledge of the effects of varied gene location on flower and fruit
development, and will inform agricultural practices that ensure food security.
Educational and outreach activities will bring knowledge gained by this research
to the general public, and contribute to curriculum development for middle
school and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic determination of
sex is widespread across eukaryotes and the evolutionary dynamics can transcend
wide taxonomic boundaries. Changes in either the chromosome pair that determines
sex or the location of the sex-determining genes can be an important driver of
phenotypic dimorphism, adaptive variation, and speciation. The research will
test four leading hypothesized mechanisms for, and phenotypic consequences of,
turnover in the W chromosome. The work will leverage the octoploid wild
strawberry (Fragaria) where translocation-based turnover has been observed,
enabling tests of predicted patterns of genomic fingerprints (changes in linkage
disequilibrium and function polymorphisms) characteristic of each turnover
mechanism. The work will use a combination of high-throughput sequencing,
molecular evolutionary analysis, genetic linkage mapping, transcriptomics, and
phenotypic assessment. The research will provide insight into a key dynamic of
chromosomal evolution and shed light on a genomic restructuring mechanism that
also underlies the evolution of other supergenes affecting complex phenotypes,
adaptation, and speciation. The work will contribute to society by expanding
knowledge of the effects of chromosomal rearrangement on ecological tolerances
in important wild relatives of the cultivated
strawberry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.