* 1912577
* Cs Energy Shifts in an Electric Field
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* David Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 488,952.00

There is a long, fruitful history of precision measurements in low energy
physics being used to answer questions that are usually considered the realm of
high energy particle physics. For instance, precision atomic parity non-
conservation experiments constrain the electroweak theory in a way that is
inaccessible to particle accelerators. Another example is the search for a
permanent electric dipole moment (EDM) in atoms and molecules. If an EDM were to
be discovered, it would imply that the standard model of physics is incomplete,
and it would point the way to a more overarching theory. The atomic measurement
proposed here relates to both of these examples. The best atomic parity
violation measurement uses atomic cesium in electric and magnetic fields. To
extract the fundamental physics, it is necessary to disentangle the atomic
physics from the atomic measurement. For about 20 years, full advantage could
not be taken of the best parity violation measurement, because the atomic theory
tools were not good enough. Recent theoretical advances are starting to change
that, but the tools need independent validation. This project will measure a
different property of cesium in an electric field, its ground state tensor
polarizability (GSTP), improving the experimental knowledge of that value by a
factor of at least 25. The calculations needed for the cesium parity violation
result are similar to those needed to predict the GSTP, so these measurements
will help validate the atomic theory with the required precision. The GSTP
measurements are also similar enough to those needed for a cesium EDM search
that they will be a step along the way toward completing such a measurement. The
experiment will also train graduate students in a very wide range of
experimental and theoretical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cesium GSTP (and
ultimately the cesium EDM) will be measured using laser-cooled Cs atoms trapped
in a pair of parallel 1D far-off-resonant optical lattice traps in a
magnetically shielded region of space. The experiment is designed around being
able to separately measure the populations of each ground state magnetic
sublevel. Within the same set of atoms, direct transitions between adjacent
positive magnetic sublevels can be measured at the same time as transitions
between adjacent negative magnetic sublevels. In a 750 microGauss magnetic field
and a 33 kV/cm electric field, these two transitions will differ by an amount
that is proportional to the GSTP, ~20 Hz. The pulse-time-limited linewidth will
be 1 Hz, so the line splitting that can be readily achieved with the available
108 atoms will yield ~10-4 sensitivity in a single scan. The ultimate precision
will be limited by systematic affects related to the light traps. These can
clearly be controlled well enough to improve on the existing 8% relative
precision by a factor of 25. The fact that the new GSTP measurement directly
measures transitions between ground state sublevels accounts for the large
expected improvement over previous measurements, which looked for small shifts
in much broader optical transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.