* 1912847
* Efficient and Adaptive Methods for Simulating Multiscale Effects in Optical Metamaterials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Matthias Maier, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2022
* USD 125,000.00

The project centers on the development of novel computational approaches to
simulate the optical properties of metamaterials. Metamaterials are small
optical devices that manipulate light on a microscopic scale. An important
aspect of the project is the dissemination of the developed numerical algorithms
in form of publicly available open source software. As such the project will
enable and foster research directions in optics that require a strong
computational component. In addition to the dissemination of the research to the
scientific community, results will be presented to students through graduate
courses, mentoring of students, and university-internal research and student
seminars. In particular, the PI plans to develop a new graduate-level course
about advanced finite element methods for optical problems. Efforts will be made
to attract female and minority students and stimulate their interest by
presenting and incorporating exciting new research topics in numerical methods
courses on upper-division undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metamaterials are specifically engineered,
periodically aligned microstructures that exhibit unusual optical properties. A
major challenge that manifests in the simulation of scattering processes
involving metamaterials is that they are of pronounced two-scale character,
meaning that relevant optical processes act on very different length scales.
This is complicated by the fact that realistic experimental geometries contain
1D discontinuities at boundaries of the 2D material sheets. Such discontinuities
cause edge effects that are challenging to simulate due to their dominant and
singular behavior. The project centers around the development and analysis of
novel computational approaches for the simulation of scattering processes in
complex optical devices, that are able to cope with the two-scale character and
the occurrence of edge effects: (1) a parallel and adaptive finite element
method for 3D device simulations will be developed and implemented that combines
goal-oriented local mesh refinement and domain decomposition for MPI
parallelization and preconditioning; (2) a heterogeneous multiscale method will
be developed and analyzed that incorporates model-adaptive strategies for an
efficient sampling of effective metamaterial parameters; (3) special emphasis
will be given in both research directions to connect the algorithmic and
numerical development to interdisciplinary
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.