* 1912539
* Conference Proposal: Strengthening Methods and Broadening Public Impacts in Psychological and Cultural Anthropology Santa Ana Pueblo, NM, April 4-7, 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Jill Korbin, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2021
* USD 12,998.00

This project aims to give scientists more of the knowledge and tools they need
to produce robust and reliable research. By providing a forum to engage with
national colleagues renowned for their expertise in research design, methodology
and public impact, this project will enhance both the quality and relevance of
future research efforts. The workshop provides a platform for scientific
collaboration, the results of which will benefit those working to develop more
effective methodologies and avenues for the dissemination of findings from
anthropological research to promote public scientific understanding. Products
from the workshop will be made publicly available. The project also contributes
to the training of graduate students in methods of scientifically-grounded and
empirical data collection.

Under the leadership of Dr. Jill Korbin of the Case Western University and Dr.
Rebecca Lester of Washington University, six workshops will be convened and led
by thirteen scholars immediately before and concurrent with the biennial meeting
of the Society for Psychological Anthropology (SPA) in Santa Ana Pueblo, NM,
from April 4-7, 2019. There will be two pre-conference workshops addressing
methodologies, one on using standardized instruments in ethnographic research;
and the other focused on innovative linguistic methods in anthropology. Two
other pre-conference workshops will address effective communication and
dissemination of research: strategies for successful grant writing and
disseminating research findings beyond anthropology. And two additional
workshops will be offered during the regular conference hours. The first,
Methods in Visual Anthropology, will be a double-session workshop that will
offer participants hands-on opportunities for exploring this emerging research
and dissemination opportunity. The second will be a writing workshop, scheduled
on the last morning of the conference. This workshop will be aimed at advanced
dissertation and early career stage anthropologists who have not yet published a
scientific article. The workshops will advance psychological and cultural
anthropology through advancements and innovations in research design and
methodology. Because concepts that have been extensively developed and theorized
in the subfield of psychological anthropology have been increasingly abstracted
more widely in the behavioral and social sciences, a strong multiplier effect
beyond the specific subfield is expected. It is anticipated that more than 150
scholars will participate in person in these workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.