* 1912232
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Choice-induced biases in human decision-making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Alan Stocker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,991.00

The choices we make not only influence how we remember the past but also how we
will perceive the future. In both cases, our judgments are biased in favor of
our preceding choice. Such choice-induced biases have been known for centuries.
They affect our judgments in daily life including in situations where judgment
errors are critical (e.g., medical diagnoses, scientific hypothesis testing, or
political decisions). Why the human brain generates these biases and tends
towards self-confirmation has long remained elusive. Supported by the
Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience program, the proposed
research will set out to identify the underlying computational and neural
mechanisms of choice-induced biases in human decision-making. The proposed work
employs a highly interdisciplinary approach that combines measures of behavior
and brain activity with theory and computational modeling. It perfectly draws
from the complimentary experimental and computational expertise of each PI and
their laboratories. The goal is to develop and validate a novel theory of
decision-making under uncertainty, in which choice-induced biases play a central
role. Unraveling the source and function of choice-induced biases is not only
critical for understanding the limits of human rationality but has also
immediate and important implications for society at large. For example, the
insights can help training of physicians to reduce judgment errors in clinical
diagnostics, as well as that of other decision-makers in the legal and corporate
sectors. Finally, the experimental methods and results of the proposed research
may help to shed light on the biological underpinnings of important brain
disorders, in particular schizophrenia, for which confirmation biases are
aggravated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central focus of the proposed work is to
test the hypothesis that choices generate subjective expectations that influence
the subsequent evaluation process of both past and future evidence. The proposed
research will record psychophysical and functional neuroimaging
(magnetoencephalography (MEG)) measurements of healthy human subjects while they
are performing a range of novel behavioral tasks specifically developed to
assess choice-induced biases in low-level perception as well has high-level
cognition. Theory and computational modeling will be crucial to interpret these
signals and ultimately to help infer the underlying cognitive operations. The
results of this research will not only advance our understanding of choice-
induced bias effects in decision-making, but of decision-making in general. The
combined approach of simultaneously using behavioral, neural, and
theoretical/computational measurements and methods imposes strong constraints on
the expected results and explanations while at the same time lending also
extraordinarily strong confidence to the findings as they are supported on all
levels. To the degree that they demonstrate how choices influence subsequent
evidence evaluation, our results have the potential to drastically change the
traditional understanding of decision-making as a simple feedforward
accumulation-to-bound process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being
funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.