* 1912025
* EAGER:  Developing a Novel Virus-like RNA as a Model for mRNA Systemic Movement and as a Vector for Citrus and Other Trees and Vines
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Anne Simon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding how plants respond to pathogens is critical for maintaining a
robust food supply. Key to this response is the movement of RNA, a type of
genetic information, from one part of the plant to another. However, detailed
understanding of how RNA moves in plants is not well understood due to the small
amounts of transiting RNAs. In addition, nearly all of our knowledge comes from
research on short-lived plants and very little is known about long-lived trees
due to the time it takes to grow and study them. The discovery of a novel virus-
like RNA (called CYVaV) that infects virtually all citrus varieties provides an
unparalleled opportunity to explore the biology of trees and the movement of RNA
in plants. CYVaV accumulates to high levels in tree veins and moves in the
absence of specific virus-produced "movement" proteins. Since CYVaV RNA must use
the trees molecular machinery to move its RNA, it is an ideal system to study
RNA movement. This project uses CYVaV to develop technologies to understand the
movement of RNAs in plants. In addition, CYVaV may enable researchers to
introduce genetic elements in trees. An important broader impact is the
possibility of using CYVaV as a vehicle to combat the bacterial disease Citrus
Greening by targeting the bacteria and the insect depositing the bacteria. This
could help save the US citrus industry from Citrus
Greening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent revelations that 50% of the companion cell
(CC) transcriptome is moving long distances through sieve elements (SE) have
elicited numerous questions concerning how and why this migration of mRNAs is
occurring. Answering key questions on intracellular and intercellular movement
of mRNAs requires a model system consisting of an abundant mobile RNA, whose
location can be traced in living tissue under different cellular conditions. The
recently discovered Citrus yellow vein associated virus (CYVaV) is a highly
unusual virus-like RNA that traffics bi-directionally through the phloem of all
commercial varieties of citrus and laboratory host Nicotiana benthamiana in the
absence of encoded movement proteins (MPs), coat protein or silencing
suppressors. This project develops CYVaV as a model for transiting mRNAs using
MS2 CP and &amp;lambda;N22 systems and as a VIGS vector to study effects of
altered gene expression in citrus phloem. CYVaV causes few if any symptoms on
citrus although it accumulates to levels detectable on ethidium-stained gels in
infected plants. This should allow for high level expression of small RNAs, with
the initial goal of down regulating CC callose synthase, which causes callose
deposition in SE during stress or pathogen invasion. Since CYVaV should have no
host-MP specific incompatibility, it will also be examined for an extended host
range in other woody plants and vines, which currently have no useable vectors.
By studying CYVaV movement and ability to serve as a VIGS vector, one broader
impact of this work is using CYVaV to block the devastating effects of Citrus
Greening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.