* 1912415
* Enhancing Teacher Preparation in Elementary Mathematics through a Research-based Framework for Teacher-facilitated Discussions
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Gwendolyn Lloyd, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,979,290.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving the education of undergraduate preservice
elementary teachers. Classroom discussions are valuable teaching approaches that
can promote active engagement with a topic, exploration of reasoning about a
topic, and consideration of alternative ideas or approaches. This project will
investigate whether teaching preservice elementary teachers how to use
discussion-based pedagogy improves the quality of mathematics instruction in
their classrooms. Specifically, it will adapt a small-group, teacher-facilitated
discussion approach, known as Quality Talk (QT), for use by teacher educators in
STEM methods courses and classroom-based field experiences for future elementary
school teachers. Including QT in the education of preservice teachers is
expected to help them learn mathematics concepts, as well as how to use
effective discussion-based teaching approaches in their own classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This five-year project aims to: (1) enhance the
professional vision of teacher educators by bolstering their discussion-
intensive pedagogical content knowledge and efficacy; and (2) increasing the
mathematical proficiency of preservice teachers by increasing their mathematical
reasoning and understanding through content-rich discussions and developing
mathematics-rich STEM pedagogy. The adaptation of QT for preservice teacher
education will be investigated through a series of four mixed methods studies in
the first four years of the award, with a focus on broad dissemination in Year
Five. Participants (teacher educators and preservice teachers) will be drawn
from six Pennsylvania State system campuses and two types of teacher preparation
settings (professional development school and traditional). Findings and
products, including a QT Toolbox, will be disseminated to practitioners and
researchers through publications, presentations, data sharing, and a dedicated
website. The project has the potential to provide needed research regarding ways
to foster teacher educators professional vision for advancing preservice
teachers' discussion-intensive mathematical proficiency and emergent STEM
pedagogy so that elementary mathematics instruction can be improved. Expected
project outcomes include increasing the ability of teacher educators to support
other educators in improving instructional practices, changing teacher education
models and practices to advance preservice teachers' mathematical understandings
and reasoning, and supporting preservice teachers' development of effective STEM
pedagogy. The project aims to positively impact society by improving the STEM
education community's capacity to meet 21st century pedagogical expectations by
examining the effectiveness of QT for teacher education, providing online access
to QT materials, increasing sustainability of QT through propagation to diverse
settings, and disseminating findings widely. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is providing co-funding
for this project in recognition of its alignment with the broader teacher
preparation goals of the Noyce effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.