* 1912911
* Blue Light Emitting Diodes Based on Metal Halide Perovskites and Perovskite-Related Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Biwu Ma, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 397,170.00

Electrically driven blue light emitting diodes (LEDs) are essential components
in modern electronics, such as color displays and solid-state lighting, which
have a market size of billions of dollars. To date, blue LEDs based on inorganic
semiconductors, such as InGaN, have been dominating the market, which are
manufactured by expensive processes involving high temperature and high vacuum.
Developing blue LEDs based on low cost materials that can be facilely processed
at low temperature are of great scientific and practical interest. Solution
processable metal halide perovskites and perovskite-related materials have
recently emerged as a new class of light emitting materials for efficient and
low cost LEDs. While great progress has been achieved for green, red, and near-
infrared perovskite LEDs, blue LEDs lag far behind with extremely low
performance and stability. The proposed research aims to develop highly
efficient blue LEDs based on new metal halide perovskites and perovskite-related
materials with optimized device structures. The success of this project will
generate new knowledge in materials chemistry, thin film processing, and device
physics for metal halide perovskites and perovskite-related materials. It will
have significant technological impacts on electronic devices, including
displays, solid state lighting, and flexible electronics, with the potential to
revolutionize the display and lighting industries. This project will also
educate and train graduate and undergraduate students in multidisciplinary
materials and energy research, and promote Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) education through various community outreach activities, such
as science exhibitions and summer camps for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
aims to develop high performance electrically driven blue LEDs based on metal
halide perovskites and perovskite-related materials, through identifying new
perovskite materials, thin film processing methods, and device architectures.
First, new approaches of color tuning will be investigated to obtain highly
efficient blue emissions from metal halide perovskites and perovskite-related
materials. Secondly, solution processing approaches will be developed for the
preparation of blue emitting thin films with controlled morphological, optical,
and electronic properties. The proposed research will investigate how the
processing conditions affect the thin film properties and their performance in
devices. With the highly luminescent blue emitting thin films, device
integration and engineering will be carried out to achieve highly efficient
electrically driven LEDs, by integrating them with proper hole and electron
transport layers in a multilayer structure. The stability of blue LEDs will be
studied to reveal potential degradation mechanisms, with which approaches to
enhancing stability will be developed. Eventually, a comprehensive in-depth
understanding of the structure-processing-property-performance relationships
will be available, which would serve as a guideline for the further development
of blue emitting materials and devices. This project will significantly advance
the field of perovskite optoelectronics and improve sustainability of blue LEDs
with earth-abundant materials and low-cost processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.