* 1912779
* New Finite Element Techniques for Simulating Flows and Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jay Gopalakrishnan, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 374,446.00

Computer simulations of various natural and technological processes require
accurate and efficient numerical approximation of flows and waves. This project
advances the state of the art by developing unconventional approaches that
improve numerical techniques at the heart of such simulations. In addition to
the anticipated mathematical inventions, the project also plans to develop a
public-domain open-source software product implementing the new techniques and
use the product to solve simulation problems in varied application domains
including geological hazard mitigation and material science. Through inclusion
of under-represented minorities, the project activities contribute to the
foundation's goals to widen participation of all in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical work on the project is divided into
two lines of inquiry. One leads to new methods for capturing wave solutions of
hyperbolic systems, methods that are expected to excel on the emerging many-core
architectures. Another line of inquiry leverages a new mathematical ingredient
to obtain structure-preserving numerical approximations of viscous flows. The
first line of inquiry is motivated by the observation that when hyperbolic
solutions can be advanced in time by varying amounts at varying spatial
locations, the allocation of computational resources is optimized. When this can
also be done concurrently, much faster simulations are possible. New fast
methods on unstructured spacetime meshes of causal spacetime tents are the
projected outcome. The advances from this project benefit simulation of various
wave propagation systems as well as inviscid compressible flows. Viscous
incompressible flows are targeted by the second line of inquiry. Using a Sobolev
space of matrix-valued functions, novel formulations are constructed that yield
optimal fluid stress approximations, exact mass conservation, and pressure
robustness. Work in both lines of inquiry involve answering several technical
questions, shown to be fundamental, and of potential disciplinary impact beyond
the confines of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.