* 1912619
* WoU-MMA: Research in Strong-Field Gravity and Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Vasileios Paschalidis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. In
particular, it involves research on compact binary systems in general relativity
and modified gravity by combining theory and multi-messenger observations with
gravitational waves. The work will advance our understanding of nuclear physics
at densities and that arise in the deep interiors of neutron stars, which cannot
be probed by experiments on Earth. New tools will be developed for understanding
gravity through a synergy of gravitational wave observations by LIGO, and the
anticipated electromagnetic signals that will be detected by ground and space-
based telescopes observing from the radio to the hard gamma-ray bands. The group
will develop new codes for modeling binary neutron stars and binary black hole-
neutron stars with the aid of supercomputers. Such theoretical work is crucial
for the successful interpretation of and the extraction of fundamental physics
from existing and future observations of compact binary systems. The award will
support the training, education and further career development of students in
STEM fields, including minorities and women. Neutron stars and black holes are
often portrayed in movies and documentaries, and excite the interest and
curiosity of the society. For this reason the PI will also train undergraduate
students in visualizations of these systems and will develop a website showing
scientific animations of these systems based on real physics input.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific projects designed in the proposed research
program have a two-fold goal: a) advance our understanding of strong field,
relativistic gravity, nuclear physics and theoretical astrophysics; b)
facilitate the detection and physical interpretation of gravitational waves and
their possible electromagnetic counterparts. A substantial part of the effort
will focus on the investigation of the inspiral and merger of compact binaries
(binary neutron stars, binary black hole-neutron stars) and their gravitational
wave and electromagnetic signatures. Methods will be developed for utilizing
these observable signatures to extract information about fundamental physics, in
particular about the nature of gravity and nuclear physics above the nuclear
saturation density. More specifically codes that run parallel on supercomputers
will be developed that solve the equations of a scalar-tensor theory of gravity
with future application to binary black hole-neutron stars in order to develop
techniques that test whether there are any scalar-field induced deviations from
Einstein gravity, and to test the equivalence principle in this regime for the
first time. Techniques and codes will also be developed for probing the unknown
thermal part of the equation of state at nuclear densities by using the
gravitational wave and electromagnetic signatures from binary neutron star
mergers. The proposed studies are extremely timely in light of the recent
detection of gravitational waves by the LIGO and Virgo collaborations not only
as generated by binary black holes, but also as generated by compact binaries
with at least one neutron star. The project will benefit the interpretation and
detection of gravitational waves and their electromagnetic counterparts not only
by current and upcoming gravitational wave detectors and telescopes, but also by
future ones. The proposed research will be accomplished via large-scale
supercomputer simulations accompanied by analytic
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.