* 1912657
* I-Corps:  Analyzing the cochlear implant programming market and assessing the need for image guided cochlear implant programming
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Jack Noble, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 01/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project addresses 1)
improving the overall cochlear implant (CI) programming process, 2) enabling the
assessment of the CI electrode array placement which has been shown to affect
hearing outcomes, 3) reducing the subjectivity in CI programming by providing
patient-specific objectives and quantitative information, and 4) creating a
patient focused procedure by enabling CI users to have a better understanding of
factors that affect their outcomes. According to the latest reports from several
CI companies, around 37 million could benefit from a CI; the number of
candidates among newborns each year alone is estimated around 150,000. This
technology will not only individualize and enhance hearing outcomes but it will
also increase market penetration, by making the benefits more apparent and
programming less of a burden, thereby allowing more people to take advantage of
the CI technology. Additionally, overall improved hearing outcomes will reduce
isolation faced by older adults with poor hearing
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project utilizes cutting-edge image
processing algorithms that localize crucial inner ear structures as well as
cochlear implant (CI) electrodes. The resulting information enables estimation
of auditory nerve stimulation patterns which are then used to help guide CI
programming where the goal is to determine a set of satisfactory settings that
will lead to better hearing outcomes. Currently, the programming process is more
of a subjective exercise than a patient-specific procedure that is based on
quantitative and objective measurements. Clinical studies conducted with over
200 participating CI recipients have showed that significant improvements in
speech discrimination as well as recognition in both noisy and quiet
environments were achieved when CIs were programmed using this technology. In
addition, over 70% of those participants decided to keep their new mapping. This
project will help 1) better understand the features and characteristics of the
current cochlear implant market including eligibility, surgery and programming,
2) consider the challenges in overcoming the status quo and changing the current
audiological process, and 3) determine a commercially viable business model that
will improve both the programming process and the hearing outcomes for CI
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.