* 1912836
* NSF-BSF: Searching for Physics Beyond the Standard Model at the LHCb Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Mike Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists,
leaves open many questions about the universe. These include why matter
dominates over anti-matter in the Universe (CP violation), the values of the
masses of the fundamental constituents, the quarks and the leptons, the size of
the mixings among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the
properties of dark matter. Most explanations require the presence of new
particles, symmetries or forces, which we call Beyond the Standard Model Physics
(BSM). This project is designed to pursue searches for BSM physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHC is the premier High Energy Physics particle
accelerator in the world and is currently operating at the CERN laboratory near
Geneva Switzerland, one of the foremost facilities for answering these BSM
questions. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology group is a collaboration
member of LHCb, an experiment designed specifically to study the decays of
hadrons containing b or c quarks at the LHC and to search for other new states
of matter. The goal of LHCb is to identify new physics in nature by examining
the properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New physics, or new forces,
can be manifest by particles, as yet to be discovered, whose presence would
modify decay rates and CP violating asymmetries of hadrons containing the b and
c quarks, and thus allow new phenomena to be observed indirectly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, LHCb is making contributions to the study of
the emergent phenomenology of quantum chromodynamics (QCD), and to searches for
new GeV-scale (i.e. "low mass") BSM particles, possibly components of the dark
sector of matter. And it is in this research domain that the MIT group is
playing a leading and fundamental role, both in the development of new trigger
strategies based upon machine learning algorithms to identify and select the
physics of interest, but also in conducting analyses of interactions that might
contain hypothetical "dark sector" particles such as dark photons or axion-like
particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analytical activities associated with these
dark sector studies are enhanced in this program through collaboration with
Technion in Israel, through the United States - Israel Binational Science
Foundation (NSF-BSF) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The machine learning
algorithms developed by the MIT-LHCb group are available in open-source software
packages and are being used by many other research groups. Additionally, the
group has introduced at MIT the well-recognized International Masterclasses
program, which brings local high school students to the MIT campus to learn
about the excitement of high energy physics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.