* 1912998
* Quantized Geometry, Cosmology and Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Ali Chamseddine, American University of Beirut
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Ali Chamseddine at the
American University of Beirut. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of theoretical
elementary-particle physicists is directed towards finding a better
understanding of the building blocks of nature and their fundamental
interactions. This is done by searching and building alternative models that go
beyond what is presently known and which could be tested by experiments or
satisfy stringent mathematical constraints. This often requires the invention of
new theoretical methods, and in some instances new mathematics. Professor
Chamseddine will work on developing new geometry that describes the a possible
hidden structure of space-time and helps to explain why nature behaves as
observed. Another goal of this research project is the development of a modified
model of Einstein's General Relativity which explains dark matter and also
removes certain problematic features of existing cosmological models and
theories of black holes. Research in this area advances the national interest by
promoting the progress of science in one of the most challenging directions:
finding the laws that govern the physical universe and its constituents. This
project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts, including the
training of graduate students at the cutting edge of this field, thereby helping
to foster a vibrant environment for the promotion of research, and of the
American educational system, in the Middle East.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
technical level, the research of Professor Chamseddine is aimed at developing
noncommutive geometric models at the quantum level. Quanta of geometry could be
used as building blocks to construct four-dimensional manifolds and their
noncommutative extension. In addition, the work of Professor Chamseddine on
mimetic gravity will be applied to solve some outstanding problems in cosmology,
such as building models of a bouncing universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.