* 1912417
* Quantum Feedback, Closed-Loop Magnetometry, and Quantum Nonlinear Dynamics at the Quantum/Classical Boundary
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Poul Jessen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 575,360.00

This work aims to help lay the foundation for new technologies that use quantum
physics to out-perform conventional non-quantum devices, a situation referred to
as "quantum supremacy". The first goal of this project is to borrow an element
of conventional engineering known as the feedback loop (familiar from, e. g.,
the cruise control in a car), apply it to a manifestly quantum object (here, a
collection of atoms trapped by a laser beam), and show that "quantum feedback"
can greatly improve the sensitivity, speed, and reliability of magnetic sensors.
From a basic science perspective, feedback control involves measurement and
corrective action (e. g., measuring the speed of a car and increasing/decreasing
engine power to keep the speed of the car reliably constant). In the quantum
realm, this interplay between measurement and correction is fundamentally
limited by the quantum uncertainty principle, according to which measurement
also causes disturbance, which then limits the accuracy of the correction. The
second goal of this project is to study this measurement/disturbance tradeoff in
quantum feedback when controlling a physical system (again, atoms in a laser
trap) subject to chaos, a scenario that is challenging even in conventional
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recurrent theme in quantum metrology has
been the use of continuous quantum measurement and feedback to construct
adaptive measurement strategies that outperform their open-loop equivalents. One
good example is the pioneering work of Wiseman on adaptive measurement
strategies for homodyne phase estimation, along with related strategies for
coherent state discrimination. In the early 2000's, Mabuchi and co-workers
developed the theoretical framework for closed-loop strategies that use optical
dispersive quantum nondemolition (QND) measurements and real-time feedback to
create spin squeezing and perform magnetometry below the standard quantum limit
(SQL), but were unable to implement these ideas in practice. The main objective
of this project is to show that quantum feedback and closed-loop control of
collective atomic spins is an experimentally viable idea with applications in
quantum metrology and quantum simulation. Over the past few years the Principal
Investigator has systematically solved many of the problems that plagued the
early work, allowing significant deterministic squeezing of the collective
angular momentum of an atomic ensemble, as well as a proof-of-principle
demonstration of closed-loop control and magnetometry below the SQL. Building on
these accomplishments, the goals of this project are (i) Further development of
closed-loop magnetometry, and (ii) Exploration of a novel type of quantum
nonlinear dynamics where the evolution of a quantum system is conditioned on the
outcome of a time-continuous QND measurement. The latter provides an attractive
platform for fundamental studies of the information gain/disturbance tradeoffs
involved in real-time quantum feedback. It also provides access to new regimes
of quantum simulation, and an opportunity to study long-standing issues related
to quantum-classical correspondence in chaotic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.