* 1912682
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusion of Computational Science Based Data Analytics Coursework and Research to Strengthen and Enrich the Lane College Undergraduate Chemistry Program
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Aminah Farrakhan-Gooch, Lane College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2023
* USD 398,786.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Lane College will provide
students with exposure to skill-building techniques that will benefit them
throughout their matriculation as well as beyond their baccalaureate studies
through introduction to computational chemistry and data analytics, research
opportunities and scholarly engagement/dissemination opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the interest in STEM majors has grown over the years,
so has the need for non-traditional, interdisciplinary preparation of students
working towards the baccalaureate. The overall goal of the project is to
increase the interest, preparation and inclusion of students from groups
underrepresented in the field of chemistry, specifically computational chemistry
and related areas. This goal will be accomplished by 1) exposing and training
students in computational science techniques; 2) increasing the number of
students conducting scientific research through mentored research experiences;
3) encouraging the engagement of undergraduate students into scientific
discourse and dissemination of data and 4) increasing the number of students
attending graduate school for a chemistry-related discipline. This project will
serve as a case study on the preparation of students who, historically, have not
been exposed to STEM education or research opportunities. These efforts will
also increase the body of scientific knowledge in the areas of computational
chemistry and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.