* 1912274
* DFG-NSF: Investigations on Physical Implications of Canonical Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Parampreet Singh, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The unification of quantum theory and Einstein's theory of general relativity is
one of the main fundamental problems of theoretical physics. Despite the
availability of various models in the quantum theory of gravity, fundamental
questions remain on how to formulate dynamics in terms of quantum Einstein
equations, and if different paths to construct such a theory result in
qualitatively different physical predictions. Without insights on answers to
these questions, the reliability of various models and their predictions remains
an open issue. This NSF funded award aims to address various such questions in
construction of models using techniques of loop quantum gravity. A primary
objective will be to explore the physical consequences of choosing different
procedures to construct models, especially in the cosmological setting. Research
in this project will have direct implications for the understanding of a
reliable procedure to quantize gravity and the way it can potentially impact
physical predictions. The project aims to significantly enhance collaboration on
fundamental issues in quantum gravity between researchers at Louisiana State
University and at Friedrich-Alexander University at Erlangen-Nuremberg. Progress
in this area of research will have broad benefit for canonical quantum gravity,
classical gravity and cosmology communities. Graduate students trained in this
project will have opportunities for international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two fundamental problems in the construction
of a canonical theory of quantum gravity are: (i) how to formulate quantum
Einstein equations, and (ii) how does the procedure of gauge fixing in the
theory commute with its quantization. Using non-trivial cosmological models,
this project aims to explore answers to the above questions. The primary goal
will be to understand the physical implications of the choices made in the
construction of models using techniques of loop quantum gravity, and whether
they affect any qualitative predictions such as resolution of singularities and
for cosmological perturbations. To overcome the problems associated with
dynamics in quantum gravity, a relational formalism based on Dirac observables
will be used and applied to cosmological perturbation theory both at the
classical and quantum levels. The relationship between different models
constructed via different routes will be explored to test their reliability and
resulting predictions. This research is expected to yield significant insights
on understanding the physical implications of loop quantum gravity, especially
in the cosmological sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.