* 1912670
* EAGER: Geothermal Battery Energy Storage Technical Feasibility
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2020
* John McLennan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 296,723.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project addresses the
geotechnical engineering research needed to assess the feasibility of using the
earth (a geothermal sedimentary reservoir) as a "battery" for large-scale energy
storage to help manage the intermittent nature of solar and wind electricity
generation. A geothermal battery would store solar generated hot water in the
earth, and withdraw it as steam or use it in a hot water binary-cycle
electricity generation system when needed, particularly when solar and wind are
not available. Solar and wind electricity are being introduced into electric
grids to supplement conventional electricity production, driven substantially by
a desire to "decarbonize" electricity production, and more recently due to
falling prices of solar and wind energy. Such introduction has in some ways been
"too successful" leading to short-term curtailments of some solar and wind
production. Also, electricity can be provided by solar and wind only when the
sun shines and the wind blows, resulting in fluctuating production of
electricity. Meanwhile, the deployment of "utility scale storage" (sometimes
referred to as "grid scale") has not kept pace with this intermittent nature of
solar, and to a lesser extent wind. The battery concept would utilize an
existing geo-heated reservoir, but one where the reservoir temperature is too
low to be economically viable. The addition of heat produced by solar thermal
may be able to raise the low-grade geothermal reservoir temperature enough to
utilize it efficiently for steam/binary cycle electricity production. To a large
extent, this storage concept is all "renewable energy" drawing on geothermal
energy and solar thermal energy combined. If feasible, the implementation of
this storage concept would improve the reliability and extent of solar and wind
electricity throughout areas of the nation, resulting in less reliance on
carbon-based fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy storage that is cost
competitive is essential in order to continue the addition of solar and wind
electricity without great disruptions. This project focusses on the
determination if a Geothermal Battery Energy Storage System is technically
feasible at a potentially competitive cost. A steering committee will meet at
the start of the project to provide planning guidance, and near the conclusion
of the project to provide tentative consensus conclusions. A concluding workshop
will be held where findings will be reviewed and consensus conclusions
presented. The results of the project will add to the existing knowledge base by
exploring technical phenomena related to the Geothermal Battery Energy Storage
concept, including thermal energy movement within a geo-reservoir; rock
expansion that occurs when heating the reservoir; the chemical effect on the
rock due to the cyclic heating and cooling of the reservoir; and the potential
for induced seismicity as thermal expansion and the injection of water into the
reservoir produce certain fault movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.