* 1912081
* WoU-MMA: Research in Black Hole Physics and Relativistic Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Saul Teukolsky, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. A
large component of the research is aimed at the numerical solution of Einstein's
equations by supercomputer simulations. The proposed research will have a broad
impact on our understanding of fundamental physics. The first real tests of
general relativity in the strong field regime of black holes are just beginning
to occur with experiments like LIGO. To confront theory with observation, one
must be able to calculate what the theory predicts. Are the black holes that
LIGO observes the black holes predicted by Einstein's theory? The research will
have an impact on astronomy. Mergers of binary systems containing neutron stars
can lead to the emission of electromagnetic and neutrino signals, as well as
gravitational waves. In one spectacular case so far, such an event has been
detected by LIGO with gravitational waves, and also all across the
electromagnetic spectrum. As more of these events are seen, better simulations
are needed to help determine the parameters of these binaries and the
characteristics of these signals (timescale, strength, etc.). The research will
also have an impact on the broader area of computational science. The
computational techniques to be developed here can be used to solve problems in
many other areas, including fluid dynamics, meteorology, seismology, and
astrophysics. Young researchers trained in these techniques are in great demand.
Relativity and black holes continue to fascinate the public and allow science to
be communicated broadly. Movies of simulations produced by the investigators
will continue to provide public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To solve
Einstein's equations, the investigators will use high-accuracy computational
techniques suited to the mathematical properties of the equations. These methods
solve the equations at a much smaller computational cost than other techniques.
One focus is to track the coalescence and merger of binary black hole systems
and to calculate the gravitational waveform emitted by such processes. A second
focus of the research is to study the coalescence and merger of binary systems
containing a neutron star and a black hole, or two neutron stars. The
investigators will include ever more realistic descriptions of the microphysics
in the simulations, such as the equation of state of nuclear matter, neutrino
effects,and magnetic fields. The investigators will also develop a new code for
computational astrophysics that is designed to take advantage of upcoming
exascale machines in a way that current codes cannot. This new code will be
based on discontinuous Galerkin methods and task-based parallelism. It will
provide transformative capabilities not only for numerical relativity, but for
many problems in computational astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.