* 1912504
* Coherent Electron Control
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Herman Batelaan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 475,161.00

Classical Mechanics tells us how bridges, cars, and other objects in our
everyday world work. Quantum Mechanics tells us how electrons, atoms and other
objects in the microscopic world work. We need to find a description of nature
that works at the microscopic and macroscopic scales and everything in between.
This is a century-old unsolved problem that is called the "Quantum Measurement
Problem." Not only do we want to solve the problem, but we want to use
"quantumness" at a larger scale, and not understanding the problem stops us from
doing this. To solve this problem objects at an intermediate scale, in between
the microscopic and macroscopic, need to be studied. This is what the project:
"Coherent Electron Control" is aiming to do. Microscopic objects, electrons, are
placed close to an everyday world object, a wall, so that the description of how
the two interact is neither described by Quantum Mechanics, nor Classical
Mechanics. New models and theories can be tested in this way. On the practical
side, the interaction between electrons and walls has stopped the development of
sensitive devices based on electrons, called electron interferometers. The walls
destroy the useful quantum mechanical properties of the electrons. If this
"decoherence" can be overcome, new electron devices can be constructed that
measure, for example, small changes in magnetic fields, and may thus find
application in the numerous areas of technology where magnetic fields play a key
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron diffraction from nanofabricated gratings
will be used to split electron beams coherently into two parts. Walls will be
placed close to the electron beams to partially decohere the electron beams. The
electron beams are recombined and the measured amount of quantum mechanical
interference tells us about the amount of decoherence. Four different existing
microscopic theories have now been tested. Control of the decoherence will be
explored by changing the wall from insulating copper oxide, to semi-conducting
Gallium Arsenide, to conducting gold, and illuminating the walls with laser
light and particles. The understanding gained will be used to control and reduce
the decoherence and be applied to enlarge the size of existing electron
interferometers. In this way it is attempted to construct the largest and most
sensitive electron interferometer in the world. Patents will be pursued based on
the new technology being developed and the inventions may be marketable. The
research project provides experience to graduate students, undergraduate
students and high school students in the new research area of free electron
quantum optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.