* 1912001
* Regulatory transition and forest-related outcomes in the Global South
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Richard Howarth, Erbaugh                 James          T
* Fellowship Award
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 06/30/2022
* USD 175,000.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences (SBE) Postdoctoral Research Fellowships (SPRF) program and SBE's
Political Science program. The goal of the SPRF program is to prepare promising,
early career doctoral-level scientists for scientific careers in academia,
industry or private sector, and government. SPRF awards involve two years of
training under the sponsorship of established scientists and encourage
Postdoctoral Fellows to perform independent research. NSF seeks to promote the
participation of scientists from all segments of the scientific community,
including those from underrepresented groups, in its research programs and
activities; the postdoctoral period is considered to be an important level of
professional development in attaining this goal. Each Postdoctoral Fellow must
address important scientific questions that advance their respective
disciplinary fields. Under the sponsorship of Drs. Richard Howarth and Michael
Cox at Dartmouth College, this postdoctoral fellowship award supports an early
career scientist investigating regulatory transitions and forest management
outcomes in the Global South. Canonical research concludes that self-organized
groups can generate norms and rules (i.e. institutions) that enable the
sustainable management of forest areas. To promote forest conservation, many
governments across the Global South have rapidly decentralized forest
management. As a result, these same governments have witnessed a rapid rise in
the number of administrative units that conduct regulatory activities. Despite
these processes of decentralization and administrative proliferation in the
Global South, forest loss continues to increase. The relationship between
regulatory transition and institutional stability provides an important link
between the theory of how self-organized user-groups have managed forest
resources for long-term sustainability and the current trends of increased
decentralization and forest cover loss in the Global South. Regulatory
transition refers to a period during which rules, regulations, or
administrations change. Behavioral uncertainty often increases during regulatory
transition, which can lead to outcomes that may differ drastically from periods
of institutional stability. Through the study of how regulatory transition
affects forest outcomes in the Global South, this research advances fundamental
research in social, economic, and behavioral sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research investigates the extent of regulatory transition and its impact on
forest related outcomes across scales. First, it utilizes publicly available,
global datasets to quantify the extent of forest cover in the Global South that
experienced different forms of regulatory transition over the past two decades
(2000 to 2020). This analysis will assess the years during which forest
management was decentralized, and the extent to which sub-national
administrative units have proliferated. Second, this research will analyze the
impact of regulatory transition on forest cover and multidimensional poverty.
This analysis will use panel data and causal inference techniques to understand
how regulatory transition affects forest cover. Third, this research will assess
the causal mechanisms by which regulatory transition affects forest outcomes
through the collection and analysis of interview data. Decentralization and
proliferation provide a unique opportunity to understand how and why forest
cover change has occurred as a result of regulatory transition in one of the
most important countries for tropical forest conservation. The combination of
these three analyses will provide a comprehensive study of when, how, and why
regulatory transition leads to changes in forest resources. In doing so, it
promises to advance scholarship on institutional analysis and natural resource
policy and behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.