* 1912799
* Non-equilibrium Critical Phenomena in Many-Body Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Mohammad Faghfoor Maghrebi, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education towards understanding the quantum properties of matter away from
equilibrium. Quantum mechanics governs the microscopic world, where atoms and
electrons behave in ways that defy intuition. It also describes macroscopic
phases of matter where many particles form a collective quantum state. However,
quantum properties are generally obscured at high temperatures and away from a
stationary equilibrium state, a situation that occurs in real systems that are
in practice almost never isolated from external perturbations. On the other
hand, true applications of quantum mechanics require harnessing such properties
in large systems that can be manipulated away from
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to identify
situations where "quantumness" persists far from a stationary state at very low
temperatures. The PI will identify the collective behavior of many particles
away from equilibrium and will identify the degree to which their behavior is
universal, i.e. independent of the individual system's
particularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will help identify
new avenues to control quantum systems and to protect their quantum features far
from equilibrium, a direction that could be useful for quantum memory and
quantum computing applications. To engage the broader public, the PI is planning
a series of workshops called "Schroedinger's Cat is in Town!" in partnership
with Michigan-based physicists and local artists from the Michigan State
University Museum Art Lab. These workshops will engage the public in an
interactive setting and will also involve creating art based on physics
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental advances have opened a window
to a new era of nonequilibrium quantum phenomena. They have also posed a great
challenge to our descriptive capabilities as most of the familiar tools in
physics are specifically designed for systems under equilibrium conditions.
While nonequilibrium quantum many-body systems hold promise for new and exciting
possibilities stemming from their quantum nature, they often end up exhibiting
an effective classical behavior. This significantly limits the range of the
quantum domain and in fact restricts it to unperturbed platforms at low
temperatures. The issue is especially acute for critical behavior emerging near
phase transitions: nonequilibrium quantum systems have not matched, or
contributed much beyond, the grand triumph of understanding critical phenomena
in classical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an integrated
research, education, and outreach program focused on the dynamics of macroscopic
quantum systems far from equilibrium. The PI aims to significantly broaden the
existing perspective by identifying situations where a genuinely nonequilibrium,
quantum behavior emerges. This will be achieved in four settings of long- and
short-time dynamics in both isolated quantum systems after a sudden change of
system parameters, as well as in open quantum systems that are continuously
driven. The goal is to discover novel dynamical and quantum universality classes
with no counterpart in equilibrium. A specific aim of this proposal is to
develop a unified framework in the different settings of isolated and open
quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will help identify
new avenues to control quantum systems and to protect their quantum features far
from equilibrium, a direction that could be useful for applications in storaging
and processing of quantum information. To engage the broader public, the PI is
planning a series of workshops called "Schroedinger's Cat is in Town!" in
partnership with Michigan-based physicists and local artists from the Michigan
State University Museum Art Lab. These workshops will engage the public in an
interactive setting and will also involve creating art based on physics
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.