* 1912778
* Beyond The Standard Model Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Henry Lubatti, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,625,000.00

This award will provide support to a group working on the ATLAS experiment at
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, a particle physics laboratory in
Geneva, Switzerland. The LHC machine and ATLAS, a large particle detector
facility, were built as basic science tools using funds from NSF and other
agencies around the world. One of their primary objectives was to find the Higgs
Boson, the last particle in the historically successful "Standard Model" (SM)
that accounts for so much of the existence of, and forces between, known
particles forming the matter in the universe. This effort has been successful.
The next step in the experiments is to look for evidence for physics Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM) that might, for instance, account for the presence of the
mysterious "Dark Matter" that makes up so much of the mass of the universe. The
LHC is currently in the midst of Run 2, at almost twice the energy explored
earlier and with significantly increased event samples. It is possible that
evidence for BSM physics could emerge at this higher energy and with the higher
event statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators from the University of
Washington are searching for the new BSM physics through two approaches. The
first is through the study of pair production of Higgs Bosons, with each Boson
decaying into b-quarks. This work emphasizes specialized analytical techniques
for identifying b-quark decays and for background estimation. The second
approach is a search for neutral long-lived particles that decay in the ATLAS
detector volume far from the LHC interaction point, where the high-energy beams
collide. This search uses custom triggers developed by the group to select
decays displaced from the collision point and will search for long-lived neutral
Higgs bosons as well as a broad range of other BSM phenomena. The group is also
making significant contributions to the upgrade of ATLAS detector as well as
software developments to facilitate the analysis of the very large data sets
expected to be recorded by the experiment in the next
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group supports a broader impact program through
public dissemination of the results from ATLAS, with emphasis on training
students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.