* 1912214
* Target Infusion Project: Integrating Data Science into the Urban Studies &amp; Sustainability Curriculum at Winston-Salem State University
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Debzani Deb, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,825.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
science, technology, engineering or mathematics (STEM) graduate programs and/or
careers. The project at Winston-Salem State University will enhance
undergraduate education by adding data science content to the urban studies and
sustainability curriculum and preparing students to meet the needs of the
workforce or advanced studies in fields related to data science and urban
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project spans the department of computer
science and the minor program in urban studies and sustainability. The project
will modify two courses through the infusion of data science content which will
orient students to current trends in urban studies; develop a new course -
Applied Urban Studies Lab; engage undergraduates in urban studies related
research; and establish an Urban Studies Lab. Undergraduate students are
involved as research assistants and as teaching
assistants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.