* 1912742
* Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Multimode Optical Pulse Propagation: Route to High-Performance Ultrafast Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Frank Wise, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 377,282.00

Lasers that produce very short flashes of light (billionths of millionths of
seconds in duration) can be used to observe very fast processes in nature, such
as the motion of molecules or electrons. They do this in much the same way a
strobe light can freeze motion on much longer time scales. In addition, such
flashes of light can be used in applications such as cutting industrial
materials and precise surgery.&lt;br/&gt;Such a laser can be made of optical
fiber, which is attractive because the light is contained inside the fiber. In
fibers used for this purpose to date, the core of the fiber is very small (a few
millionths of a meter) and only a single pattern of the light propagates in the
fiber. This pattern is what most people associate with a laser beam: a small
spot that is brightest in its center. &lt;br/&gt;If the core of the fiber is
made larger, other patterns can propagate. All of the allowed patterns overlap,
so the beam that comes out is a complicated mix of them. Lasers based on
multiple patterns can theoretically reach much higher powers, which are needed
for applications, but the patterns must be controlled. &lt;br/&gt;In the last
two years researchers have learned how to lock together multiple beam patterns
in fiber lasers. Groups from Cornell University and the University of Central
Florida will work to make lasers and other sources of short light pulses based
on fibers that support many overlapping beam patterns. Instruments with new
capabilities, such as much higher powers, will be developed. &lt;br/&gt;Graduate
students who work on this project will receive theoretical and practical
training, and will be prepared for diverse careers in science and technology. In
an effort to increase exposure of science and enhance diversity of participants,
the Cornell group will work with the 4H organization to offer workshops aimed at
exposing junior-high-school students to science careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lasers that
generate ultrashort light pulses have had enormous impact in science and
applications. The field of ultrafast science has been built on a foundation of
short-pulse lasers based on a single transverse mode of a cavity, or optical
fibers that support a single transverse mode. In fibers that support multiple
transverse modes, wave propagation is inherently spatiotemporal. The generation
of ultrashort light pulses in a fiber laser with many transverse modes was
recently demonstrated for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;A group from Cornell
University will work to develop lasers and optical amplifiers with new
capabilities, based on multimode optical fibers. In such a laser it is possible
to control both the spatial and temporal degrees of freedom of the
electromagnetic field. A particularly promising direction is scaling short-pulse
fiber lasers to higher powers, which are always desired for applications.
Numerical simulations of candidate laser designs will be performed. Lasers will
be built and compared to the simulation results. Collaborators from the
University of Central Florida will provide theoretical and computational support
for this effort. The limits of performance will be investigated, and lasers will
be designed for optimum performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.