* 1912389
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Promoting Rural Opportunities for Student Achievement in STEM (PRO-STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Cherise Harrington, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 12/31/2023
* USD 349,999.00

Researchers at North Carolina Central University will examine the barriers to
student achievement in STEM among underrepresented minorities in rural
communities. They will identify patterns of STEM exposure and access to
educational resources among incoming freshmen from rural high schools in North
Carolina and generate data to guide interventions to increase student retention.
The specific goals are to (1)conduct formative research, using community-based
practices, to identify relevant geographically-specific cultural and social
determinants and educational factors associated with STEM achievement, (2)
triangulate formative data to inform the development of a multidimensional
sociological framework-based program to recruit and retain rural students in
STEM education, and (3) conduct feasibility and pilot testing of the prototype
program Gaining Opportunities in STEM (GO STEM), a summer bridge program that
focuses on critical rural workforce issues and relevant training to improve
preparation for and recruitment into STEM-based coursework and degrees. The
research results will document the effectiveness of a community-based approach
to increase STEM retention in rural communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will use a mixed-methods design and community-based perspective to
optimize data collection and triangulation of the research results. The research
questions are (1) How is STEM education prioritized at the classroom, school,
county, and state level? Are there differences between urban and rural schools?
(2) How do urban and rural students differ on specific barriers and challenges
relative to STEM exposure, interest and recruitment? (3) What supports are
needed to recruit and retain students in STEM?. The project will be implemented
in two phases. In Phase I, the researchers will conduct structured interviews
and focus groups to assess barriers that impact student retention and survey
incoming freshmen students from rural communities to identify social
determinants relative to educational attainment and degree selection The
Integrative Model of Behavioral Prediction will be used to guide formative data
collection activities in Phase 1. In Phase II, the researchers will use the
results of Phase I to develop and test a pilot program (GO STEM) that focuses on
the specific needs, knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs that impact the retention
of rural students. The project will produce empirical evidence of the
effectiveness of a community-based approach to mitigating STEM
underrepresentation among rural underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.