* 1912973
* SBIR Phase I:  THE REDUCTION OF TWO STROKE ENGINE EMISSIONS BY MEANS OF ROTARY EXHAUST VALVES
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* John Krzeminski, STRANGE DEVELOPMENT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,172.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to reduce two stroke emissions while improving
overall engine efficiencies. Engine emissions directly impact the environment,
wildlife, and public health. Small engines used in powersports and small
lightweight ground transportation are becoming a significant source of
emissions. The technology developed in this effort will yield a low cost high
power density engine with reduced emissions output. Transportation manufactures
have limited low cost options to improve emissions and this technology will
provide a commercial incentive to implement; keeping cost low while achieving
lower emissions outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes
to develop two stroke engine technology that reduces engine emissions. Two stoke
engines are low cost with high power density but despite these advantages, the
two stroke engines' major disadvantage is the emissions produced by the engine.
The disadvantages are inherent to the design of the traditional two stroke
engine with the lubrication oil being mixed with the fuel and the port design
allowing unburnt hydrocarbons to exit the engine. This project will address
these shortcomings of the traditional two stoke developing an engine with an
emissions profile similar to that of a four stoke
engine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.