* 1912444
* SI2-SSE:   GenApp - A Transformative Generalized Application Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/31/2018,09/30/2020
* Emre Brookes, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2020
* USD 197,151.00

Scientific computing and computational analysis are becoming integral aspects of
virtually any field of science, be it exact sciences like Physics, Chemistry and
Biology, or social sciences. Efforts of many research laboratories are focused
on creation of scientific codes for data generation, analysis and
interpretation. However, publicly funded and often hard won scientific codes
developed in a typical research laboratory too frequently become unsustainable
beyond the lifetime of funding or shortly after staff rotation. Projects that
are funded to afford expensive computer science expertise simply to maintain and
update existing software divert scarce resources from the lab's primary goals
and often translates the problem without resolving it. Only a select number of
researchers receive sufficient funding to maintain and update software, limiting
the dissemination of new ideas and techniques. The diversity and continually
changing nature of software environments compounds the issues. Enabling user
utilization presents hurdles in deployment, access and training. These issues
also create barriers to the implementation of new ideas embodied in new codes.
The GenApp project's goals are to address these issues. To begin with, GenApp
enables the rapid dissemination of scientific codes to researchers with minimal
software expertise. As more researchers use these codes, more of them become
vested in the codes, which helps their sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental goal of this project is to advance the GenApp framework into a
transformative tool to broadly benefit the scientific software developer
community. GenApp is a generalized application generation framework intended for
rapid deployment of scientific codes, which can generate both science gateways
and stand-alone applications. Among the main unique features of GenApp are the
minimal technical expertise requirement for the end user and an open-end design
ensuring sustainability of generated applications. To produce fully functional
applications, GenApp weaves libraries of fragments and user defined modules as
directed by simple definition files, created from a uniform, logical, and
simple-to-encode general interface definition file provided by GenApp. This
general definition file and the underlying software can be reused indefinitely
to produce applications in a variety of existing and yet-to-be defined software
environments. Preserving such simplicity with GenApp's maturation is one of the
main developmental strategies. To achieve the goal of GenApp four focus Aims
have been proposed. The first is infrastructure development, which includes
general enhancements to the capabilities of GenApp. The second is documentation,
training, dissemination, outreach and sustainability - all important aspects to
produce a software product that is useful to the community. The third is simply
feedback, since user and developer feedback will help drive the first two Aims.
The final Aim includes two structural biology domain science applications that
will adopt and drive GenApp development. GenApp will see its primary practical
utilization in making highly demanding novel computational and analysis tools
accessible to experimentalists and theoreticians working in the nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and small-angle scattering (SAS) domains of structural biology.
The GenApp framework will serve as a platform for applications utilizing
advanced tools requiring efficient use of HPC resources, tools for modeling SAS
data with molecular simulations, and a large software suite for a combined
analysis of NMR and SAS measurements coupled to computational modeling. Easy
access to these powerful tools will enable hitherto impossible studies of a
number of fundamental biological problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.