* 1912664
* The AQUARIUS (Air QUAlity Research In the western US) Workshop; Salt Lake City, Utah; April 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Christopher Cappa, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 25,779.00

This project supports a workshop, "The AQUARIUS (Air QUAlity Research In the
western US) Workshop," to be held in Salt Lake City, Utah for two days in 2019.
The goal of the workshop is to bring together experts to discuss and develop
plans for a future aircraft campaign to investigate wintertime particulate
matter (PM) in the mountain basins of the Western U.S. The outcome of the
project will be a white paper outlining the scope and plan for a future aircraft
and ground-based field campaign. Early career scientists will be given priority
for travel support,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the now extensive knowledge of
atmospheric chemistry and the formation of PM, existing models do not reproduce
pollutant concentrations in several air basins in the Western US. The chemistry
in these regions is significantly impacted by the boundary layer meteorology
which can confine the pollution mixture below the height of surrounding terrain
for an extended period. During the PCAPs local and regional emissions accumulate
and age, changing the composition of the PM. While previous field studies have
investigated the boundary and atmospheric chemistry individually, no studies
have collected a suite of data needed to assess their interactions.
Additionally, because precursors of PM are often emitted with GHGs, both will be
impacted by GHG mitigation plans. The goal of this workshop is to bring together
research leaders and young scientists in the boundary-layer meteorology,
atmospheric chemistry, and urban carbon cycle communities to develop joint and
complementary science objectives for a large measurement campaign in the western
U.S. Discussions will focus on the following topics: 1) the impact of
agricultural emissions, residential wood combustion, and volatile chemical
products on wintertime air quality; 2) the data and parameterizations needed to
improve models of wintertime PCAPs; 3) the impact of inter-basin transport and
vertical stratification of PCAPs; 4) the emission ratios between PM precursors
and GHGs; and 5) how GHG mitigation actions might affect wintertime air quality.
The broader impacts of this project will be the development of a document to
guide development of a future field campaign focused on addressing these
scientific goals. Additionally, the workshop organizers have existing
relationships with state and local air quality management agencies and the
scientific knowledge and data obtained in this effort would be used to address
current challenges within air quality management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.