* 1912519
* Precision Measurement of Parity Non-Conserving, Weak-force Induced Transitions in Atomic Cesium
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniel Elliott, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,082,092.00

We understand the universe in which we live through four fundamental forces:
gravitational, electromagnetic, weak (responsible for radioactivity and beta
decay), and strong (which provides the force that binds atomic nuclei together).
A theoretical framework that unifies three of these forces (electromagnetic,
weak and strong) is known as the standard model, and has been very successful at
explaining a broad range of observables and predicting others. There are,
however, several notable effects that the standard model has not been able to
explain, including the preponderance of regular matter in the universe (but very
little anti-matter), and the existence and nature of dark matter and dark
energy. The evidence of the existence of dark matter is provided by observations
of the rotation of galaxies. From this, we know that the universe contains much
more matter than we have been able to observe. But we know very little about
what this "dark" matter is, or how, other than through gravity, it interacts
with the matter that we can observe. In this project, the principal investigator
and his team will use precision measurements of extremely weak optical
interactions of a laser field with cesium atoms to test the standard model, and
to search for signatures of physical effects that lie outside the realm of the
standard model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator and his
research team are developing two measurement techniques to probe the weak force
interactions in atomic cesium. Each measurement technique is a variant of two-
color coherent control, in which the amplitudes for two transitions in the
optical or radio-frequency range interfere with one another. One measurement,
based on the 6s 2S1/2 &amp;#8594; 7s 2S1/2 transition, is designed to provide an
improved value of the weak charge of the cesium nucleus. The second, based on
the 9.19 GHz transition between the hyperfine components of the ground state, is
due solely to nuclear-spin dependent contributions such as the anapole moment of
the nucleus. Atomic cesium was, of course, the choice of Wieman for his 1997
work, and that group's measurement is still the most precise measurement of the
weak charge in any atomic species. Cesium is also the only species in which the
nuclear anapole moment has been observed. The degree to which the measurement of
the weak charge agrees with the standard model prediction will place constraints
upon various models of physics beyond the standard model. The coherent control
technique is expected to result in a reduction of the susceptibility of the
measurement to systematic errors, critical for the success of these
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.