* 1912588
* Targeted Infusion Project: Infusing Machine Learning in Cognitive Psychology and Cognitive Bias Analysis: Enhancement of the Computer Science and Psychology Curricula
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Michael Watson, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2023
* USD 281,056.00

The Targeted Infusion Project (TIP) at Fisk University seeks to implement a
novel infusion of the computer science and psychology curriculum. This project
will enhance psychology students? abilities to understand artificial learning
and cognition. This project will also develop a course in machine learning
focused on social sciences. Novel aspects of this proposal include: providing an
introduction to machine learning (ML) and applications to social science for
balanced algorithm development; offering an experience of understanding learning
and bias related to artificial intelligence (AI) protocols; creating computer
science and social science curriculum modules relating to bias and learning in
ML and AI ; and offering this experience at a HBCU, so that underrepresented
students are funneled into STEM graduate schools and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will incorporate quantitative
methods and include research into lecture and laboratory components of social
science and computer science courses. The goal of this project is to innovate
the curriculum in order to better prepare students in the social sciences and
computer sciences for an increasingly multidisciplinary worldview: 1) develop an
introductory machine learning course for social sciences which balances between
core machine learning concepts as well as application and implication to the
social sciences, 2) develop a psychology course that focuses on deep learning
paradigms in learning and cognition, 3) develop modules for other computer
science and psychology courses which reinforce the connections between computer
science and psychology. Together the objectives will provide a strong foundation
in core scientific skills, particularly quantitative skills in computation,
cognitive development, algorithm assessment, and problem solving. This
interdisciplinary approach will synergize with several ongoing initiatives at
Fisk University and have a transformative effect on student training, learning
and careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.