* 1912694
* NSF-BSF: CCSS: Resistance Tomography with 2D Sensor Membranes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Matthew Grayson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 06/30/2023
* USD 490,751.00

Touchpads and touchscreens in today's computers and cell phones have two
disadvantages - first, they are rigid, and second, they require a complex
manufacturing process with many individual sensors. A flexible and easy-to-
manufacture pressure sensor could function as an artificial skin for people and
objects and could lead to cheap and convenient solutions for wearable computer
interfaces, touch enabled spaces, and biomedical movement diagnostics. Such a
device with a wireless interface will allow for ease-of-use in sensor
interfaces. With the help of an unconventional sensor mapping method called
resistive tomography, it is possible to create such a platform using only a
single piece of easy-to-manufacture pressure-sensitive material to map
pressures. Device fabrication for such a flexible sensor is trivial in
comparison to standard sensor arrays, with the complexity shifted to the signal
processing needed to interpret the pressure pattern. Multiple measurements using
various combinations of contacts can create the full pressure map. It is
expected that the technology that is developed from this effort will lead to new
kinds of flexible sensors for wearable touch-pad like interfaces and biomedical
movement diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of today's two dimensional (2D)
touch sensors and strain sensors require an indexed array of individual sensors
in order to gather spatial information, requiring significant complexity in the
fabrication stage, while impairing durability and broader applicability. This
work proposes a new means of gathering 2D spatial data combining touch sensing
and strain mapping that uses a trivial fabricated composite membrane to serve as
the spatial pressure sensor, with the complexity shifted from fabrication to the
computational domain through a tomographic mapping algorithm. This research will
develop new tomographic algorithms based on a Zernike moment analysis to convert
resistive four-point measurements at the periphery of a strain-sensitive
membrane into a 2D map of the local pressures applied throughout the area of the
membrane. The membrane will be made of a nanotube-silicone conducting composite
rubber developed for this purpose. An energy-efficient measurement architecture
and wireless interface to the membrane will allow this strain-sensor map to be
easily employed in-the-field for various mechanical, medical, engineering, and
personal-user applications. The low cost of fabrication will lend itself to
ubiquitous touch sensors and novel modes of interaction for wearable and
Internet-of-Everything applications. The trivial fabrication method of the
sensor component and the conformability of the sensor around any shape make for
a mass-producible, easily implemented, and highly versatile strain sensor and
flexible touchpad. The exact algorithms to be investigated here can be applied
on a much broader class of systems, expanding the utility of tomographic methods
in sensing. The conducting elastomer sensor material will be developed to
optimize the tomography application envisioned here. The ideas generated in the
course of this proposal are expected to generate new intellectual property in
the area of sensors, such as flexible, wearable touchpads for computer
interfaces, likely to spawn new industry products. The conformal ability to
shape such a sensor will lead to broader applications in the health industry for
rehabilitation, such as a tomographic sock to sense bending and mechanical
strain at the elbow, knee, or torso for health monitoring. Durable, long-
lasting, zero-maintenance haptic skin for prosthetic limbs and robotics can be
produced at extremely low cost with the technology proposed here. This effort
will train graduate students in essential skills for critical thinking and
design methodologies, as well as developing skills in applied math, physics, and
materials design with newly developed courses including subject matter developed
under this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.