* 1912152
* Collaborative Research: Beyond Procedures: A Research-Based Approach to Teaching Mathematical Methods in Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Warren Christensen, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 171,528.00

This interdisciplinary project brings together physics education research (PER)
and research in undergraduate math education (RUME). It combines efforts at
identifying and addressing student conceptual difficulties in physics with
efforts toward understanding the ways students use and reason about mathematics
in physics contexts. The work targets the mathematical methods course, a key
course for physics majors as it begins the transition to using advanced
calculus, linear algebra, etc. in physics problems and serves as a gateway to
the upper-division in physics. The project will strengthen the research base in
a portion of the curriculum that has, to this point, largely gone unexamined,
and will touch upon, and build upon, work in related areas, such as research on
other upper division physics courses, as well as the extensive research base in
undergraduate mathematics education. Prior mathematical success is a strong
indicator of success in physics, and the gap of knowledge available between what
is taught in mathematics courses and physics course may be a significant source
of attrition for physics majors that can be addressed through this
work.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the development of
students' mathematical understanding in the context of learning and
understanding middle- and upper-division physics. The team will conduct an
integrated program of research, curriculum development, and assessment of topics
found in middle- and upper-division physics courses, with particular focus on
the sophomore- or junior-level mathematical methods course. The primary
objectives of the project are: (a) to conduct research on student understanding
of mathematics in upper-division physics contexts, with an emphasis on the core
mathematical methods and reasoning covered in an intermediate-level mathematical
methods course; and (b) to develop a library of modular curricular materials
(such as, student-centered tutorials and Peer Instruction tasks) emphasizing
mathematical methods and reasoning suitable for use in a wide variety of upper-
division physics courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.