* 1912279
* I-Corps:  Phygital Math Play
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Cheryl Talley, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Vipin Chaudhary
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to teach math
in after-school or summer enrichment settings located in under-resourced
communities. This project will result in cohorts of trained college student math
mentors engaging younger students in the full set of digital learning and
mentoring services aimed at mathematics. This program can be integrated into the
activities of existing academic enrichment program, such as those associated
with the YMCA, Boys and Girls Clubs and other private entities. Because the
trained mentors are college students employed by the company and often already
volunteering for the afterschool programs, there is incentive for such private
providers to partner with the PI's team and utilize their services. Increasing
standardized test scores by reinforcing classroom learning in out-of-school
settings is a value proposition for school districts and schools. Parents also
see the importance of their children receiving a full high school diploma, which
is predicated on standardized test scores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project utilizes a game-based learning platform which uses the format of popular
action games to implement math lessons. The user interface is a three-
dimensional first-person environment which can be displayed on a personal
computer, mobile device or adapted to a virtual reality system. Once in play,
the scenarios given to the student teach the underlying principles behind math
techniques. Gaming scenarios can compile to span full curriculums aligned with
standardized tests. The digital experience is then reinforced in physical space
by trained math mentors in after-school settings, Phygital Math Play rests on
the premise that Physical and Digital gaming experiences can be used as
motivational tools to learn mathematics in grades K-12. Just as the relational
bonds between gamers is a crucial component of digital games, the mentor-mentee
relationship will be developed and cultivated for physical play. An important
element for this venture is building a mentoring infrastructure between
institutions of higher learning and their surrounding school districts. The
project team asserts that there should be no distressed school district within
20 miles of a minority-serving institution. To that end, undergraduate mentors
will be trained to help reinforce the math concepts linking physical play and
digital application experience to pencil-paper
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.