* 1912514
* Probing Fundamental Physics with Gravitational Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Krishna Venkateswara, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 439,619.00

In modern physics nature is described by two theories. One is the "Standard
Model", which describes all material properties with quantum particles; the
other is "General Relativity", Einstein's theory that describes gravitation.
Most physicists think that there must be a connection between these two
theories, but to date there is no experimental signature for such a connection.
Furthermore, the discoveries of dark matter and dark energy suggest that
gravitation phenomena exist that lie outside of General
Relativity.&lt;br/&gt;The group at the University of Washington specializes in
measuring ultra-feeble forces to search for unprecedentedly small deviations
from gravity as described by General Relativity. While observing any deviations
from General Relativity would be a revolutionary scientific discovery, it may
also have consequences for future technical applications of GPS or next-
generation precision clocks. Technology and technical expertise developed by
this group has applications ranging from industrial metrology to earthquake
prediction.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern ideas for unifying gravity and particle
physics, as well as the observations of dark energy and dark matter, suggest
that General Relativity is not a complete theory and that new ultra-feeble
forces of nature may remain undiscovered. The table-top experiments of the
University of Washington gravity laboratory (Eot-Wash Group) provide a unique
opportunity to probe for new physics at the intersection of general relativity,
cosmology, and particle physics. The group leads the field of ultra-weak force
detection through technical expertise, innovation, and by responding to the most
relevant timely and timeless physics questions.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
group will: 1) Continue to test the equivalence principle (EP): It is almost
certain that any connection between General Relativity and the Standard Model
violates the EP. The group's torsion balance experiments provide the most
precise EP-tests over ranges between microns and 100 km. The group has upgraded
the flagship rotating torsion-balance instrument with a fused silica torsion
fiber and will carry out a new EP measurement. 2) Dark matter's only known
interaction appears to be gravitational. Following recent theoretical
suggestions that dark matter may be bosonic with particle masses as low as
10exp(-22) eV/c2, the group will search dark matter evidence by re-analyzing
archival datasets and by collecting new ultra-sensitive silica-fiber-based
measurements. 3) Test Newton's Inverse-Square Law at short distances: The Eot-
Wash group has measured and tested gravity at distances below 50 microns. The
group will begin another measurement cycle with upgrades to its existing
instrument. 4) Advance the frontier of low-frequency ultra-small-force
technology: Innovative and challenging technology development has enabled the
group's success. With a vision towards the future, the group will continue
pursuing development of cryogenic instruments, optical readout, and silica
fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.