* 1912373
* CRCNS US-German Research Proposal: Language representations in bilinguals
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Fatma Deniz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 920,079.00

The overarching goal of this project is to uncover how language-related
information is represented and&lt;br/&gt;processed in the brains of bilinguals.
To do this the project will use functional magnetic resonance imaging
to&lt;br/&gt;record brain activity in bilingual subjects while they read
passages of text in two different languages.&lt;br/&gt;These data will be
analyzed and modeled using a cutting-edge approach called voxelwise
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will provide crucial insights
regarding how syntactic and semantic&lt;br/&gt;information about multiple
languages are represented and organized in individual bilingual
brains,&lt;br/&gt;and how these representations are flexibly deployed to
facilitate multi-language comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;Improving our understanding
of language representations in bilinguals will improve diagnosis
and&lt;br/&gt;treatment of language disorders, enhance methods for language
education, and advance machine&lt;br/&gt;translation
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past 10 years the project team has
developed a novel and sensitive voxelwise modeling approach
for&lt;br/&gt;analyzing and modeling fMRI data. This approach recovers
functional maps in the human cerebral cortex in&lt;br/&gt;unprecedented detail.
The project team will use this powerful framework to study language
representation in the brains of&lt;br/&gt;bilingual speakers. In Aim 1 the
project will compare lexical semantic information represented in cortical maps
obtained&lt;br/&gt;during language comprehension in bilinguals in both German
and English. In Aim 2 the project will compare syntactic&lt;br/&gt;information
represented in cortical maps obtained during language comprehension in the same
individuals&lt;br/&gt;examined in Aim 1. In Aim 3 the project will compare
cortical semantic and syntactic maps obtained during
language&lt;br/&gt;comprehension in bilinguals who know two very different
languages, Chinese and English. Together these&lt;br/&gt;experiments will answer
several important questions about semantic representation in bilinguals: Are
the&lt;br/&gt;functional representations of semantic and syntactic information
similar or different across languages? What are&lt;br/&gt;the similarities and
differences in semantic representations across languages? How are syntactic
features&lt;br/&gt;represented and how do these representations differ across
languages?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A companion project is being funded by the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research, Germany
(BMBF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.