* 1912795
* Special Issue of Oceanography titled "Paleoceanography - Lessons for a Changing World"
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Jennifer Ramarui, Oceanography Society
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 12/31/2020
* USD 59,978.00

The Oceanography Society (TOS) will publish a special issue of the open-access
journal Oceanography with the title "Paleoceanography - Lessons for a Changing
World". The special issue will provide a comprehensive, accessible, and
authoritative summary of the Earth system problems that paleoceanographers are
currently pursuing as well as the state-of-the-art techniques used in their
research, with the twin goals of stimulating new collaborations within the
global Earth and ocean sciences community and providing up-to-date, peer-
reviewed syntheses for use worldwide by educators and decision-makers.
Oceanography Editor Dr. Ellen Kappel, along with four guest editors who are
experts in the field, Drs. Alan Mix, Peggy Delaney, Laurie Menviel, and Katrin
Meissner, will ensure that the proposed set of peer-reviewed articles,
spotlights, and information boxes will further these objectives. The special
issue will provide a coherent compendium of the most recent results from
research intended as a basis for undergraduate and graduate classroom
instruction and discussions, as well as to inform policymakers. The journal gets
broad distribution within the oceanography community as well as in institutional
libraries and with government representatives. More than half the regular
subscribers to Oceanography are graduate students. To ensure the greatest
impact, TOS will make freely available a PDF of the full issue for download from
the Oceanography website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed special issue of
Oceanography will broadly review significant scientific accomplishments of
paleoceanographic research in the last decade and provide a forward look at
research opportunities. Six specific themes will serve to organize the special
issue: (1) proxy development, new models and statistical tools; (2) geobiology,
linking paleoclimate changes with biology and evolution; (3) carbon-climate
feedbacks across time-scales; (4) ocean circulation and climate system dynamics;
(5) the role of the Southern Hemisphere and tropical processes in global
climate; and (6) ice-ocean interactions. The set of Oceanography articles will
provide a benchmark against which current and future changes in climate, the
carbon cycle, sea level changes, and marine ecosystems can be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.