* 1912006
* LTREB:  Phenological responsiveness of plants and bees: consequences for species, interactions, community composition and productivity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* David Inouye, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2022
* USD 171,416.00

It is well known that climate (temperature, rain or snow) can change the timing
(or "phenology") of plant and animal reproduction, and that different species
vary in how much they shift their timing. Little is known about how these
differences in responses to climate will influence the ability of species to
thrive. When the weather becomes warmer, or snow melts earlier, do plant species
that shift their flowering time earlier become more common than plants that
change less? Is it possible for bees and flowers to shift their timing of
reproduction differently and miss interacting? Answers to these kinds of
questions are important for predicting how plants and animals in natural areas
will change in the future, and for managing the crop plants we depend on for
food. The project also trains elementary and high school science teachers and
college students in research, and provides science talks for children and
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory Phenology
Project maintains the world's longest detailed record of the timing of plant and
insect activity. These records, together with new measurements of plant growth,
will be used to understand how changes in the timing of flowering and bee
activity with climate affect plant and bee success. The project has detailed
measurements of climate (daily) and the timing of flowering (three times per
week) for all plant species in 36 permanent plots in high mountain meadows in
Colorado for up to 45 years, and the abundance of all bee species (every other
week) in nearby meadows for ten years. Going forward, this project will measure
the relative abundance of all plant species and productivity of the plant
community. With these new data, the project will address three questions: (1)
Does the phenological responsiveness of plant or bee species explain differences
in species' abundances, annual variation in abundance, or resilience after
extreme weather events? (2) How does the phenological responsiveness of the
plants used by each bee guild influence bee communities? (3) Are the traits of
plants in a local community related to community-level responses to climate such
as changes in species richness, or ecosystem responses such as productivity? The
project will also continue to provide its long-term datasets (already used by
research groups across the US and abroad) to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.