* 1912598
* Support for LIGO Scientific Collaboration Core Functions in the Era of Gravitational-Wave Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Richard Savage, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,418,534.00

The LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) was formed in 1997 to directly observe
gravitational waves (GW) in data collected by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO). This goal was realized in September 2015
with the detection of GWs originating from the Binary Black Hole (BBH) merger,
GW150914. In 2017 the LSC, together with the Virgo collaboration, inaugurated
the era of multi-messenger GW astronomy with the detection of the Binary Neutron
Star (BNS) merger, GW170817. This is the dawn of a new and exciting era of
astronomy, made possible by the organization and coherent vision of the LSC. The
success of the LSC relies on a globally distributed team. Effective and
efficient operations requires regular in-person meetings for planning and
reviews. This project supports travel for the LSC Spokesperson and other members
of the leadership team to participate in such activities and it also supports
the LSC Fellows Program. This program attracts a diverse and skilled set of
(mostly) junior researchers to work at each LIGO site. Participants monitor the
quality of data during observation runs and work with local engineers and
scientists to improve the performance of the interferometers. Participation by
LSC members in on-site investigations helps improve the sensitivity of the LIGO
detectors and increase their duty cycle; this extends the scientific reach of
the detectors. Developing and maintaining a broad base of research scientists in
the LSC that are trained in gravitational-wave science is essential for future
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports core functions of the
LIGO Scientific Collaboration (LSC) in order to carry out its scientific mission
of using gravitational-waves to explore the fundamental physics of gravity and
as a new multi-messenger astronomical tool of discovery. The grant supports the
U.S. portion of the LSC Activities Fees, which amounts to about 52% (444 of 884
members) of all fees collected. The LSC levies an Activities Fee on a per-member
basis to fund key programs and functions deemed essential by the membership.
These include the LSC Fellows Program, publication fees associated with
collaboration papers, LSC service travel associated with organizational
responsibilities, and LSC spokesperson's travel. About two thirds of the
Activities Fee funds the LSC Fellows Program, which attracts a diverse and
skilled set of (mostly) junior researchers to work at each LIGO site. The goals
of the program are to provide opportunities for LSC members to learn about and
contribute to LIGO's precision interferometery at the observatories, to have on-
site LSC scientists monitoring the quality of data during observation runs, and
to complement the activities of local engineers and scientists in improving the
performance of the interferometers. The Activities Fee assessment ensures that
the publication fees for collaboration papers, including fees to make seminal
detection papers open-access, and LSC Spokesperson and other members' travel
associated with organizational responsibilities, are distributed evenly among
collaboration members. The fee also funds reliable internet hosting and identity
services, both of which are crucial for a large collaboration such as the LSC.
The LSC has a substantial positive impact on research, education and public
understanding of science through its activities. The LSC trains junior
scientists to understand the design and operations of the cutting-edge LIGO
detectors. The experience gained through the LSC Fellows program significantly
and positively impacts junior scientists' abilities to understand and
communicate on highly technical topics; these are important skills both inside
and outside academia. Students and junior researchers from smaller institutions,
some of whom are under-represented minorities, gain access to resources that
would otherwise be out of reach. In the long-term, there is significant benefit
from training a larger and more diverse group of experimental
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.