* 1912168
* Effective Descriptions of Quantum Gravity and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Martin Bojowald, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2022
* USD 70,000.00

General relativity and quantum mechanics are the two major theories that govern
fundamental physics. However, the majority of known mathematical methods are
insufficient for a complete analysis of a combination of these theories, or
quantum gravity. Fascinating phenomena such as the very first stages of the big
bang or the cores of black holes therefore remain out of reach for our current
understanding. This project promotes the progress of science by deriving new
methods and investigating systems in which both general relativity and quantum
mechanics are relevant. Applications to mathematical models of the big bang and
black holes will lead to conclusions that are of interest to the public at
large. They further our knowledge about the universe, for instance by providing
new tests of general relativity for strong gravitational fields. Methods derived
in this project can also be used for systems that do not involve general
relativity, where they may help to solve technical questions or to communicate
results in a new way. The project therefore supports education, for instance in
teaching quantum mechanics. This project also supports diversity by including
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to introduce and
evaluate new methods for a systematic analysis of physical implications of one
set of candidate theories of quantum gravity, based on canonical quantization.
Throughout physics a powerful tool to derive potentially observable phenomena is
given by effective theories which provide quantum corrections to the classical
equations. Such systems can more easily be evaluated, analytically or
numerically, than equations for quantum states. They are therefore more direct
sources for the discovery of new phenomena. While standard techniques to derive
effective equations do not apply to canonical quantum gravity, a general scheme
applicable to canonical quantum theories exists (introduced by the PI) and is
used in this project to address some of the main problems of quantum gravity.
During this funding period emphasis will be put on understanding implications of
possible non-associative structures in quantum physics, as well as non-classical
space-time effects around black holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.