* 1912329
* EAGER: Multiscale Modeling of Mechanically-Interlocked Macromolecules
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2022
* USD 197,391.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award made on an EAGER proposal supports
theoretical and computational research and education aimed at advancing
fundamental understanding of the physical properties of ring-like molecules
interlocked to form a molecular chain called a catanane polymer. The project is
focused on investigating the structure and dynamics of polymer catenanes.
Mechanically-interlocked macromolecules (MIMs) such as DNA and protein catenanes
are macromolecular assemblies that can be thought of as being held together by a
kind of "mechanical bond" formed from interlocking rings rather than usual
direct chemical bonds. This novel structure is expected to exhibit unique
properties, particularly in comparison with those of linear chain-like
molecules, classic polymers. Limitations in synthesis approaches have delayed
research on MIMs. Since the 1950's improved synthesis methods were sought to
substantially increase the yield of MIMs. Recent advances in synthetic methods,
particularly "template-directed" synthesis, have substantially improved yields
for MIMs and led to the 2016 Nobel prize in Chemistry. This opens research into
understanding the unique physical properties of MIMs, as well as their
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will use computer
simulation in tandem with machine learning (ML) to explore catenated polymers
and investigate their structure and dynamics in different physical environments.
The PI aims to expand knowledge of the underlying physics inherent in
interlocked macromolecules that is critical in exploring the untapped potential
of catenated macromolecules for industrial applications. Machine learning
approaches will be used to overcome simulation barriers enabling the prediction
of new design principles for catenane polymers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the PI also aims to predict novel target materials for future
synthesis, construction and characterization. This project will provide
educational experiences for high school students to postdoctoral researchers.
High school students from the local St. Vincent-St. Mary school will participate
in the proposed work. Undergraduate students will participate through the NSF-
REU center at the College of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award made on an EAGER
proposal supports theoretical and computational research and education aimed at
advancing fundamental understanding of the physical properties of catenated
polymers. Mechanically-interlocked macromolecules (MIMs) such as catenanes are
macromolecular assemblies held together by topological constraints rather than
chemical bonds, possess well-defined topological interactions, and are expected
to exhibit a variety of unique properties that are much different than their
linear counterparts. Limitations in synthesis approaches has led to slow
progress in this area, until the recent development of new synthetic methods,
"template-directed" synthesis, which substantially improved yields for MIMs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the use of all-atom and coarse-
grained molecular dynamics simulations in tandem with machine learning (ML) to
investigate the structure and dynamics of catenanes, including at surfaces and
interfaces. Machine learning approaches will be used to overcome limitations of
simulations and enable the prediction of new design principles for catenane
polymers. Through theoretical and simulation-based research, the PI aims to
expand knowledge of the underlying physics inherent in interlocked
macromolecules that is critical in exploring potential industrial applications
of catenated macromolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide
groundwork for future mesoscale and multiscale modeling of complex polymeric
systems. In this project, the PI also aims to predict novel target materials for
future synthesis, construction and characterization. The research will provide
educational opportunities for students from high school to graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.