* 1912191
* Implementation Project: Increasing the Quality of STEM Education and Research
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Sharron Streeter, Tougaloo College
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,249,996.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation project at
Tougaloo College, a small, private institution, provides a multilayered approach
to broaden opportunities for African-American students to succeed in STEM
majors. The focus of the project is on two critical fields, namely mathematics
and the physical sciences. The project is guided and informed by an on-going
evaluation, as well as by internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tougaloo College will engage students from the
pre-college level, during the first year, and up until graduation by using
holistic strategies to identify, inform, motivate, and support students for
success. These intervention strategies are anticipated to lead to increased
enrollment in STEM disciplines, higher success rates in gatekeeper courses,
increased retention of freshmen, and an increase in the number of students
entering into the graduate school and STEM workforce. The project has the
objectives to: increase recruitment and retention of STEM majors by revamping
the summer bridge program and developing an interdisciplinary freshman
curriculum; provide students with the opportunity to see the value of STEM in
addressing real life problems through research; and revitalize faculty by
creating a learning community with comprehensive training in a student-centered
learning pedagogy. This approach, building a bound STEM learning community prior
to entry into college, then providing a holistic academic and research
environment, will demonstrate a reliable performance model for small colleges
and universities that are concerned about first year STEM student
attrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.