* 1912785
* SBIR Phase I:  Student Gaming and Algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Bryan Goerger, FIDELIUMTECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 249,490.00

This SBIR Phase I project will focus on developing and demonstrating feasibility
of a first multi-player educational gaming platform where the experience in the
game directly translates to real world skills in skilled trade. The platform
will be a multiplayer experience in which gamers collaborate to complete
construction projects and design and engineering efforts in the real world. This
approach to training the next generation of construction professionals provides
an efficient approach to train the next generations of construction managers,
estimators, contractors, field superintendents and tradesmen. Since the
construction industry continues to trail others related to the adoption of
technology, the timeliness of this educational technology that links STEM
learning within a simulated construction project is underscored. This technology
will also address the challenge of making education, especially in the skilled
trades, more accessible to socioeconomic disparate populations, and to other
students not able to attend traditional universities to acquire these skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will focus on developing and
demonstrating feasibility of the high-risk components of the Design Builder Pro
Simulator application. In general, the Phase I will require curriculum
development and developing a prototype of the user interface, gaming and design
layout. The prototype software will be integrated with intelligent algorithms to
adjust gaming difficulty based on student performance. More specifically, the
project includes the following 3 objectives: 1. Design and build alpha
technology that successfully passes verification testing. Success metrics
include the alpha prototype software interface and gaming subcomponents is
developed and successfully passes all technical verification. 2. Develop
intelligent algorithms to adaptively adjust game parameters. Success metrics
include the developed algorithms accurately adjust game difficulty based on
subject performance. 3. Complete a usability study to validate the student
experience and core curriculum. Success metrics include Improved student
knowledge about and interest in construction, significant positive quantitative
and qualitative metrics from user validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.