* 1912166
* EAGER: A Framework For Economical Cyber Security Inspection and Assurance
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Theodore Allen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 02/28/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project seeks to develop and apply smart inspection methods to keep the
costs of cyber security low, while ensuring the security of scientific results.
Many other industries use statistical sampling and sequential inspection methods
for quality assurance. Yet, at present much of cyber security relies on
attempted inspection of either 100% of items of a given type (such as top
priority domain name server logs) or 0% (such as many types of possible hardware
inspections). Working across two major universities, Ohio State University and
the University of Wisconsin, the project develops new inspection methods,
tailored to cyber security objectives. Specific objectives relate to hardware,
cyber software vulnerabilities, log inspection, and emergency management and
related scientific research. The project explores the usefulness of these new
methods to senior quality professionals to support widespread adoption. By
working smarter and not harder, scientists using this approach can feel more
confident that their results are trustworthy, and, at the same time, the cost
curve can be bent so that research can remain cost-
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project models security
metrics probabilistically and develops patterns of testing to estimate these
metrics. The research addresses a variety of domains and cyber security
challenges: (1) supercomputing log and hardware inspections, (2) ordinary
department vulnerability sampling and estimation and improved logging and
sampling (focusing on scientific infrastructure), (3) highly resourced
department stratified sampling hardware, improved vulnerability decision-making,
and strategic log generation and sampling, and (4) the UW Emergency Management
system center. Metrics from attack-defend and standard quality assurance will be
explored and serve as validation outputs for the techniques. This project seeks
to meet the vital security needs by formulating an assurance framework that
adapts and extends existing methods in quality control and assurance to the
cyber domain. The assurance framework offers many advantages: it can address
sequential decision-making, it can seek solutions that are robust to uncertain
data, and it balances cost with threat reduction. The inspection methods to be
studied include Multiple Complete Inspection &amp; Inspector Inspection,
Attempted 100% Inspection with Optimal Supplementation, Stratified Sampling,
Sequential Sampling, and Optimal Multi-Fidelity Inspection. In each case,
operating characteristic curves and other estimates of system integrity will be
developed and applied. A key and unique element of the proposed approach is the
combination of multiple inspection methods, including new methods, to provide a
comprehensive framework for cost-effectively enhancing
integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.