* 1912125
* Collaborative Research: Ocean Transport and Eddy Energy
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Kyla Drushka, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 59,999.00

Ocean mesoscale eddies are turbulent motions with lateral scales of tens to
hundreds of kilometers. These eddies can significantly impact the transport of
heat, carbon, and nutrients throughout the oceans, and play an essential role in
shaping the ocean's strongest mean currents and their variability. Energy
exchanged between the ocean and atmosphere, and across reservoirs and scales in
the ocean controls the ocean circulation and transport. Mesoscale eddies play a
significant role in this energy exchange. Yet, these eddies are at best
partially resolved in ocean climate models, and most of their momentum and
tracer transport must be parameterized. Imperfections in these parameterizations
lead to biases in modern climate models, including incorrect rates of exchange
of heat and carbon with the atmosphere, errors in the position and strength of
the ocean's strongest current systems, and incorrect stratification at high
latitudes. This Climate Process Team (CPT) brings together observationalists,
modelers, and theoreticians to unify and extend recent research on ocean eddy
energetics and parameterization, therefore improving both our knowledge of these
processes and their representation in ocean models. Newly generated datasets for
ocean energetics and transport, together with the increased fidelity of climate
models, will advance our understanding of mesoscale eddies in the climate system
in particular through their role in the energy budget. This research will lead
to increased ocean model fidelity, and therefore has the potential to reduce
some of the most stubborn biases in climate models, primarily related to the
strength and position of strong currents, and the ocean's stratification. The
team, which includes three leading global coupled modeling centers, will
implement new parameterizations within climate models, therefore enhancing links
between modeling centers and universities. The project will also generate new
datasets and parameterizations, promoted on many platforms (e.g., Pangeo,
GitHub), which can be used by the whole climate community. The results will be
disseminated via publications and annual workshops involving the international
community. The project will support the training of four postdoctoral
researchers by enhancing their knowledge in fundamental ocean dynamics, eddy
parameterizations, numerical modeling, and observational analysis. The team will
also promote underrepresented groups in STEM (three female PIs, including the
lead PI). Finally, improved climate simulations can lead to improved predictions
with significant societal and economic benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extant
parameterizations fail to fully account for the exchanges of mesoscale energy
with different scales, or conversions between kinetic and potential energy
reservoirs. Recent advances from theory, process studies and longer-term
observational records of ocean energetics can now be leveraged to improve the
current generation of climate models across a range of horizontal resolutions.
This CPT aims to vet, improve, and unify new advances in energy-, flow- and
scale-aware eddy parameterizations in process studies and global models;
constrain parameters and parameterized eddy fluxes through a synthesis of up-to-
date observations of ocean energetics and transport; and implement and assess
schemes within IPCC-class models at NCAR, GFDL, and LANL. Modernized,
energetically-consistent mesoscale eddy parameterizations are expected to
significantly reduce model biases in ocean currents, stratification, and
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.