* 1912555
* Metastable Trapped Ions for Clockwork and Probing Nuclear Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Wesley Campbell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 470,990.00

Some of the most sensitive probes scientists have for learning about the
universe are in fact single atoms. To access this sensitivity, charged atoms
(ions) are individually isolated in vacuum chambers, cooled to nearly absolute
zero by lasers, and levitated in electromagnetic fields known as ion traps.
Ytterbium ions, arguably the most popular for this type of science, can store
energy for years in a unique (and poorly understood) "metastable" excited state.
Rare atomic effects have been predicted to exist in this metastable state that
should make it particularly good for building atomic clocks and seeing the shape
of the atom's tiny nucleus. This program is experimentally studying these
effects for the first time to gain insight into the high precision measurement
capabilities offered by this unusual state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
seeks to observe and study two unusual features that have been predicted to
exist in the low-lying 2F7/2 state of the relatively unexplored (I=5/2)
ytterbium-173 isotope. First, hyperfine-induced state mixing 173Yb+ has been
theoretically predicted to reduce the lifetime of four of the six hyperfine
levels of the 2F7/2 state by approximately two orders of magnitude (as compared
to 171Yb+) to the experimentally-desirable level of a few days. The group is
measuring this effect for each affected hyperfine state to determine how large
the corresponding reduction in ac Stark shift systematic error will be when this
system is used in place of the current 171 isotope as a clock. Second, the group
is demonstrating a scheme to measure the (currently unknown) hyperfine structure
in the 2F7/2 state of 173Yb+. The large spin of both the electronic state and
the nucleus allows the possibility that this "electron microscope for the
nucleus" will show signatures of its electromagnetic multipole moments,
including the nuclear magnetic octupole, electric hexadecapole, and possibly
even the magnetic 32-pole moment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.