* 1912908
* Numerical Methods for Fluid-Structure Interaction Problems with Large Displacements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Martina Bukac, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,942.00

Fluid-structure interaction (FSI) problems arise in many applications, such as
geomechanics, aerodynamics, and blood flow dynamics (hemodynamics). In
hemodynamic applications, mathematical models must capture the non-linear
coupling between blood and the elastic structural dynamics of vessel walls, soft
tissue, or cardiac muscles. These structural dynamics create 'moving domain' FSI
problems that are challenging to numerically solve and analyze. Fast and
efficient FSI solvers are valuable for bioengineering applications since the
combination of numerical algorithms with experimental and clinical measurements
provides an innovative approach to understanding the basic function of many
components of the cardiovascular system and their mutual interaction. The PI
will develop a class of numerical methods and underlying theory for non-linear
FSI problems with large displacements. The research aims at making fundamental
contributions to development of algorithms and numerical analysis of such
problems. The proposed research will push the boundaries of our ability to model
FSI problems in hemodynamics, including fracture propagation in soft tissue.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is the development of a class of
numerical methods and underlying theory for solving non-linear FSI problems with
large displacements. Proposed methods will be specially designed for problems
arising from hemodynamics. We will consider elastic and poroelastic structures
where solid mechanics are described by hyperelastic constitutive models. Both
partitioned and monolithic methods will be developed. Special attention will be
given to numerical analysis of the proposed methods. The research goals will be
achieved through the following specific aims: Aim 1: Development of
noniterative, domain decomposition methods for FSI problems with
porohyperelastic structures using secondorder Backward Differentiation Formula
time discretization and the Crank-Nicolson Leapfrog time discretization; Aim 2:
Development of non-iterative, domain decomposition methods for FSI problems with
thick, hyperelastic structures; and Aim 3: Development and analysis of a
monolithic, phase-field approach for FSI problems with hyperelastic
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.