* 1912367
* I-Corps:  Reactive Nanobubbles Technology for Green and Sustainable Environmental and Agricultural Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Wen Zhang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to catalyze
the development and commercialization of innovative nanobubble technologies in
environmental, agricultural and other potential engineering applications. In
environmental applications, reactive nanobubble technologies could impact water
or wastewater treatment industries, municipal water treatment plants, drinking
water disinfection, natural and landscape water management and remediation of
impaired water bodies (e.g., by algal bloom). Value propositions include the
improved water treatment efficiency (e.g., increased disinfection efficacy),
reduced use of traditional hazardous chemicals such as chlorine, and reduced
maintenance/operational cost in water remediation. In agricultural fields,
irrigation with nanobubble water can significantly improve dissolved oxygen in
water by 100-5000% and efficiently deliver oxygenated water and growth elements
such as nitrogen to plant roots. Thus, the value propositions include improving
crop or plant's growth, health and quality. Moreover, nanobubble water can
positively affect turf and grass business and promote reduced or chemical-free
fertilization in turf or lawn maintenance and therefore increase ecosystem
safety and reduce negative environmental impacts.

This I-Corps project explores fundamental engineering principles of colloidal
bubble systems at nanoscale dimensions. Innovative scientific approaches employ
reactive nanobubbles to control and mitigate water pollution as well as support
smart agricultural irrigation/fertilization. Specifically, nanobubble
technologies are processes that generate ultra-small sizes of bubbles with a
diameter of < 1 um dispersed in water or other liquid media. Nanobubbles in
water have a long residence time in water due to their low buoyancy and
excellent stability against coalesces, collapse or burst, and the formation of
bulk bubbles. Therefore, compared to regular bulk or large bubbles, nanobubbles
have a higher efficiency of mass transfer due to their high surface areas, which
also facilitates physical adsorption and chemical reactions in the gas-liquid
interface. Therefore, nanobubble technologies are potentially useful in many
industrial and engineering applications, ranging from ultra-sound imaging and
intracellular drug delivery, pharmaceutical manufacturing, detergent-free
surface cleaning, mining separation, water purification to wastewater treatment.
This I-Corps project focuses on the evaluation of unique business models in
water pollution control and mitigation as well as irrigation for agricultural
applications.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.