* 1912494
* Quantum Optics with Atomic Ensembles and Arrays
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alexander Kuzmich, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2023
* USD 638,831.00

This research will explore the creation and motion of many-particle quantum
states using ultra-cold atoms trapped in focused laser beams. When these atoms
are placed into highly-excited (Rydberg) atomic states, they interact with each
other strongly, rapidly leading to a situation in which many atoms are
interconnected in a very fundamental way (so-called "quantum entanglement).
Subsequent evolution and decoherence (removal of the entanglement) of atomic
states will be studied. Efficient production of multi-particle entangled states
will impact fundamental physics investigations and advance quantum-enhanced
measurement techniques. This research will also inform emerging technological
applications of quantum computation and communication, quantum sensors for
navigation and magnetometry, and atomic clocks.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
experiments feature an array of individual atoms and atomic ensembles cooled to
microKelvin temperatures, each confined by a strongly focused laser beam. The
frequency of the trapping field is chosen such that confinement is state-
insensitive with respect to ground and Rydberg atomic levels. This approach
allows for controlled evolution of strongly-interacting atoms, permitting
generation of multi-atom entangled states on the timescale of tens of
microseconds and allowing for second-scale entanglement storage within ground
hyperfine manifolds. Methods of creating and controlling highly-entangled states
and their applications to quantum-limited metrology will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.