* 1912171
* Dynamical, Strong-Field Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Frans Pretorius, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 480,000.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
research goals of this project are focused on understanding the strong-field
regime of Einstein's theory of general relativity. This encompasses both
astrophysical and theoretical aspects of general relativity. On the
astrophysical side, the main effort is numerical simulation of binary black
hole, black hole-neutron star and binary neutron star collisions. This is
important to support the nascent field of gravitational wave astronomy that
began in 2015 with LIGO's detection of the collision of two black holes. The
speed at which the field is advancing is also breathtaking, with the first
gravitational wave detection of a binary neutron star collision in 2017,
accompanied by intense study of the aftermath across the electromagnetic
spectrum by a large community of observational astronomers. Numerical models of
such events are needed to aid in detection, and are crucial to decipher details
of what happened. On the theoretical side, there are many outstanding questions
about the nature of spacetime in extreme situations. One example is the nature
of singularities predicted by Einstein's theory to occur deep in the interior of
black holes. Though not thought to be observable as no information can escape
from black holes, how general relativity breaks down here is still of keen
theoretical interest, as it will give clues to what a putative theory of quantum
gravity needs to accomplish to resolve classical singularities. The pursuit of
these projects will involve graduate students, undergraduates and postdoctoral
fellows. They will be trained to do leading scientific research, become
knowledgeable in corresponding areas of physics, and adept in high-performance
computing and numerical methods. These skills are invaluable to many
professions, and would thus also benefit and further the development of those
students and postdocs that subsequently wish to pursue careers outside
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A specific list of gravitational wave source
modeling projects that will be pursued are (1) understanding the consequences of
neutron star spin in binary neutron star and black hole-neutron star mergers,
(2) developing methods to detect mergers that occur with high orbital
eccentricity, (3) using properties of the quasi-normal ringdown of the remnant
black holes in binary black hole collisions to test general relativity, in
particular the uniqueness properties of black holes, (4) developing models of
mergers in certain modified gravity theories to better understand how
observations can either rule out such modified scenarios, or detect novel
physics beyond general relativity. Regarding black hole interiors, the initial
problem will be to study the nature of rotating BTZ (Banados-Teitelboim-Zanelli)
black holes formed during gravitational collapse in 3-dimensional asymptotically
Anti de-Sitter spacetime. This offers a simplified scenario compared to forming
Kerr black holes in four-dimensional spacetime, the ultimate goal of this line
of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.