* 1912437
* Targeted Infusion Project: Course Based Research Experiences for all Biology freshmen: A model for increased retention
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Shubha Ireland, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Xavier University will
redesign two freshmen lab courses as Course Based Research Experiences (CUREs).
Impacts of the XULA CURE model will be assessed in multiple areas including
affective gains and student retention rates in the department of Biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CUREs are gaining attention for their ability to offer
meaningful research opportunities to all students in a classroom setting, yet
few undergraduate minority-serving institutions currently have established CUREs
as part of their curricula. There is a great need to study classroom-based
research experiences and outcomes of underrepresented minorities (URMs) and
students who differ in factors like race and ethnicity. This CURE-infusion
project will infuse two authentic research projects in Biology foundational labs
and will be the first of its kind at an HBCU where all freshmen in the high
enrollment freshman courses will actively participate in real-world research.
This will also be the first time that data on impacts of CUREs on URM student-
learning, self-efficacy, project-ownership and retention in STEM will be
analyzed thus significantly advancing knowledge of science education at HBCUs.
The key objectives of the XULA CUREs include increasing students? scientific
competencies, motivation and self-efficacy and broadening their knowledge of
career options. In addition to the pedagogical contributions, scientific
findings obtained by XULA students will also advance the knowledge of both Yeast
ORFans and Aspergillus genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.