* 1912382
* Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum/Interdepartmental Hurrican Conference; Miami, Florida; March 12-13, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The 2019 Tropical Cyclone Operations and Research Forum (TCORF), the 73rd
Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference (IHC) will be held on March 12 -13, 2019
at the Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science - University of Miami
in Miami, FL. Topics will include research addressing operational imperatives,
challenges in observing and forecasting during the 2018 hurricane season, Joint
Hurricane Testbed activities, and the Hurricane Forecast Improvement Program. A
meeting of the Working Group for Hurricane and Winter Storms Operation and
Research, which supports the annual update of the National Hurricane Operations
Plan, will be a part of the forum. The forum is sponsored by the National
Science Foundation, NOAA National Weather Service, and the Office of Naval
Research.

Intellectual Merit: At the TCORF/73rd IHC, representatives from Federal agencies
and the academic research community will have the opportunity to discuss the
latest research into tropical cyclone observing, forecasting, and warning such
as: 1. 2018 hurricane/typhoon season challenges and the opportunities for
research that they offer. 2. Research priorities of the operational centers. 3.
Observations and observing strategies. 4. Tropical cyclone model development. 5.
Transitioning research to operations. 6. Advances in tropical cyclone forecast
and warning products and services.

Broader Impacts: The workshop is important to the United States because it
brings the academic research community together with Federal agencies, to
prepare for the upcoming hurricane season and make improvements to the US's
hurricane forecasting and warning program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.