* 1912715
* Modeling and Hybridizable Discontinuous Galerkin Methods for Two-phase Flows in Karstic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Daozhi Han, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 99,951.00

A prime example of multi-phase flow in karstic geometry is flow in natural karst
aquifers. Karst aquifers supply about 40 percent of the drinking water in the
United States, and are susceptible to contamination. During flooding seasons,
the water pressure in the conduits is larger than that in the adjacent porous
media so that conduit-borne contaminants are driven into the porous media.
Likewise during dry seasons, contaminants sequestered in the porous media are
released into flow in the conduits due to the pressure reversal, and exit
through springs and wells into surface water systems. This exchange of flow
between conduits and porous media poses an environmental issue in that
sequestered contaminants may influence the quality of underground water sources
and thus significantly decrease water availability. Besides applications in
environmental science, multi-phase flows in karstic geometry are also important
in oil recovery in petroleum engineering, in Polymer Electrolyte Membrane fuel
cell technology, as well as in cardiovascular modeling and simulation in
biomedical sciences. In these applications multi-phase flows in conduits and in
porous media interact with each other, and therefore have to be considered
together. Geometric configurations that consist of both conduits and porous
media are termed as karstic geometry. Despite the importance of the subject,
little work has been done in this direction, due to the nature of deforming
boundary of the problem, the complex geometry, the coupling of different
dynamics via domain interface, the vast disparity of spatial and temporal scales
and so on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will examine modeling and the
design of hybridizable discontinuous Galerkin (HDG) methods for two-phase flows
in karstic geometry. Based on the phase field formalism and Onsager's
variational principle, the PI will derive a degenerate Cahn-Hilliard-Stokes-
Darcy model for two-phase flow of arbitrary density and viscosity contrast in
karstic geometry. The derivation seeks to overcome a number of obstacles in
modeling of multiphase flows in karstic geometry, including maintaining a
divergence-free velocity, deriving an explicit degenerate mobility function, and
incorporating multiphysics such as wetting and solute. The PI then will
introduce and analyze superconvergent HDG methods for solving the diffuse
interface model by exploiting approximation via polynomials of mixed orders and
by carefully stabilizing the nonlinear advection in the presence of high-order
diffusion. Finally, the PI and his collaborators will develop scalable HDG
multigrid solvers for diffuse interface fluid models. The practical solvers will
further address the lack of efficient iterative solvers in the HDG community.
Graduate students will participate in the work of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.