* 1912400
* Implementation Project: Improving Minority Participation and Completion through STEM at Dillard University- IMPACTS at DU
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Eric Buckles, Dillard University
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,250,000.00

Implementation Projects in the Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate program provide support to design, implement, study and assess
comprehensive institutional efforts to increase the numbers of students and the
quality of their preparation by strengthening science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education and research. This implementation project at
Dillard University provides a multilayered approach to broaden opportunities for
African-American students to succeed in STEM majors. The focus of the project is
on retaining and graduating students in STEM fields and preparing them for
graduate school or the workforce. The project is guided and informed by an on-
going evaluation, as well as by internal and external advisory
committees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has the goals to: increase the
number of students applying to Dillard with STEM as their intended majors, and
increase the number of students retained year-to-year through deliberate on-
ramping and monitoring of students' course progression; improve preparation of
STEM majors through curriculum redesign and technology-infused coursework; and
strengthen Dillard's research and workforce development efforts and further
develop research experiences for undergraduate STEM students. To achieve these
goals, the project will utilize innovative strategies to recruit high school
students with STEM interests; provide a bridge program to on-ramp incoming
freshman students with STEM major aspirations; redesign gateway courses and
enhance existing student supports to retain STEM majors; and provide research
and workforce development opportunities for both STEM faculty and students.
These holistic approaches will demonstrate a reliable performance model for
small colleges and universities that are concerned about recruiting, retaining,
and preparing undergraduate STEM majors for the next
step.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.