* 1912703
* Approximation of Functions with Parameter-Dependent or Stochastic Shock Locations Arising from Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/29/2018,07/31/2022
* Gerrit Welper, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 60,000.00

Many mathematical models of scientific or engineering problems are influenced by
design parameters and random parameters. An example is the modeling of flow
around an airfoil. A design parameter is its shape, and random parameters
include, for example, perturbations in the air before a plane travels through
it. These parameters pose some natural questions for engineers and the
mathematical models they use: What is the best possible shape? Can we compute
safety tolerances of the wing and limit the probability of failure? With
increasing computational power, such questions attracted considerable attention
in recent years. However, for physical phenomena with sharp transitions, only
brute-force approaches are available, which quickly become challenging even with
advanced computer hardware. In the wing example, one such transition is the
sonic boom, a rapid change in the pressure around the wing at high speed. This
project aims to develop new algorithms that can handle such rapid transitions in
parametric models, far more efficiently than currently. The method under
development will be applicable to a range of other engineering problems as well,
such as environmental questions in groundwater flows or the simulation of bio-
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is the development of
new approximation schemes for functions with parameter-dependent jumps or kinks,
motivated by solutions of parametric and stochastic hyperbolic partial
differential equations. These singularities pose serious challenges by
deteriorating the convergence rates for established methods such as reduced
basis methods, proper orthogonal decomposition, or polynomial chaos expansions.
Recent work offers a new method to approximate functions with jump
discontinuities and achieves super-polynomial convergence rates for many
problems. It serves as a proof of principle that high-order methods are
advantageous, but it needs to be developed further to make it practical: In most
realistic problems, jumps not only move but they also interact, and parameter
spaces are typically high-dimensional. Addressing these issues is the goal of
this project. The new algorithms will be tested numerically, in particular
regarding the convergence rates that can be achieved. In addition, the
investigator plans to prove convergence rates for model classes of parametric
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.