* 1912578
* Binary Black Holes at the Extremes in the Era of Gravitational Wave Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Aaron Zimmerman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 05/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational wave detector data analysis and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. This
research project is devoted to the analysis and modeling of gravitational waves.
These ripples in the very fabric of space and time are produced when the densest
objects in the Universe -- such as black holes and neutron stars -- orbit and
collide. The detection of gravitational waves by the NSF-funded LIGO and
European Virgo collaborations has opened up a new window on the Universe,
revealing previously invisible events like pairs of black holes merging. Members
of the Austin Relativity group will participate in the analysis of gravitational
waves as members of the LIGO collaboration, helping to infer the properties of
the sources of these ripples. To ensure the maximum scientific benefit from the
detection of gravitational waves, models for how these waves are produced
require continuing refinement. Members of the research group will perform
numerical simulations on supercomputers in order to explore the orbit and
collision of pairs of black holes. The focus will be on extreme configurations
-- such as systems with very unequal masses and complicated orbits -- with the
goal of making new connections to pen and paper approximations for how
gravitational waves are produced in these cases. These research activities will
provide training for graduate students in high-performance computing and data
analysis, skillsets which are in great demand and of great benefit to society.
In addition, members of the group will engage in outreach activities in order to
educate and inspire the public about this new field of physics and astronomy.
Finally, members of the group will participate in outreach to high school women,
in order to promote diversity within STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on the study of binary black holes with significantly different
masses, whose gravitational waves are challenging to model. This project will
connect numerical simulations of these binaries with analytical approximations
which are capable of modeling binaries with very unequal masses, in particular
the self-force approximation. Targeted simulations will test the self-force and
other approximations, provide independent verification of their predictions,
reveal their limitations, and point to refined approaches for use in GW science.
The key tool for making comparisons will be invariant quantities, such as the
redshift factor and orbital frequency shifts of the black holes. Advances in
modeling these binaries will have immediate benefits for the current era of GW
detectors, and will be crucial for the success of future, space-based missions.
In addition, the PI and other members of the research group will directly
participate in the analysis of gravitational waves. Members of the group measure
the properties of these binaries which produce these waves using Bayesian
parameter estimation. These inferences are a crucial first step in the use of
gravitational wave detections for understanding the population of binary black
holes, inferring the nuclear equation of state from observations of binary
neutron stars, testing the theory of relativity, and using gravitational waves
to measure cosmic expansion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.