* 1912667
* I-Corps:  PARROT, a wireless orofacial myofunctional imaging and pressure mapping appliance
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Jeremy Patterson, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to address a
current void in medical and clinical practices across a broad scope of
disciplines (e.g., dentofacial orthopedist, speech language pathologist, sleep
medicine specialist, respiratory therapist, orofacial myofunctional therapist)
specializing in Orofacial Myofunctional Disorders (OMD) (i.e., sleep apnea,
dysphagia, malocclusions, tongue thrusts, articulation). Millions of people
worldwide are impacted by some intricate and individualized form of OMD each
year. Currently, there is a limited number of oral function diagnostic devices
available. Providing a device, PARROT, that will capture real-time natural
lingual behavior outside a controlled clinical setting may further one?s
understanding of the obscure happenings within the oral cavity. Such information
may further advance OMD diagnostic and rehabilitation practices as well as
promote the engagement of new research across several medical and clinical
fields. Recognizing the growing prevalence of OMD across multiple health related
disciplines and the projected growth of a multibillion-dollar medical device
manufacturing industry, PARROT may address such a
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is purposed toward enhancing
one's quality of life by establishing a robust method to view lingual behaviors
potentially associated with OMD. The tongue's placement within the oral cavity
obstructs and limits accessibility to observe and objectively record natural
lingual behaviors (i.e., spatial positioning, placement, movement and
performance). Such limitations may dilute biofeedback purposed toward
identifying atypical patterns or mechanics potentially causing or promoting an
OMD; thereby, impeding the appropriate application to effectively treat the OMD.
PARROT is a wireless orofacial myofunctional imaging and pressure mapping
appliance that introduces the potential for a systematic approach to objectively
evaluate natural lingual behavior (e.g., region specific lingual movement,
positional habits, and performance) while allowing an individual to continue
routine daily activities and behaviors. To date, a particular proximity sensor
has been identified for measuring tongue-palate distance along with contact and
motion displacement across the stretch of the tongue in the oral cavity, while a
specific pressure mapping matrix will measure intensity of pressure applied by
the tongue across the palate and upper dentition. PARROT is currently in an
Alpha Prototype state with configuration and optimization of biomaterials
continuing prior to Beta Prototype validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.