* 1912199
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Run-In and Superlubricity of Diamond-Like Carbon Coatings from a Tribochemical Perspective
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 05/31/2023
* USD 397,919.00

Smartphone screens are an impressive example of how new technologies often rely
on surface engineering, such as the ability to create durable, hard and slippery
surfaces. Many key economic sectors can benefit from minimized wear and friction
of surfaces, including the automotive, medical device, computer component and
defense sectors, so that this research directly and positively impacts the
economic welfare and national security of the United States. Recently, a hard
surface coating known as diamond-like carbon (DLC) has been found to achieve an
extreme level of slipperiness called "superlubricity". This desirable property
is, however, very sensitive to environmental conditions such as the amount of
water or hydrogen in the surrounding atmosphere. Sensitivity to environmental
conditions limits the effectiveness of the coating for many potential
applications. This collaborative research aims to understand the chemical
reactions that govern superlubricity in DLC and to discover ways to extend its
high performance to a wider range of conditions. The collaborators at Penn State
and St. Olaf College specialize in measuring friction using different state-of-
the-art methods that complement each other. The broader impacts of this study
extend to training the next generation of scientists in the United States by
supporting student participation in the research. Educational activities will
include outreach for underrepresented minority recruitment at Penn State and
undergraduates at St. Olaf, instruction of undergraduates in friction-related
physics at St. Olaf, instruction in DLC surface properties for a graduate course
at Penn State, surface characterization tutorials in professional conferences,
and student participation in international collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its amorphous nature, the carbon atoms in DLC have
very broad distributions in bond length and angle. The covalent bonds in DLC are
formed during the high-energy deposition process and cannot be relaxed or
rearranged without annealing at extremely high temperatures. This means that the
lengths and angles of many bonds in DLC deviate significantly from the minimum-
energy structure of ideal sp2 and sp3 hybridization. Those bonds are weaker and
more reactive compared to the bonds with parameters close to the ideal
structures. Such broad distributions in bond parameters and reactivities are
intrinsic parameters specific to each DLC coating and its deposition conditions.
The main thesis of this study is that the presence of highly-distorted carbon-
carbon bonds facilitates a mechanochemically-induced polymorphic transition to
graphitic domains at the shearing interface. Under this hypothesis, the run-in
process can be attributed to the shear-induced mechanochemical transformation of
the distorted carbon networks to graphitic (or graphene-like) domains. The
transformation process will also be affected by reactions with molecules
impinging from the gas phase. These surface reactions with surrounding gas
molecules are extrinsic parameters affecting the run-in and superlubricity of
DLC. A mechanically-assisted thermal activation (Arrhenius-type) model will be
combined with structural characterization to study how the intrinsic and
extrinsic parameters facilitate or hamper the shear-induced mechanochemical
transformation of the DLC interface to graphitic domains with ultra-low shear
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.