* 1912970
* SBIR Phase I:  Light-Driven Conversion of CO2 and Methane to Syngas
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Shreya Shah, Syzygy Plasmonics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,058.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research project is that the proposed chemical reactor utilizes methane from
natural gas, a native resource, and waste carbon dioxide from industrial
processes to create syngas, a widely used industrial gas. Syngas is a crucial
resource for production of hydrogen, ammonia, methanol, and synthetic fuels.
Hydrogen can be used as a clean alternative fuel to gasoline, ammonia is used in
the production of fertilizer for food, and methanol can be used to produce
olefins that are used to produce plastics. This chemical reactor uses LED light
as an energy source instead of heat from burning fuel to consume two potent
greenhouse gases and create a commercially relevant product at a competitive
price. Using LED light allows for the use of renewable electricity, whenever
available, to power the chemical reaction, in effect electrifying the chemical
manufacturing process and reducing its carbon emissions. Some commercial
benefits of this reactor are: (a) it is low-cost: built out of cost-effective
materials such as glass, (b) it can startup and shut down on demand, (c) it can
be made into large plants or efficiently scaled-down to build small-scale
distributed reactor to produce syngas at the point-of-application.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to build and demonstrate a bench-scale
photoreactor for dry methane reforming (DMR) reaction that uses LED light as its
primary energy source. To date, DMR has not achieved commercialization due to
very high temperature requirements and lack of commercially relevant stable
catalyst. The presented photocatalyst overcomes the previous challenges with
DMR. At lab-scale, it has has shown unprecedented high reaction rate,
selectivity, and stability after long duration testing. This 6-month project
will focus on three foundational aspects critical to this technology
development: (a) develop a multi-physics thermal model of the bench-scale
reactor in COMSOL to understand the energetic effects of the incident light and
the endothermicity of the reaction on the catalyst bed, (b) build a bench-scale
reactor and perform photocatalysis experiments to measure and optimize reaction
rates and energy efficiency, (c) build a techno-economic model that can be used
to determine the feasibility of this reactor for commercialization. Upon
successful completion of the project, the reactor will be ready for a larger
scale pilot implementation at a testing facility.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.