* 1912755
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Advancing Cybersecurity Learning Through Inquiry-based Laboratories on a Container-based Virtualization Platform
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Liran Ma, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

It is critical to educate and train a cybersecurity-capable workforce in an era
where security breaches, privacy violations, and phishing scams have become
commonplace. However, due to the complicated and abstract nature of many
cybersecurity concepts and techniques, it is challenging for students to
comprehend them in an effective manner. To address this challenge, this project
seeks to create innovative learning materials and tools that can help transform
the status quo of cybersecurity education. The project design is based on the
inquiry-based learning model and enabled by recent advances in virtualization
technology. Specifically, this project consists of a set of inquiry-based,
hands-on laboratories that are hosted on an affordable, scalable, extensible,
and low-maintenance container-based virtualization platform. This project meets
the pressing and essential needs in cybersecurity curricula by aiding the
development of new lab materials and courses for community and four-year
colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, three types of hands-on labs
will be designed and developed: Outreach, Core, and Advanced. Outreach labs are
designed specifically for community college students to inspire their curiosity
and interest in cybersecurity, and thus, to drive them to continue their study
in a 4-year college. The key purpose of the core labs is to assist the learning
of complicated cybersecurity concepts and technologies. The advanced labs aim at
not only introducing emerging security technologies, but also inspiring students
who are interested in doing research in these areas. All of our lab materials
and software tools will be open-source and available to learners, educators, and
researchers. Lastly, training on the container-based cloud computing platform
will be offered to instructors and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.