* 1912643
* Green's Functions and the Nuclear Many-Body Problem
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Willem Dickhoff, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

The properties of nuclei with large or small neutron to proton ratios are
becoming available for experimental scrutiny at facilities like the Facility for
Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) under construction on the campus of Michigan State
University. Most of the experimental probes to study these exotic nuclei involve
particles that interact strongly themselves, making it difficult to extract the
properties of individual protons or neutrons in these exotic systems. This
project aims at overcoming this difficulty by providing a simultaneous
description of positive energy nucleons, the domain of elastic scattering, and
bound nucleons, the domain of nuclear structure, using the framework of the
propagator method of quantum mechanics. This approach will provide critical
insight into the properties of very neutron-rich nuclei, and is therefore
relevant for the physics of neutron stars by clarifying where neutrons are found
with respect to the distribution of protons. The PI will mentor graduate
students in this research and collaborate with experimental colleagues who will
perform related experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The propagator method will be
utilized with non-local potentials constrained by experimental data that allow
for the accurate description of ground-state properties of nuclei by the method
of dispersion relations. Simultaneously, this implementation will be able to
describe or predict all relevant experimental data in the continuum including
elastic scattering cross sections. It will therefore be possible to study
various nuclear reactions using the ingredients of this method in analogy to the
successful analysis of electron-induced proton knockout reactions, thereby
clarifying the properties of protons and neutrons in exotic nuclei as well as
suggesting relevant new experiments. In particular, the prediction of the
neutron distribution for nuclei with excess neutrons will be of critical
importance for experiments at Jefferson Lab and future experiments at FRIB. The
propagator method will also be employed to calculate the properties of nuclei by
starting from the underlying interactions between nucleons as constrained by the
symmetries of the fundamental theory of quarks and gluons, Quantum Chromo
Dynamics, and the available data for the properties of two nucleons. Such
calculations will be applied with a new scheme that allows the ab initio
calculation of properties of heavier nuclei that have not been studied in this
way to date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.