* 1912385
* Targeted Infusion Project: Nurturing Science Identity through Culturally Relevant Organic Chemistry Laboratories
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Leyte Winfield, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 06/30/2023
* USD 447,923.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. This project at Spelman College will
transform the organic lab curriculum by providing a learning experience that
fosters science identity in black women. This curriculum will provide guided
inquiry experiments supplemented by culturally relevant activities and
instructional materials to engage, motivate, and improve student outcomes
related to identity development processes and academic performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to improve the
academic performance of students while simultaneously empowering and affirming
their role as scientists. The specific aims are to: 1) revise the first semester
organic chemistry laboratory by developing and implementing guided inquiry
modules that contain culturally relevant instructional materials, 2)
characterize the impact of the modules on students beliefs about science,
beliefs about their role as a scientist, their motivation to study chemistry,
and their mastery of experimental techniques and concepts and 3) assess the
implementation of the modules based on faculty and student feedback. The modules
will be developed by a faculty working group consisting of organic chemistry and
social science faculty. This project will impact over 350 students from Spelman
College and the materials developed from the project will allow for adaptation
beyond Spelman. The findings from this work will contribute to the understanding
of diversity initiatives in STEM and serve as an inclusive curricular model to
prepare women and minorities that go on to graduate school or the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.