* 1912322
* Targeted Infusion Project: Transforming Biology Laboratory Learning by the Development, Deployment and Assessment of evidenced-based research and learning (EBRL) experiences
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Manoj Mishra, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. The project at Alabama State University
will re-design the introductory biology laboratory learning experience by
integrating an evidenced-based research and learning (EBRL) experiences into the
existing first-year courses. This activity will have a significant impact on
student retention, persistence and graduation in the department and serve as a
model for other STEM departments at ASU and other HBCUs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on transforming the first-year
introductory biology laboratory course curriculum and enhancing the quality of
STEM education at ASU, leading to the formation of a new research-intensive
teaching curriculum in biology laboratories. The evidenced-based research and
learning (EBRL) experiences will be integrated to augment the use of innovative
information technology and learning by improving cyber-infrastructure and
instruction technology for biology laboratory learning. The overall goals of
this project will be achieved by 1) providing cutting edge evidenced-based
teaching and research to improve the introductory biology curriculum in
gatekeeper courses; 2) providing effective mentoring, advisement, and state of
the art research experiences for freshmen and sophomore level students from
underserved populations; and 3) upgrade teaching and research infrastructure in
the introductory biology laboratories. The implementation and periodic external
and internal evaluation of these objectives will attract and sustain
underrepresented minority students to the biological sciences and improve their
overall undergraduate learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.