* 1912068
* Manipulating Spinor Quantum Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Han Pu, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 282,886.00

This theoretical research program concerns the quantum mechanical properties of
atoms in the ultracold low temperature regime. Each atom possesses internal
states. In addition, the atom moves like a point particle and hence can be
characterized by such quantities as momentum and angular momentum. In the
ultracold regime the interplay between the atomic internal degrees of freedom,
and their external motion, as well as interactions between different atoms,
leads to many intriguing phenomena which this research project aims to
investigate. On the one hand, such studies can deepen our knowledge about the
fundamental properties of atoms --- the basic building blocks of matter; on the
other hand, the research results could shed light on the mysteries of
superfluids and superconductors which may have future societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program can be divided into two
projects. In the first project, the researchers will focus on the properties of
a coherent mixture of two different atomic gases. Due to the presence of the
inter-species interaction, the properties of such a mixture can be quite
different from those of an individual gas. For example, certain properties of
the pure gas may be significantly modified in the mixture, and new and exotic
quantum phases that do not exist in a pure gas may emerge in the mixture.
Furthermore, the inter-species interaction also offers a new control knob to
manipulate the atomic system which may open up new avenues of research. In the
second project, the researchers will consider ultracold atoms confined into one
dimensional space. Such a system has been routinely realized in the laboratories
by trapping atoms in elongated geometries. Such confinement can greatly affect
the quantum properties of the atom. The researchers will develop new theoretical
tools to help us better understand the novel properties of ultracold atoms in
one dimension, particularly in the strong interaction limit where conventional
methods often fail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.