* 1912151
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: An Experimental and Theoretical Study of the Microstructural and Electrochemical Stability of Solid Oxide Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Katsuyo Thornton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 220,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Solid oxide cells are a rapidly developing technology
for clean efficient conversion of fuels-to-electricity and electricity-to-fuels.
While much of the development has been as solid oxide fuel cells for stationary
power generation, important new applications have emerged that are critical for
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, including electricity storage, conversion of
renewable electricity to fuels, and fuel-flexible range extenders for electric
vehicles. A key barrier to more widespread application of solid oxide cells is
their limited operating lifetime - more research is needed to understand and
ultimately mitigate degradation mechanisms that limit lifetime. This project
provides a fundamental understanding of degradation processes that complements
more practical studies, e.g., long-term fuel cell life tests, being carried out
in industry. The project is achieving this understanding by developing and
testing theoretical models based on measurements of device performance
degradation and three-dimensional imaging of device damage. The project involves
an industrial partner, Nissan, Inc., ensuring that cells are tested under
application-relevant conditions. The results are relevant to many research
communities, ranging from modelers who can utilize three-dimensional data and
simulation methods, to industrial developers who can use the results to help
improve their fuel cells. Graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students
receive extensive training that will be valuable in their future careers - they
find employment in energy-related industries, auto manufacturers, and many
others. Student diversity is emphasized. Dissemination of the challenges and
results with the public occur through two forums: Science Cafe in Evanston and
the Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum, the latter attracts youngsters from surrounding
communities that are disadvantaged (e.g., Ypsilanti) and/or rural (majority of
communities in Washtenaw and its surrounding
counties).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project focuses on solid
oxide cell performance and long-term stability; this is currently relevant
because new applications involving cyclic operation introduce new degradation
mechanisms. Three-dimensional imaging of fuel cell structure is carried out
using focused ion beam - scanning electron microscopy, atom-probe tomography,
and transmission X-ray microscopy, the latter done in a way that directly
observes structural and chemical changes due to cell operation. These images are
combined with three-dimensional simulations of electrode performance and
structural evolution based on the phase field modeling, which will utilize high
performance computing. This addresses a key challenge - to develop simulation
models based on microstructural changes observed in short accelerated tests, and
then apply them to accurately predict long-term (beyond 5 years) performance
changes. This combination of 3D microstructures, validated simulation tools, and
computationally intensive data analysis provides a framework that is broadly
useful for design and discovery of electrode materials. Students receive
training in state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical research methods, and
directly interact with industrial and national laboratory researchers, the
latter to utilize powerful three-dimensional imaging capabilities at Argonne and
Brookhaven National Laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.