* 1912369
* RUI:  High-Precision Measurements and Tests of Fundamental Physics in Group III and IV Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Protik Majumder, Williams College
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 469,334.00

This project supports the latest in a series of laser-based measurements of the
electronic atomic structure of a set of particular heavy metal atoms, including
thallium, indium, lead, and tin. The goal is to measure, with unprecedented
precision, properties of these atoms by using lasers to cause electrons in the
atom to "jump" from one quantum level to another. In a long-standing
collaboration, the investigators will compare their high-precision measurements
of atomic properties to the predictions by colleagues who perform complex
theoretical calculations based on the quantum mechanical properties of these
atoms. This interplay of experimental measurements and first-principles
theoretical predictions reflects the process by which science should ideally
progress: better experiments test current models and assess their accuracy while
new theoretical techniques and predictions inform what additional experiments
should be undertaken. The work in this atomic physics laboratory involves
building and testing laser and optical systems, constructing and optimizing
electronics and control systems, using computer-based methods to collect and
then model and analyze large amounts of data. This work is located at an
undergraduate liberal arts institution (Williams College) where students at all
levels of their education become research partners, contribute to all aspects of
the experimental work, collaborate on presentations at conferences and journal
publications, and in many cases go on to graduate work in physics, engineering,
and related fields. NSF funding also supports the hire of a postdoctoral
research associate who will work closely with the Principal Investigator and
undergraduates, receive important mentoring, and become involved in the
department's educational life. The most recent NSF-funded postdoc will be
departing the group this summer to begin a tenure-track faculty position at
another nearby undergraduate institution, Connecticut College. Training of the
next-generation of science and engineering students, as well as future faculty
members and teachers, is thus a central aspect of the supported research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program, located at an undergraduate
institution, focuses on high-precision measurements of atomic structure in
complex, multi-valence-electron systems using diode laser spectroscopy
techniques. In addition to providing exacting tests of state-of-the-art ab
initio atomic theory, these atomic systems play an important role in tests of
fundamental physics, including searches for violations of discrete symmetries.
These searches rely on accurate, independent atomic structure calculations,
which are needed to distinguish the complicated (but "ordinary") quantum
mechanical effects from the fundamental particle physics being tested. Recent
work has focused on vapor-cell and atomic-beam-based spectroscopy of tri-valent
indium and thallium where recent precise polarizability results have helped
guide the latest theory work by distinguishing between two complementary
approximation techniques. Current work focuses on transition amplitude
measurements in four-valence lead, where new ab initio calculations have
substantially improved calculational accuracy. This work utilizes a very-high-
precision Faraday polarimetry technique to observe, for the first time, an
electric quadrupole transition amplitude in the ground state configuration of
lead. Given existing high-precision parity nonconservation measurements in lead
and thallium, modest improvements in atomic theory precision can have
significant impact on the quality of these atomic-physics-based tests of
electroweak physics. In the course of this work, new techniques for laser
stabilization, small-signal detection, and precision polarimetry will continue
to be developed that have broad applicability. All of this work provides
research-training opportunities for undergraduate students at every stage of
their education, many of whom grow to become research partners, coauthor papers
and conference presentations, and go on to attend highly selective Ph.D.
programs in physics and related disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.