* 1912764
* The PA-Supported Neutrino Program at MIT
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Janet Conrad, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,170,864.00

There is only one area of particle physics with an accumulation of potentially-
related anomalies: neutrino oscillations, where neutrinos change their character
as they propagate through space. For more than two decades, deviations from the
Standard Model three-neutrino expectation have been observed in short baseline
neutrino oscillation experiments. Most commonly, new-physics explanations
introduce a single sterile neutrino in addition to the three active flavors,
electron, muon, and tau, called a 3+1 model. However, within this model, the
anomalies and relevant null results are not self-consistent. Given these
discrepancies, if all, or even some, of the signals are due to new physics, then
the underlying physics must be more complicated than a 3+1 model. Resolving the
situation has become a high priority for the field. Unlike many beyond-Standard-
Model searches, this is a case where the parameter space we must probe is
relatively well-understood. This coordinated IceCube and IsoDAR program, which
is developed as part of this project, will explore this space in depth, and
offer new approaches involving all three flavor signatures -- even tau-
neutrinos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PI has developed two ongoing, unusually-
impactful programs. The first is the $100 desktop muon counter, which has been
featured in the press. She will continue to improve the design and instructions,
and to present the device at conferences, schools, and science festivals. The
second is development of a modestly modified IsoDAR cyclotron to produce rare
medical isotopes, including Ac-225. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IceCube can uniquely
search for sterile-induced matter-effect resonances. As the only on-going
experiment with tau-neutrino identification capability, recently demonstrated in
a successful astrophysical tau-neutrino candidate search, the group will use
IceCube data for the first search for anomaly-related muon-neutrino -&gt; tau-
neutrino resonances. They will integrate the results of their searches into
global fits that the group has performed for more than a decade. IsoDAR is
transitioning from R&amp;D to construction of equipment. The group plans to
calibrate and commission the transformative radio-frequency quadrupole
technology that they have developed, establishing that IsoDAR can meet its flux
goals. Thus, along with a coordinated physics program, the IceCube+IsoDAR
combination offers the junior scientists experience at every stage of particle
physics: phenomenology, hardware, software, and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.