* 1912455
* Investigation of Quantum Coherence and Correlated Dynamics Using Attosecond Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Arvinder Sandhu, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 398,178.00

Electron motion is fundamental to the natural and laboratory phenomena that
govern our daily lives, examples being photosynthesis, chemical processes,
electronic circuits, etc. Being elementary particles, electrons are extremely
agile, and can move inside atoms, molecules and materials on the timescale of
attoseconds, which is a billionth of a billionth of a second. To understand the
functioning of physical, chemical and biological processes important to us, it
is useful to be able to resolve and control the underlying fast electronic
motion. Recently devised attosecond spectroscopy provides exactly such an
opportunity, where attosecond duration light pulses can be used to strobe the
dynamics of electrons. The researchers supported by this project will develop
methods to study how electrons help to redistribute energy within molecules.
Success along these directions could open up opportunities for direct control of
chemical processes in complex molecules relevant for light harvesting and energy
storage. The proposed program will therefore advance US scientific efforts in a
frontier area of research, while training the next generation of scientists
belonging to diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims for
detailed investigation of quantum coherence and correlated electronic and
nuclear dynamics using ultrafast light pulses. These studies will focus on what
transpires at the quantum level, in terms of interactions between electrons,
couplings between electrons and nuclei, and between molecules and the
environment. The natural timescale for the evolution of electronic
superpositions is in the femtoseconds to attosecond regime, so these
investigations will involve the application of attosecond to femtosecond x-ray,
extreme ultraviolet, and infrared light pulses. The scientific objectives of the
project are: (1) Investigation of correlated decay dynamics of molecular excited
states, (2) Study of coherent charge migration and decoherence mechanisms, and
(3) Implementation of new techniques to study charge directed reactivity. These
objectives will be achieved while training graduate and undergraduate students
in the field of attosecond spectroscopy. Velocity map imaging and attosecond
transient absorption techniques will be used in the proposed work. The far-
reaching objective is to build bridges between the field of physics, and those
of chemistry, biology and material sciences, paving the way for control of a
variety of electron driven processes. The project will also conduct outreach by
involving undergraduates and the local community, and by creating advanced
research opportunities for members of under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.