* 1912480
* Sensors of Relativistic Phenomena Based on Solid-State Quantum Platforms
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Swati Singh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 245,532.00

This research aims to identify and explore the promise and limitations of using
emerging quantum platforms as precise detectors of various astrophysical
phenomena such as continuous gravitational waves and scalar dark matter.
Controllable, yet fragile quantum systems can be perturbed significantly by weak
forces, thus operating as detectors of tiny forces. Both gravitational waves
from distant neutron stars or dark matter in our solar neighborhood would
produce weak forces due to stretching and squeezing objects by distances much
smaller than the size of the atomic nucleus. This research will study the
possibility of detecting these forces by studying their action on state-of-the-
art quantum devices. It will also investigate the technical and fundamental
limitations on using various quantum objects to detect weak
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both of the relativistic phenomena mentioned above
produce tidal forces when acting on extended solid objects. Such forces will be
resonantly amplified and can possibly be detected in optomechanical setups, for
instance. Along with exploring the viability of various detection schemes with
respect to technical and fundamental quantum noise, this program will also
explore quantum measurement and feedback-based sensing improvements. This
research spans a wide range of experimental systems: superfluid helium acoustic
devices, micron sized SiN membranes, and photonic crystal cavities. This
theoretical work consists of a combined analytical and computational approach
along with strong collaborations with both particle theorists and quantum
experimentalists. This project is jointly funded by the Theoretical Atomic,
Molecular and Optical Physics Program, by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
Program in the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.