* 1912632
* Fully Relativistic Studies of Black Hole Binaries with Applications to Gravitational Wave Observations
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Carlos Lousto, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 584,540.00

Gravitational Wave Astronomy promises to provide a revolutionary new view of the
universe that can probe previously unknown regions, including the interiors of
neutron stars, collisions of black holes, which emit energy at luminosities
exceeding the entire visible universe, and even remnants of the big bang. To
gain new insights into the dynamics of the universe, gravitational wave
astronomers need to be able to infer the nature of the sources from the observed
signals. The physical parameters of these sources can be extracted from the
observed signals if the dependence of the waveform on source parameters is known
to sufficiently high-accuracy. This award supports the numerical modeling of
merging black-hole binaries using simulations on supercomputers. These
simulations will allow a deeper understanding of extreme gravity phenomena as
well as tests of Einstein's theory of general relativity in strong field
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal goals of this research will be to
produce waveforms for LIGO source parametrization efforts, and to model the
remnant mass, spin, and gravitational recoil from highly-precessing spinning
binary black holes in order to these parameters and how they affect the spatial
distribution and growth of black holes. The PI's team will produce and publicly
release gravitational waveforms in previously unsampled regions of parameter
space for LIGO data analysis, to directly use these waveforms for studies and
modeling of binary black holes dynamics, and will improve the accuracy and
efficiency of the numerical simulations. This project will keep the RIT group at
the forefront of black holes supercomputer simulations involving students and
postdoctoral fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.