* 1912062
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Child and Child-Directed Expression of Possession in a Polysynthetic Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Andrea Berez-Kroeker, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2022
* USD 21,183.00

The scientific field of language acquisition research examines a basic
foundation of the human experience: How children come to speak their first
language. For decades the field has largely focused on languages with millions
(or even billions) of speakers, such as Spanish, French, Japanese, and English.
We know very little about how children learn to speak most of the other 7000
languages around the world. Approximately half of these languages are in danger
of disappearing, which includes all of the Algonquian language family, one of
the largest groups of indigenous languages in North America. Algonquian
languages such as Northern East Cree (NEC) are radically different from those
typically studied in language acquisition research, and as these languages cease
to be spoken, we lose the chance to understand how children acquire the
fundamentally human capacity of linguistic expression. This dissertation project
explores how children learn to speak NEC, one of the few remaining indigenous
languages in North America still learned by children as a first language. This
project analyzes and improves video/audio recordings collected by the Chisasibi
Child Language Acquisition Study (CCLAS), and this dissertation also includes
new fieldwork with adult speakers of NEC to provide more insight into how the
language works and the stages children go through when learning the language.
This dissertation project offers a range of benefits for science and for
communities. It will enhance existing documentation of NEC and include child
speech as well as speech from adults to children, both of which are
underrepresented genres in language documentation. It will also expand the
purview and deepen the diversity of language acquisition research. Furthermore,
this dissertation can help provide Cree communities with better tools for
language assessment and speech-language pathology, so that children may have
better support on their journey to become speakers of their language. Lastly,
the documentation and description generated by this dissertation can help inform
the development of curricula and teaching materials for learners of the Cree
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation will enhance and expand the
documentary record of NEC. This project will create new language documentation
as well as enrich existing recordings of child and child-directed speech
collected by the Chisasibi Child Language Acquisition Study (CCLAS). The focus
of this dissertation is the first language acquisition of the expression of
possession, which is a fundamental concept in cognitive and linguistic
development. This project will create and advance language documentation on two
fronts. First, research involves working with adult speakers of NEC to review
CCLAS recordings and elicit and transcribe adult-like targets. This will produce
hours of transcribed and annotated audio recordings of NEC as well as unique
metalinguistic commentary and analysis. Second, these adult targets,
transcriptions, elicitations, analysis, commentary, and notes will be used to
enrich the existing CCLAS corpus. This work will help enable CCLAS to make
additional transcripts, annotations, and media files publicly available. Through
this work, this dissertation will help break new scientific ground. For example,
this dissertation examines speech genres often absent in language documentation,
and it enriches the range and typological diversity of language acquisition
research. This project can also provide insight to help ensure that methods and
tools in language assessment and speech-language pathology are linguistically
and culturally inappropriate. The findings from this research can also inform
the creation of curriculum and pedagogical materials to benefit not only second
language learners but also meet the needs of schools teaching Cree-speaking
children about the structure of their mother tongue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.