* 1912536
* Detector Technology for Gravitational-Wave Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Stefan Ballmer, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 480,000.00

This awards supports research in gravitational wave detector instrumentation,
and it addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Since its initial gravitational-wave discovery in 2015 the NSF's Advanced LIGO
has observed numerous black hole and neutron star collisions, shedding new light
on a broad set of questions in astrophysics, cosmology, fundamental physics, and
nuclear physics. The observatories' sensitivity can be improved further by
controlling thermal distortion effects when operating at high laser power, and
by lowering the thermal noise in its test mass mirror coatings. This award funds
research into better laser wave front distortion sensors and actuators, and
supports collaborative research into finding better coating materials for
terrestrial gravitational-wave detectors. Both research directions pursue the
common goal of significantly expanding the observational reach of Advanced LIGO.
The award provides students and postdocs access to a world-class observatory and
prepares them for scientific leadership positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award specifically provides funding for: (i.) The development mode-converter-
based optical wave front sensors, capable of simultaneously sensing cavity
alignment and mode-match for the Advanced LIGO detector. (ii.) The development
of a phase camera, based on pixel-demodulation, to provide high-resolution RF
beat maps of the laser field in the detector at a high frame rate. The camera is
intended for use in interferometer commissioning and feedback control. (iii.)
Exploring options for sensing and control of higher-order wave front
aberrations. (iv.) Continued commissioning support in collaboration with LIGO
Laboratory to improve the astrophysical sensitivity and bandwidth of Advanced
LIGO in the upcoming O3 and O4 observing runs. (v.) Installation support for the
construction and testing of a cryogenic nodal suspension for measuring
mechanical loss of new coatings down to cryogenic
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.