* 1912425
* AMO Physics in Parahydrogen
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Weinstein, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 586,076.00

Atoms frozen in solid hydrogen exhibit promising quantum mechanical properties.
For example, recent work has shown that rubidium atoms in solid hydrogen have
properties that make them extremely sensitive magnetic field sensors. The first
goal of this project is to measure a single atom inside solid hydrogen for use
as a magnetic field sensor. If successful, this single-atom "quantum sensor"
could be used to measure the structure of complex biomolecules, which would be
of great utility for biochemistry and medicine. The second goal of this project
is to measure the quantum mechanical properties of molecules inside solid
hydrogen. If certain molecules exhibit favorable properties, these molecules
could then be used for precision measurements leading to an improved
understanding of fundamental physics and the Standard Model. In pursuing these
goals, the project will make measurements that will help better understand the
physics of atoms and molecules inside the "quantum solid" of solid
hydrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This experimental physics research program will
measure atoms and molecules in solid parahydrogen, with two main goals. First,
the project will investigate the fluorescence properties of alkali-metal atoms
in solid parahydrogen and develop techniques to optically address single atoms.
Alkali-metal atom ensembles in parahydrogen have previously demonstrated long
transverse relaxation times, so the ability to optically address single atoms
will enable their use as quantum sensors for magnetic fields, with possible
applications in nano-MRI experiments. The second experimental goal is to measure
the transverse relaxation time of the nuclear spin of ensembles of polar
molecules in solid parahydrogen. This will shed light on the motion of molecules
in this quantum solid. Moreover, if the nuclear spin dephasing time is as
favorable as expected, it has the potential to lead to improvements in
fundamental physics measurements (such as the search for an electric dipole
moment and related time-violating physics) with heavy polar
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.