* 1912757
* Collaborative Research: Distributed Predictive Control of Cold Atmospheric Microplasma Jet Arrays for Materials Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Javad Mohammadpour Velni, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 11/30/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Cold atmospheric plasmas are composed of weakly ionized gases containing a
mixture of ions, electrons, neutral and excited species, and photons at
relatively low temperatures. Cold atmospheric plasmas are emerging as an
effective and cheaper alternative to the low-pressure plasma technology and are
increasingly used in materials processing and manufacturing applications. In
these applications there has been a growing interest in using arrays of
microplasma jets to scale up the surface area treated by plasma. This project is
focused on addressing challenges involved in the control of such microplasma
jets. This research will lead to the development of new models and advanced
model-based controllers for plasma jet arrays opening new vistas in other areas
such as plasma medicine and biomedical engineering. The outcomes of this work
will advance research in data-driven modeling and distributed control of
nonlinear distributed-parameter systems with interacting subsystems. The
educational and outreach activities planned in this effort are natural
extensions of this multidisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this collaborative research between University of California
at Berkeley and University of Georgia is to develop a systems theoretic
framework for tractable modeling and optimal control of plasma jet arrays for
state-of-the-art materials processing applications that critically hinge on
uniform treatment of large surface areas. This goal will be realized through
fusion of nonlinear systems theory for data-driven modeling of distributed-
parameter systems and distributed model predictive control. The key objectives
of the project are to: (1) develop a novel framework for non-parametric, input-
output modeling of nonlinear distributed-parameter systems; (2) develop a
distributed control approach that can systematically coordinate predictive
control of spatially distributed but interacting systems; and (3) test the
modeling and distributed control methods for effective and reproducible
operation of a micro-plasma jet array consisting of several jets through real-
time control experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.