* 1912495
* FoMR: Shrinking the Control and Data Flow Latencies of Single Thread Executions for Emerging Workloads
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Edge devices such as AR/VR glasses, smart cameras, gaming consoles are
permeating rapidly through society for performing numerous applications in
surveillance, multi-user gaming, immersive social networking, autonomous
control, etc. While one would want to perform all of the data processing at
these edge devices, resource constraints with the need for accessing a broader
corpus of data, require offloading the computations to a back-end server. These
computations are usually parallelized for their throughput needs, but the
slowest thread still impacts the latency/responsiveness to the edge device/user.
The highly interactive nature of these workloads, thus, makes it imperative to
ensure that no thread is left behind, and individual data path of each thread is
maximally utilized. This project seeks to address this challenge and work to
eliminate the mismatch in responsiveness across various applications run at edge
devices. The investigators aim to offer a graduate level course on this subject,
help enhance the related undergraduate courses, conduct summer camps for middle
school girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes three optimizations
each for reducing control and data flow latencies in the normal data path for
the emerging edge-serving workloads. The three control flow optimizations
include: (i) cross-stack code layouts for better instruction locality, (ii)
identifying and boosting the fetch bandwidth of critical instruction chains
(CritICs), and (iii) improving branch prediction accuracy especially in shared
libraries/OS by leveraging application/data knowledge. On the data flow side,
the three optimizations try to leverage the importance of data content: (i)
identifying frequent data flow sequences across the entire software stack and
memorizing them, (ii) developing content-aware tiling techniques for code
generation to reduce re-use distance between same/similar content, and (iii)
dynamically leveraging approximations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.