* 1912898
* SBE: Small: Behavioral Control of Deceivers in Online Attacks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Lina Zhou, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 112,337.00

Online attacks can cause not only temporary asset loss, but long-term
psychological or emotional harm to victims as well. The richness and large scale
of online communication data open up new opportunities for detecting online
attacks. However, attackers are motivated to constantly adapt their behaviors to
changes in security operations to evade detection. Deception underlies most
attacks in online communication, and people are poor at detecting deception.
Against this backdrop, this project aims to improve the resilience of solutions
to online attacks and enable predictive methods for their detection. Although a
complete set of deception behaviors of online attackers is assumed to be
unknown, there is a reason to expect that some behaviors are more difficult for
attackers to control than others. By identifying such behaviors and their
relations in online communication, the project lays the groundwork for the
development of resilient and predictive approaches to the detection of online
attacks, and advances the state of knowledge on online deception behavior and
its identification. At the educational front, the project provides new
educational material for enriching the curriculum in cyber security and related
disciplines. The interdisciplinary nature of this work contributes to graduate
student training toward a new generation of scientists who are capable of
conducting multi-disciplinary cutting-edge research using a variety of research
methods. The PIs actively engage students at both graduate and undergraduate
levels in their research activities, particularly making a strong effort to
engage women and underrepresented minorities.

Online attackers' evolving behaviors can make the existing solutions to online
attacks become ineffective quickly. This project not only discovers new
deception behaviors and their relations from the discourse and structure of
online communication, but also determines attackers' behavioral control during
online attacks by comparing different types of online deception behavior.
Further, this project develops techniques for automatic extraction of deception
behaviors from online communication by building upon natural language processing
and network analysis techniques. Some anticipated advances include: (1)
deception theory extension by investigating deception behavior in online attacks
via a new lens of behavior control, (2) guidelines on how to improve the
resilience of online attack detection methods by identifying deception behaviors
that likely escape the attackers' control attempt, (3) a predictive approach to
attack detection in online communication by exploring the temporal relationships
among deception behaviors, and (4) techniques for extracting deception behaviors
from online discourse and structure. This project can lead to integrative and
effective methods for online attack detection.