* 1912520
* Longitudinal Investigation of the Decision Process in Adoption of Course-based Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* John Coley, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,309.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by investigating the motivators and barriers that influence
instructors' adoption and implementation of research in undergraduate courses.
The value of early opportunities for undergraduates to engage in research is
widely recognized. In fact, national reports have recommended replacing standard
laboratory courses with discovery-based research courses as an inclusive way to
engage students in compelling experiments. Course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs) are particularly valuable because they can reach students at
institutions in which out-of-classroom research is limited or unavailable (e.g.,
high enrollment institutions; community colleges). However, development of a
successful CURE requires an initial investment of time and the willingness to
take a risk in the classroom. Many instructors do not have the autonomy, time,
or resources to develop their own CUREs. As a result, nationally disseminated
"network CUREs" have been a successful alternative. In network CUREs, students
at different institutions work in parallel using the same methods, but in
different contexts. Although network CURES have expanded accessibility of
research experiences, much work remains since non-research activities still take
up the bulk of most undergraduate laboratories. If widespread dissemination of
CUREs is to reach all institution types, the undergraduate STEM education
community needs a better understanding of the institutional and contextual
challenges that instructors face in implementing CURES. This project aims to
investigate the "undergraduate research mindset" of instructors representing a
diversity of undergraduate populations. The study intends to identify the
characteristics of CURE programs that influence instructors' decisions to
implement and persist in implementing them, and whether these characteristics
differ depending on institutional context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by
Rogers' Diffusion of Innovations theory, this study will use qualitative and
quantitative methods to assess what programmatic characteristics of two
conceptually related, but structurally different network CUREs factor into
instructors' decisions to implement and then persist in implementing or exit
from each program. In the first phase of the study, longitudinal tracking will
be employed through interviews of instructors who are ready to implement one of
these two CUREs. In the second phase, results from longitudinal tracking will be
used to create and administer a national survey to gain similar information from
a broader group of instructors. This understanding could guide future CURE
developers to target institutional contexts that are currently underrepresented
in CURE networks. In addition, it can provide a framework to help future CURE
developers create research experiences that are likely to be successfully
implemented at diverse institution types. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program will support efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.