* 1912648
* Gravitational-Wave Inference from Binary Compact Objects
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Shane Larson, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 559,181.00

This award supports research in relativity and relativistic astrophysics, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea.
Gravitational waves offer a new tool for astronomy. First predicted by Einstein
in 1916, their direct observation was only made possible a century later with
the development of Advanced LIGO. Gravitational waves allow us to study some of
the Universe's most extreme systems, such as the mergers of two black holes or
neutron stars, which would otherwise remain hidden from us. In its first two
observing runs, the Advanced LIGO detector network discovered gravitational
waves from 10 binary black hole mergers and one binary neutron star merger. In
future runs, the rate of detections will accelerate, with binaries being found
every few days. These unique observations will enable us to answer long-standing
questions in astrophysics like: What are masses of black holes? How are binaries
of black holes and neutron stars made? How do massive stars explode and leave
black hole or neutron star remains? Does the population of black holes change as
the Universe evolves? What role do neutron star mergers play in forging heavy
elements like gold? To answer these questions requires reliable and efficient
techniques to analyse the rapidly growing collection of gravitational-wave data.
The research supported by this grant supports the development of cutting edge
statistical techniques to extract the information encoded in gravitational-wave
data, and use this the unravel the central mysteries of black hole and neutron
star binaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, two main research objectives
are targeted: (i) Inferring the physical parameters of merging binaries from
gravitational-wave signals more efficiently (through improvements to sampling
algorithms and through automation) and more accurately (accounting for
realistic, non-stationary and non-Gaussian noise, and accounting for missing
physics, such as eccentricity, in our current gravitational-wave models); (ii)
Performing population inferences from the ensemble of the detections, using
parametric and non-parametric models to reconstruct distributions of merging
binaries (in terms of masses, spins and redshifts), and comparing results to
astrophysical models to constrain the currently uncertain physics of binary
evolution (such as common-envelope efficiency and supernova kicks). The
inference tools developed will be made publicly available to enable the rapid
advancement of gravitational-wave astronomy in the era of frequent detections.
Furthermore, the latest results of gravitational-wave astronomy, and the
excitement of multimessenger astronomy, will be communicated to diverse
audiences through a range of outreach activities ranging from planetarium events
to popular science writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.