* 1912677
* Toward a Cryogenic Interferometer for Gravitational-Wave Detection
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Rana Adhikari, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 12/31/2023
* USD 495,000.00

This award supports the development of instrumentation for future gravitational
wave detectors and it addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the
Universe" Big Idea. The goal of this project is to make a big leap in
gravitational-wave (GW) and measurement science. Gravitational-waves are the
newest way to make observations about the universe. They provide the best
information about the extremely warped space and time around black holes, exotic
neutron stars, and, within the next decade, a unique probe of the expansion of
the universe over the last several billion years. Gravitational-waves can be
thought of as the audio soundtrack to the movie of the cosmos that humanity has
been watching for many years with our telescopes. To measure gravitational-
waves, scientists have developed the most sensitive vibration measurement
technology in history. The work proposed here aims to push beyond the usual
measurement limits of quantum physics and molecular vibrations and produce a
novel way of making even more sensitive measurements. In addition to the
improvement in astrophysical sensitivity, such measurement science breakthroughs
can be used to dramatically improve sensors in hand-held devices and consumer
products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravitational-wave detectors provide the best
information about the extremely warped spacetime around black holes, exotic
nuclear matter in neutron stars, and, within the next decade, a unique probe of
cosmology at high redshifts. The current LIGO detectors will approach the
thermodynamic and quantum mechanical limits of their designs within a few years.
This project will develop high precision techniques to extend the astrophysical
reach by a factor of 5. To do so, Brownian thermal noise will be suppressed by a
novel combination of cryogenics and materials science. Quantum backaction and
squeezed light will be exploited to surpass the usual quantum limits of
interferometry. Such a dramatic change in the sensitivity should increase the
detection rate of binary neutron star mergers to ~10/day and the rate of binary
black hole mergers to ~30/day. This upgraded instrument would be able to detect
binary black holes out to a redshift of 8.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.