* 1912157
* 2019 Nuclear Chemistry GRS/GRC - Exploring Simple Structural Patterns and the Dynamics of Nuclei at Colby Sawyer College in New Hampshire June 16-21, 2019
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Kyle Brown, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2020
* USD 5,000.00

The 2019 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and associated Seminar (GRS) on
Nuclear Chemistry will take place June 16 - 21, 2019 at Colby Sawyer College in
New London, New Hampshire. The seminar precedes the conference (June 15 - 16)
and is intended for junior researchers to present their work and be involved in
discussion among their peers. These meetings bring together scientists from
around the world to focus on research at the forefront of nuclear structure and
reactions. The conference and seminar are organized in a way to promote
significant discussion and time for collaboration throughout the week.
Additionally, they play a significant role in educating young researchers, which
is crucial to meeting the demand of highly-trained nuclear
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide partial support for a
limited number of junior researchers to attend the 2019 GRC and GRS on nuclear
chemistry. The support for the participants will be selected by the chairs based
on submitted abstracts of their research. This support will allow participants
to attend these meetings who may otherwise not be able to attend. Participation
of young researchers in these meetings plays a large role in the development of
the future leaders of nuclear science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.