* 1912226
* I-Corps: Wrangler - for rounding up research writing resources
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Stephanie Link, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
opportunity to enhance inexperienced research writers? written science
communication by using a self-paced, web-based research writing software that
provides on demand instruction, practice, and feedback throughout the writing
process. If successfully commercialized, the technology can transform how both
educational and professional spheres approach the research writing process and
understand disciplinary writing conventions. Hence, the technology can
contribute to an increase in the research competitiveness of individual research
programs. In addition, the availability of state-of-the-art writing resources
will help promote science by enhancing the public dissemination of research
results. Participation in the NSF I-Corps program also offers a great
opportunity for graduate students to develop skills in entrepreneurship and
innovation, which may lead to a start-up venture that can increase the economic
competitiveness of the state.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
investigates the commercial potential of the technology, which leads users
through a series of interactive, instructional videos that help users become
critical readers of how language is used in discipline-specific, research
writing in order to become better research writers. Users integrate their new
knowledge of language use into practice tools derived from the field of applied
linguistics. These tools help users analyze and discover language use patterns
that are used to effectively structure a scientific argument. Automated feedback
then guides users toward more purposeful analysis of writing. Studies have
demonstrated that these tools can heighten user?s awareness of how to construct
an original research argument while increasing their self-efficacy in becoming
successful published research writers. Furthermore, the tools have helped users
become more independent writers, requiring users to seek less guidance about
writing from research mentors who need the extra time to focus on their own
research agendas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.