* 1912108
* Support for U.S. Participation in the 2019 Canadian-American-Mexican Graduate Student Physics Conference July 24-27, 2019 in Sudbury, Canada
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Amy Flatten, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 01/31/2022
* USD 38,388.00

This award provides support to the American Physical Society (APS) for
conference planning and student travel to participate in the joint Canadian, US,
and Mexican physical societies' graduate student conference (CAM2019), to be
held in Sudbury, Canada, July 24-27, 2019. This is an opportunity for physics
graduate students to begin networking across borders. Throughout the conference,
students will discuss current research in both formal and informal settings with
international peers and professors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAM2097 workshop
is designed for and by graduate students in all areas of physics. Plenary
sessions will be given by well-known scientists in their sub-disciplines
including Particle Physics, Astrophysics and Nuclear Physics, Condensed Matter
Physics, Biophysics, Optics, Atomic Physics, Nanoscience, Computational Physics,
and Materials Physics. The plenary sessions will be followed by contributed
talks from the students. There will be two panel discussions on "International
Physics Collaboration" and "Communication and Research" highlighting CAM2019's
goal to foster student ability to transcend boundaries in physics. All students
who attend will present their research in either a contributed talk or poster
session. The organizers will continue a peer feedback program that was
introduced at CAM2017 and was well received by the student speakers. In addition
to the traditional scientific program the CAM conference provides, CAM2019
attendees will be able to visit a major international physics facility
(SNOLAB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.