* 1912868
* Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Alexander Zupan, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The 22nd iteration of the Nebraska Conference for Undergraduate Women in
Mathematics (NCUWM) will be hosted by the University of Nebraska-Lincoln from
January 31st through February 2nd, 2020, while the 23rd and 24th installments
will take place in late January or early February in 2021 and 2022,
respectively. Women remain an underrepresented population in the mathematical
sciences, and the mission of the conference is to encourage and support
undergraduate women mathematics majors in order to help them pursue graduate
education and careers in mathematics. NCUWM achieves it goals through a variety
of activities. Plenary talks given by successful women mathematicians showcase
different kinds of mathematics and different careers made possible by a
mathematical education. Three panel discussions and a range of small group
discussions disseminate information on a number of topics involving graduate
school and career options. A significant percentage of conference attendees have
completed original research projects, and the conference provides a venue for
students to share this research in 48 talk slots and a poster session.
Additionally, the schedule includes a variety of networking activities that help
participants connect with peers and mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate
attendees benefit from learning cutting edge mathematics from the presentations
of the plenary speakers as well as from undergraduate research presentations,
and student presenters have the opportunity to share their research with
supportive and welcoming audiences. NCUWM has won the AMS Award for Mathematics
Programs that Make a Difference and has received exemplary feedback from an
independent assessment. The conference has seen an ever-increasing breadth of
applicants each year and has been recognized as a model for other undergraduate
conferences. These outcomes have occurred because of the guidance of an overall
mentoring philosophy that features active involvement of mentees and role models
at a variety of career stages, thoughtful matching of conference activities to
specific mentoring needs, enthusiastic support from the Department of
Mathematics and the University of Nebraska administration, and the leadership of
faculty who have dedicated a portion of their careers to making NCUWM a
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference webpage is available at
https://www.math.unl.edu/~ncuwm/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.