* 1912604
* Gravitational Wave Astrophysics with LIGO: The Oregon Experimental Relativity Group
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Raymond Frey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 950,583.00

This award supports research in gravitational wave detector commissioning and
characterization, as well as data analysis and it addresses the priority areas
of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. A Search for Gravitational
Radiation at LIGO Oregon Experimental Relativity Group. With the discovery of
gravitational waves in September 2015 via the observation a merger of black
holes, and the birth of multi-messenger astrophysics with gravitational waves in
2017 via the observation of a merger of neutron stars, the LIGO collaboration
has become a key player in 21st century science in the areas of fundamental
physics, astronomy, astrophysics, and cosmology. Because the LIGO detectors
measure such tiny perturbations in spacetime -- distances 10,000 smaller than
the diameter of a proton -- it is extremely sensitive to environmental
disturbances, such as ground motion or background magnetic fields. During the
period of this award, the LIGO instruments will be even more sensitive, meaning
that the rate of detections of known astrophysical sources will be increased,
and new, previously unobserved sources may appear. With this award, the group
will develop the expertise and toolkits needed to meet the data quality and
analysis challenges provided by the enhanced LIGO instruments. The team's
graduate students will continue to play a critical role in these developments.
The team will give public presentations on these exciting developments. This
includes the organization of a yearly workshop for Oregon high school science
teachers, so that they can convey the latest findings to their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will further develop the ability to
characterize the coupling of relevant environmental disturbances to
gravitational-wave data. The greater sensitivity of the detectors, along with
the associated higher detection rates make these developments imperative. The
team has developed software to determine potential environmental contamination
levels to gravitational wave candidates in low latency. This is provided in the
data quality reports made available for immediate evaluation for the O3 open
public alerts. These tools are fairly rudimentary and further development will
be needed to achieve the goal of a fully automatized process which is reliable
and accurate. Continued improvement of the instrumentation and delivery of
environmental injections will be needed to keep pace with the improved
sensitivity of the LIGO interferometers. Graduate students will undertake
environmental injection studies and associated data analyses, as well as
gravitational wave astrophysics projects, covering the topics of GRBs, magnetar
flares, and supernovae. While refinements will be needed for these studies to
keep pace with the improved LIGO sensitivities and better astrophysical
understanding of the sources, in some cases new techniques will be needed. One
example for this is for the so-called sub-threshold GRBs. The need for this was
spectacularly illustrated with GRB/GW170817.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.