* 1912938
* Modeling with Constraints and Phase Transitions in Porous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Malgorzata Peszynska, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 224,402.00

The changes in sea temperatures and those in permafrost regions have influence
on hydrological, climate, and human systems on the time scale of years and
decades. The freezing and thawing of permafrost leads to subsidence and
development of hills and depressions; these alter the direction of surface
waters, and challenge the stability of construction. Warming of permafrost
causes decay of biomass as well as release and transport of methane gas from
hydrate and other stores underneath the frozen layers. Methane gas is a major
contributor to greenhouse gas balances, and its presence, transport, and
evolution, as well as that of methane hydrate, an ice-like substance, are of
great interest in geophysics, climate studies, and energy engineering. Methane
hydrate can dissociate to gas, and is a potential unconventional energy source,
drilling hazard, and contributor to sub-sea slope instability. The realistic
scenarios and case studies motivating this work include the melting of ice to
water and dissociation of methane hydrate into gas in response to increased
temperature or mechanical disturbance, with the liquid and gas phases traveling
through the sediment. Models of similar nature also apply to bubble and steam
transport, e.g., due to microbial activity, or in geysers. In this project the
principal investigator will develop new mathematical results as well as those
useful for geophysics, and continue interdisciplinary modeling efforts across
the many fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses mathematical and
computational challenges arising in the models of phase change in porous media
such as permafrost or sub-sea sediments, and the evolution and migration of the
resident liquid and the dissociated gas phase. For these coupled processes of
energy and mass transport, data and some nonlinear model systems of PDEs at the
spatial and temporal (Darcy) scale of the reservoir are available. However, the
new dynamics in the Earth's environment calls for further insights into the
processes across the several interlinked spatial and temporal scales including
the pore-scale.The models at the pore-scale bridge the physics between the
interface and Darcy scales, account for confinement within the porous walls and
complex geometries, and can be upscaled to Darcy scale. While x-ray micro-
tomography can deliver unprecedented insight into pore-scale processes, at
present, this data is rather sparse for conditions near phase transitions. These
challenge the current knowledge and motivate the project. The research will
advance the understanding of the micro-scale (pore-scale and interface scale)
processes which inform the Darcy scale models. The project will develop and
analyze algorithms for relevant models; many techniques and results are of
independent interest. The evolution models the principal investigator will
consider are complex and delicate, and involve pointwise constraints on the
solutions in and out of the equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.