* 1912903
* I-Corps:  Assessing Market Opportunities for an Automated Clinical Documentation Service with Data Capture Designed for Secondary Use
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Samuel Rosenbloom, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 01/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make
physicians more efficient and improve the quality of patient care. Potential
short term societal and commercial impact includes improved quality of life for
physicians, increased capacity for physicians to see more patients, and greater
ability for physician to focus on the patient thereby enhancing the quality of
healthcare service delivery. Physicians spend over half their day working with
electronic health record systems and typically spend an additional 1.5 hours on
clinical documentation at the end of their day. In the long term, the potential
societal and commercial impact is improved quality of care as this work develops
a learning health system where the technology can learn from the care of each
patient to inform the care of future patients.

This I-Corps process will reveal the value that the intended product can deliver
in making physicians more efficient and improving the quality of patient care
across market segments (i.e., clinical specialty, care delivery method) as well
as better understand the key opportunities, challenges, and stakeholders across
segments. The proposed technology captures clinical documentation in a
structured format ready to be utilized by machine learning algorithms in order
to enhance physician efficiency by reducing the documentation burden.
Additionally, the datasets can be used to support various needs of health
systems including quality improvement, clinical research, operational
efficiency, and billing support.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.