* 1912608
* FoMR: Speculative Super-optimization: Boosting Performance via Speculation-Driven Dynamic Binary Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kevin Skadron, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2023
* USD 216,000.00

Modern processors are characterized by increasing 'core' counts on a single
multi-core processor, where a 'core' is a computing unit, allowing each core to
operate in parallel to, and independently of, other cores on the processor. Yet,
a substantial chunk of software applications is inherently sequential. Although
modern compilers feature sophisticated optimizations, significant waste of
computational resources across these multiple-cores still occurs due to
computational patterns that are unpredictable at compile-time. This project
explores techniques to deploy aggressive speculative dynamic optimizations
within the micro-processor, enabling continuous optimization of inherently
sequential code. This work addresses a pressing need for systems that can
aggressively and yet seamlessly super-optimize machine code, adapting to the
dynamic execution environment, and thereby speed up execution of applications on
computers. This research will also foster existing efforts and initiatives of
the investigators to build a pipeline of students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores dynamic binary
optimization techniques at the processor level to speculatively generate and
execute a super-optimized instruction stream, by leveraging established
speculative processor features such as branch prediction, value prediction, and
loop stream detection. This project introduces two distinct flavors of
speculative super-optimization: (a) a hardware implementation that leverages
dynamically predicted program state to perform simple, yet powerful peephole
optimizations on short instruction sequences, and (b) a firmware implementation
that leverages a microcode-based dynamic re-compiler running as a helper thread
to perform more sophisticated optimizations. Owing to the plethora of
speculative processor features and compiler/runtime/hardware optimizations to
choose from, this project explores a rich sample space of speculative super-
optimization strategies, along with extensive profitability analysis to
dynamically identify appropriate targets for super-
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.