* 1912816
* From Quantum Entanglement to Tensor Decomposition by Global Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Moody Chu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 470,788.00

Entanglement and separability are twins. Entanglement is the most basic mode
when characterizing the coupling or interaction of multiple parts within a
system; separability is to represent the complicated system in an equivalent but
more manifesting relationship for understanding and control. This project aims
to develop methods to numerically measure the "absolute" gap between an
entangled state and its nearest separable state with the new tool of global
optimization techniques. The initial goal is to establish a basal paradigm for
gauging entanglement and separability with global optimization technologies in
the context of quantum informatics. With modest modification, the paradigm can
be applied across different fields. Results from this research will make it
possible to address separability issues in many other contexts, such as economic
development, agricultural production, industrial manufacture, environmental
evolution, social networks, and applied mechanics, where constituents, factors,
parts, or subsystems are regularly intertwined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
entanglement is regarded as an indispensable resource for many applications due
to the potential of quantum computing for fast, concurrent computation. The
nonlinear correlations among subsystems make it difficult to analyze by
traditional decomposition techniques. On the other hand, the notion of tensors
has also gained new attention thanks to its great descriptive flexibility. Both
structures share similar features concerning entanglement and separability.
There have been many activities and achievements on both fronts. Yet, the avenue
of numerically measuring the "absolute" gap between an entangled state and its
nearest separable state has never been fully undertaken. This project aims to
tackle both quantum entanglement and low-rank tensor approximation under one
framework by global optimization techniques. When global optimization is
finished, within the prescribed error tolerance we have in hand the metric
between a given state and the set of separable states, by which we can gauge the
quality of entanglement, draw conclusions on whether the given system is
robustly entangled, and extend the knowledge to other applications. This project
aims to establish theoretic and algorithmic foundations to: 1) exploit the
geometric properties of entanglement; 2) develop a common platform for new
algorithms effective in robustness, speed, and accuracy; and 3) explore the
generalization to applications with additional constraints. This research
together with the resulting software package is expected to find wide
applicability extending from quantum mechanics to data analysis, network
analysis, and other fields. The work will solidify study of many features under
one unified framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.