* 1912907
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Dynamics of Inertial Particles in Thermally-Stratified Flows within Electromagnetic Field
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,10/31/2019
* Humberto Bocanegra Evans, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 10/31/2019
* USD 37,000.00

Despite the multiple applications and impact in industry, environment, health,
and defense, the role of particles in thermal transport processes remains poorly
understood. By characterizing the fluid dynamics and particles in thermally
stratified media under various conditions, the project will provide new
knowledge applicable to a range of phenomena including rain formation, pollutant
transport, inhaled particulate matter transport and mixing in transcontinental
gas ducts. Additionally, by exploring the possibility of using magnetic
particles as a control mechanism, the project will offer strategies to regulate
industrial processes, with potentially increasing their efficiency. The research
will provide insight on the control of thermal mixing for industrial as well as
biological systems. The project will directly contribute to STEM education of
K-12 students and educational development of both graduate and undergraduate
students; significant efforts will be made to disseminate the results to the
broader scientific community and to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to quantitatively describe and significantly improve our understanding of
the phenomena resulting from the interaction between thermally-stratified
turbulent convection with inertial particles. Advanced experimental flow-
diagnostic tools will be used to track a large set of inertial particles and
flow tracers at high spatial and temporal resolutions. The work will examine the
dominant factors modulating the dynamics of the particles, flow instability
triggered by particles, preferential concentration, two- and four-way coupling
between particles and flow. Special attention will be placed on characterizing
such phenomena under disturbed natural convection via additional boundary
conditions and electromagnetic control on particles. Analysis will include
Eulerian and Lagrangian statistics as well as highly resolved trajectories,
velocity, and acceleration of large set of particles. Results will uncover the
role of control variables including the Stokes and Rayleigh numbers and volume
fraction, which will provide basis for the development of strategies to control
thermal processes in various applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.