* 1912095
* Precision Measurements on Ions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Edmund Myers, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,274.00

The Florida State University precision Penning trap mass spectrometer is one of
the world's most precise systems for measuring atomic masses (more colloquially,
for "weighing atoms"). An atom's mass is a basic property and atomic masses have
many important applications in physics and chemistry. In particular, because of
the equivalence of energy and mass (through "E = mc2"), atomic mass differences
determine the energy released in nuclear reactions. Although many atomic masses
have already been precisely measured there are several scientifically important
applications where measurements at still higher precision are required. These
applications include determining more precise values of the "fundamental
constants," and determining the mass of the neutrino, an extremely light and
weakly interacting fundamental particle that pervades the universe. The
fundamental constants (for example, the masses of the electron and proton) are
needed for essentially all calculations in physics. But in particular, ever-more
precise values are needed so that the theories included in the so-called
"Standard-Model" of particle physics can be precisely compared with experimental
results. If discrepancies between the results of theory and experiment are
discovered, this may lead to insights into how to modify the Standard Model,
which despite great success in explaining most observations, is unable, for
example, to explain the currently mysterious phenomena of Dark Matter and Dark
Energy. At the same time the project provides training for student researchers,
from high-school to post-doctoral, in many widely applicable scientific
techniques, preparing them for careers in industry and national laboratories as
well as academe, hence contributing to the scientifically trained
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic method is to measure ratios of
cyclotron frequencies of single ions in a precision, cryogenic, 8.5 tesla
Penning ion trap using phase-coherent techniques, with ion detection via image
currents using a dc-SQUID. Measurements to be accomplished will include the mass
ratio of the deuteron to the proton (relevant to ultra-precise spectroscopy of
hydrogen, deuterium and their diatomic molecules), of tritium to helium-3
(relevant to neutrino mass), the atomic masses of alkali metals (for the fine
structure constant), of chains of calcium isotopes (for testing quantum-
electrodynamics theory), and other isotope chains (for searches for deviations
from so-called King-plot linearity of isotope shifts, which may point to new
physics). Aiming for a few parts-per-trillion fractional precision for some
measurements, the PI plans to develop a method for the simultaneous measurement
of the cyclotron frequencies of two ions in a Penning trap, in which the two
ions are in a coupled magnetron orbit. (This method was initially developed at
MIT c. 2000, but was only applied to four ion pairs, and not to hydrogen or
helium isotopes.) By measuring the cyclotron frequencies simultaneously, the
measurement will greatly suppress the effect of variation in the magnetic field,
which is the main cause of statistical uncertainty in the measurements of a
cyclotron frequency ratio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.