* 1912030
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: The Space of Riemannian Metrics for the Statistical Analysis of the Human Connectome
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Sarang Joshi, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

The human brain is one of the most complex biological geometrical objects. The
Human Connectome Project aims to make available an unparalleled compilation of
neural functional and structural imaging data from healthy adults. Data from
over 900 subjects has already been released. The principal data provided by the
Human Connectome Project are diffusion-weighted MRI and functional MRI. Due to
the amount and complexity of the data generated in this project, new techniques
to analyze, compare and represent these data are needed, which is the motivation
and driving force for the research outlined in this proposal. This collaborative
project has three fundamental goals: (1) to further develop the mathematical
theory of geometrical statistics, in particular the role of the infinite-
dimensional manifold of all Riemannian metrics; (2) to develop practical tools
for the statistical study of the connectivity of the human brain; and (3) to
demonstrate the utility of the developed techniques for the segmentation and
parcellation of the thalamus and other subareas of the subcortical gray matter
that are not visible in structural MRI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop for the first time statistical techniques on the infinite-dimensional
manifold of Riemannian metrics. The project team believes that the space of
Riemannian metrics is the natural framework for analyzing the variability of the
architecture of the human brain. Diffusion-weighted MRI allows the investigators
to model an individual human brain as a Riemannian manifold with axonal
connections that are geodesic curves of an appropriate metric. The team will
study the space of all Riemannian metrics and develop methods based on
geometrical statistics for the analysis of the whole population. An immediate
practical application of the techniques developed will be the parcellation of
the thalamus based on thalamocortical connectivity. The internal architecture of
the thalamus is not visible in standard structural MRI but rather is defined via
the connections to the different areas of the cortex. In this project, the
investigators will partition the thalamus by projecting the functional partition
of the cortex onto the thalamus via the connectomics. The aim is to use
geometric statistical mapping methods to produce a statistically informed
partition of an individual patient's thalamus. The primary driving motivation is
to eventually improve outcomes of deep brain stimulation as a therapy for
essential tremor, in which the thalamus is the primary target. The subcortical
white matter is also implicated in many neurological disorders, such as ischemic
vascular disease, Huntington's, Multiple Sclerosis, and HIV/AIDS dementia. The
PIs envision that the statistical techniques developed for qualifying the
detailed architecture of the white matter in the normal population will have
implications for all these diseases. This project will provide novel analytical
tools to unravel the mysteries of the human brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.