* 1912093
* RUI: Path Integrals and Charged Particle Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Allison Harris, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 117,226.00

Atomic collisions are a well-established method for probing the structure of
atoms and molecules, as well as understanding the dynamics of how charged
particles interact with matter. Due to their quantum mechanical nature, the
particles involved in the collision must be modeled as matter waves, not as
individual point particles. In the last decade, particles with unique waveforms
have been created. These new matter waveforms (known as vortex waves or twisted
particles) have properties that offer the opportunity for control and rotation
of nanoparticles and improved resolution in electron microscopy, as well as the
study of fundamental atomic properties, such as the magnetic moment and atomic
transitions. Currently, there is a very limited understanding of how twisted
particles interact with individual atoms or molecules. In order to realize the
proposed applications, it is necessary to develop theoretical models that
describe the particles' interaction with atoms at the most basic level. The
researchers will develop and apply theoretical models to describe the physics of
collisions between twisted particles and atoms in order to explain recently
observed quantum phenomena and provide guidance for future experiments and
applications. In addition to the science, another key aspect of the project is
the inclusion of undergraduate students in cutting-edge research and the
training of the next generation of physicists. Participation in this project
provides students with valuable hands-on research experience through conceptual
development of the models, as well as implementation and analysis. The students
will also present their results at regional and national conferences, giving
them a more global view of scientific research and encouraging them to pursue
careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project will be
accomplished through the development of two distinct computational models. All
of the models will be designed for use on high performance computers and will be
parallelized to improve efficiency. One of the models is based on the time-
dependent Path Integral Quantum Trajectory (PIQTr) method that utilizes a
Lagrangian approach to quantum mechanics. This model will be applied to
phenomena such as electron capture, coherence, diffraction, tunneling, and
quantum reflection. Application of the PIQTr model to higher dimensional systems
will require the implementation of numerical techniques, such as adaptive
stepsize, Monte Carlo integration, and boundary matching techniques. The results
of the PIQTr model will provide a time-dependent analysis of collision processes
allowing researchers to view the evolution of the interaction. A second model
will be developed for the study of electron vortex beam collisions with atoms.
This model will provide insight into orbital angular momentum transfer, as well
as orientation and rotation effects that may occur during the collision process.
A multipole expansion of the collision transition amplitude will yield
information regarding potential selection rules or the possibility of state
selectivity. The results of the electron vortex beam studies will be in the form
of collision cross sections that can be used to provide guidance to
experimentalists and others interested in applications of electron vortex
beams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.