* 1912380
* Sensors for Low-Frequency Improvements in Advanced LIGO
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Jens Gundlach, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational physics instrumentation, and it
addresses the priority areas of NSF's "Windows on the Universe" Big Idea. The
project aims at the development of high-precision sensors, such as a compact
inertial tilt sensor, to improve the low-frequency sensitivity and robustness of
LIGO. Improvement in LIGO's sensitivity will lead to the detection of
gravitational waves (GW) from heavier binary sources and improved signal to
noise ratio. Making LIGO robust against harsh environmental conditions, such as
wind and earthquakes, improves the duty cycle for GW observation, leading to
more detections, which will in turn increase the rate of new discoveries from GW
science. The tilt sensors will have a broader impact in areas such as seismology
and geophysics by enabling measurement of tele-seismic tilts and tilt-free
ground acceleration at frequencies as low as 10 mHz. The high precision angle
readouts developed for these tilt sensors have a wide variety of applications in
metrology and precision experiments. This award not only supports the
development of devices for Advanced LIGO, but it also serves to maintain and
strengthen synergistic activities of the table-top gravity group with the
gravitational wave detection community. Importantly, this STEM research will
train undergraduate and graduate students in building precision mechanical
instruments for fundamental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental
conditions such as high wind, microseism and earthquakes continue to affect duty
cycle and add noise to the LIGO detectors. This is primarily due to the
inability of seismometers to distinguish between low-frequency tilt and
translation, known as tilt-horizontal coupling. The ground-tilt sensors the
group has developed are already improving the low-frequency seismic isolation in
LIGO. Making them smaller, more sensitive with interferometric readouts and
compatible with LIGO vacuum requirements, would allow them to be mounted
directly on the isolated platforms from which the main mirrors are suspended,
reducing the low-frequency angular motion of the platform by more than two
orders of magnitude. In addition, the group will also research sensors for
Newtonian noise reduction and a Gravitational calibrator to improve the absolute
accuracy of GW measurements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.