* 1912646
* Superconvergent Approximations by Galerkin Methods for Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Bernardo Cockburn, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 350,002.00

The computer simulation of physical phenomena is a highly valued tool of
practical interest in a wide variety of applications in Engineering and Physics.
The investigator will study two new, promising techniques of carrying out these
simulations with highly accurate and more efficient algorithms for a wide range
of problems of practical interest. They include many applications to Aerospace
and Mechanics (heat flow, incompressible fluid flow, subsonic and supersonic
flow) as well as to Civil and Mechanical Engineering (seismic wave propagation
and elastodynamics of solid structures).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
proposes to continue to develop a recently uncovered adjoint-recovery method
which can reduce the cost of computing approximations of linear and nonlinear
functionals by Galerkin methods by several orders of magnitude. The
incorporation of adaptivity techniques, to deal with the varying degree of
regularity of the solution, and the extension of this approach to the
computation of nonlinear functionals, like the eigenvalues of a differential
operator, will render the method of great practical value. The investigator will
also develop new discretization techniques for partial differential equations
with Hamiltonian structure. They combine superconvergent discontinuous Galerkin
space discretizations with symplectic time-marching schemes and result in
methods with an energy which does not drift. Such methods are important in many
applications including seismic wave propagation and
elastodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.