* 1912874
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Thwarting the Malicious Insider Evolution Process: The Theory of Strained Betrayal
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sanjay Goel, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 297,731.00

Data thefts by malicious insiders are a major threat to national security, as
demonstrated by several recent high-profile data breaches attributed to
government employees. Often, these breaches occur because loyal employees
accumulate strain or become disgruntled due to a variety of psychological
stressors such as social injustice, personal injustice, harassment, and
overwork. Employees who reach a critical level of strain and who are unable to
change their situation may develop negative feelings that can eventually lead to
malicious behavior such as data theft. The Theory of Strained Betrayal, proposed
by the project team, formalizes a model of this process of a loyal employee
transforming into a malicious one that captures the dynamics of job strain
manifestation and its culmination in malicious insider activity. This project's
goal is to further develop both the theory and potential interventions to reduce
employee strain, with the goal of both better understanding and ultimately
reducing insider threat behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates insider threat activity in the context of situational factors that
cause job strain in the employee who may then resort to malicious activity to
reduce that strain, as described by the Theory of Strained Betrayal. In
particular, the theory details the Insider Threat Kill Chain, which articulates
two defining stages of the process: (1) the trigger point, when an employee is
unable to find legitimate avenues for strain reduction and begins to seek
opportunities for malicious activity such as data theft or sabotage; and (2) the
tipping point, when the employee finds such an opportunity and conducts a
malicious activity. Further, the theory posits that strain in individuals is
moderated by dispositional factors and influenced by the individual's locus of
control, culminating in malicious intentions and behaviors. To refine the
theory, the research team will conduct a series of experimental studies designed
to induce strain and measure people's willingness to exfiltrate insider data as
a function of the amount of strain induced and any methods they have to release
the strain, along with the dispositional factors described above. The team will
also develop emotion-focused and problem-focused interventions aimed at
disrupting the manifestation of malicious behavior originating from
strain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.