* 1912959
* SBIR Phase I:  Technology for displaying computerized refreshable graphics for the vision impaired
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Doug Cohen, BEACON STREET INNOVATIONS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,430.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovations Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to improve access to digital content by the vision impaired
community. This access will improve the quality of life for the vision impaired
as well as improve the probability of employment. Multiple studies have shown a
connection between Braille literacy and employment rates. Creating a tactile
display not only improves access to digital media through braille usage, but
also allows several new paths to interact with digital content, including
through maps, vertical math and graphical images currently not accessible with
existing devices. Our research into a new cell creates a basic building block
for new graphical tactile displays. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
targets the problem of creating a low cost and refreshable tactile display cell
for the use by the vision impaired. The objective is to design, fabricate and
test a series of tactile display cells and then perform a merit evaluation for
both usability by the vision impaired and for scaling into low cost production.
This research will draw on technology under development for computer display
Braille cells, and then modify these designs for use in tactile displays.
Samples will be produced based on multiple designs and evaluated for technical
and economic merit. The end goal will be to demonstrate tactile display cells
which are practical for use by vision impaired, allowing access to graphical
information via digital media for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.