* 1912338
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Collaborative Research: Mechanisms and dynamics of retronasal olfactory coding
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Cheng Ly, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 09/30/2024
* USD 233,464.00

How do our brain, nose, and mouth work together to generate the flavor of food
and drink? When flavor perception goes wrong, can this play a role in diseases
like obesity? The sense of smell is very important for perceiving flavor,
largely because of odors that originate in the mouth and are exhaled through the
nose via the back of the throat in a a process called retronasal olfaction. In
this study, researchers from the University of Arkansas, the Virginia
Commonwealth University, and Southeastern Methodist University are teamed up to
gain better understanding of how retronasal olfaction works using rats as an
animal model. The researchers combine direct measurements of the brain in action
together with computer simulations of air flow through the nose and neural
networks. They are testing the idea that different forces in the nose caused by
reversing airflow through the nasal cavity are responsible for how the brain
distinguishes exhaled retronasal odors from inhaled odors. In addition, the
researchers offer training opportunities at each of the three institutions and
are developing an educational video game aimed at introducing users to basic
concepts of neurobiology and cognitive neuroscience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smells that enter the nose retronasally, i.e., from the
back of the nasal cavity, play an essential role in flavor perception, yet many
questions about the neuroscience of retronasal olfaction remain unanswered. How
does simply reversing the direction of air flow through the nasal cavity result
in different neural input to the olfactory bulb (OB)? How are retronasal and
orthonasal (inhaled) olfactory signals encoded at the level of spiking neurons
in the OB? How do interactions within OB circuits facilitate selective response
to retronasal versus orthonasal stimuli? In this study, researchers from the
University of Arkansas, the Virginia Commonwealth University, and Southeastern
Methodist University are teamed up to answer these questions, guided by a two-
part hypothesis. First, they hypothesize that, at the sensory periphery, retro-
and orthonasal stimuli produce distinct spatiotemporal patterns of
mechanosensory excitation of olfactory receptor neurons. Second, they
hypothesize that, in the OB, cell-type-specific inhibitory circuit interactions
are crucial for dynamic changes in retronasal coding. To test these hypotheses,
the research team is combining high-density multi-electrode recordings in rat OB
with fluid dynamics computer simulations based on the three-dimensional shape of
the nasal cavity of the same animals. Moreover, the team is performing state-of-
the-art realistic computational modeling to identify OB circuit-level principles
of retronasal coding. This work is expected to generate new understanding of the
neural basis of retronasal olfaction that includes both peripheral mechanisms in
the nose and central mechanisms at the level of M/T cells in the OB. This
project is jointly funded by the cross-directorate Collaborative Research in
Computational Neuroscience program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research(EPSCoR), and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.