* 1912253
* Implementing Spaced Retrieval Practice Across Multiple STEM Domains to Enhance Student Learning in Barrier Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Keith Lyle, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 596,591.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving learning in introductory STEM courses through
spaced retrieval practice. Spaced retrieval practice requires students to
periodically answer questions that require them to recall what they previously
learned. It is a is a memory-enhancing, research-based instructional technique
that has been shown to improve memory of concepts both within and between
semesters. Spaced retrieval practice is especially important in barrier courses
where a lack of success restricts students from further pursuing STEM degrees.
This project will study the effectiveness of spaced retrieval practice in ten
different introductory STEM courses. This intervention may be most beneficial to
students who traditionally underperform in STEM, thus helping to broaden
participation in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on previous results
of the effectiveness of spaced retrieval in a few courses, this project aims to
implementing and measuring the effects of spaced retrieval in ten different
undergraduate STEM courses at the University of Louisville. Through a series of
workshops, project team leaders will work with faculty to design spaced
retrieval exercises for their courses. The intervention will then be implemented
for one semester using the same implementation strategy in all courses, reaching
a total of over 1,600 students. Retention of classroom content following spaced
retrieval practice will be compared, in within-subjects fashion, to retention
following massed retrieval practice. The effect of the practice manipulation
(the magnitude of the difference between performance following spacing versus
massing) will be compared across different courses, permitting assessment of
spacing's effectiveness across domains. For those courses in which spaced
retrieval practice is shown to be effective, the project will investigate
whether the magnitude of the spacing-related benefit differs. In addition, it
may be possible to detect other classroom design and demographic moderators of
the effect, depending upon sample sizes and variations in classrooms. Results
could provide evidence to support implementation of spaced retrieval as a
strategy to increase student success in STEM courses nationwide. Increasing
student success in STEM courses will lead to more individuals successfully
pursuing STEM careers. It will also pave the way for future research to explore
the impacts of spaced retrieval practice in the context of different types of
institutions of higher education, potentially leading to even broader adoption
of the intervention. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.