* 1912205
* Broadening Participation Research Project: Examining the Efficacy of a Virtual STEM Peer Mentorship Program
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Vivian Jones, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 05/31/2022
* USD 349,979.00

The project is a collaborative effort among the University of the District of
Columbia, Bethune-Cookman University, and the University of Memphis. It will
expand the development, implementation, and evaluation of a virtual STEM peer
mentorship program for underrepresented minority women (UMW) undergraduate
students. The goal is to examine the efficacy of a Virtual Peer Mentoring
Program in developing culturally responsive mentorship leadership skills, STEM
self-efficacy, and science identities among UMW students. In this project,
graduate and senior-level undergraduate students will use a systematic process
to mentor a group of freshman, sophomore, and junior undergraduate students in a
virtual environment. Prior to engaging in the virtual mentoring relationship,
mentors and mentees will be trained using case-based virtual training modules to
socialize the mentors and mentees to the mentoring relationship and build skills
in leadership, mentoring, and cultural responsiveness. The project will extend
current research by identifying effective types of mentoring relationships and
modes for these relationships in STEM degree programs at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and for underrepresented minority women
students in general. It is expected to document the effectiveness of an
intervention to increase STEM persistence for UMW undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching framework for the study combines
persistence, self-efficacy, identity, and mentoring research theories. A
multiphase mixed-method research approach will be used to answer the following
research questions: (1) After participating in the virtual mentorship training,
what changes, if any, do student mentors and mentees self-report in their STEM
mentorship, leadership, and cultural responsiveness skills? (2) After
participating in the Virtual STEM Peer Mentorship Program, what changes, if any,
do student mentors and mentees self-report in their STEM self-efficacy from
pretest to posttest survey as compared to a waitlist control group? How do
student mentors and mentees believe the Virtual STEM Peer Mentorship Program is
useful, if at all, in furthering their STEM self-efficacy? (3) After
participating in the Virtual STEM Peer Mentorship Program, what changes, if any,
do student mentors and mentees self-report in their STEM identity from pretest
to posttest survey as compared to a waitlist control group? How do student
mentors and mentees believe the Virtual STEM Peer Mentorship Program is useful,
if at all, in furthering their STEM identity? (4) How do student mentors and
mentees persist, if at all, in their STEM degree program during the duration of
the Virtual STEM Peer Mentorship Program? After participating in the Virtual
STEM Peer Mentorship Program, how do student mentors and mentees self-report
intent to persist in their STEM degree programs and pursuit of a STEM career
pathway? How, if at all, were the Virtual STEM Peer Mentorship Program
components effective in supporting student mentors and mentees? intent to
persist in a STEM degree program and, ultimately, in their intent to pursue a
STEM career pathway? The multiphase design will allow for examination of
quantitative and qualitative data over time to answer the proposed research
questions and assess the program objectives. This design allows for use of
descriptive and randomized controlled trial designs for quantitative data
collection and a case study lens for qualitative data collection. The proposed
project will advance knowledge about the impact of mentoring in STEM education
on persistence of UMW and produce an evidence-based strategy for student
support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU-UP) program, Broadening Participation in
STEM Education Research track, that focuses on the creation and investigation of
new theory-driven models and innovations relevant to the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM education and the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.