* 1912488
* Teen Science Cafes: Technology in Response to Floods Caused by Hurrican Harvey
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Janice Mokros, Science Education Solutions Inc
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 11/30/2019
* USD 107,262.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program funds innovative research,
approaches and resources for use in a variety of settings. The uses of
technologies in emergency management and public safety are emerging rapidly, but
it could take years for school STEM curricula to catch up with the technologies
that are already being deployed in the field. Informal learning environments,
such as Teen Science Cafés, provide a compelling venue for youth learning about
rapidly-developing STEM fields such as technology. The floods and devastation
caused by Hurricane Harvey provide a timely learning opportunity for them. This
project, in addition to developing new materials for learning about
technologies, will provide much-needed baseline research on teens' understanding
of technology, technology careers, and emergency
preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the robust platform of the NSF-
funded Teen Science Café, the Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance will build
upon its existing partnership with Science Education Solutions to develop and
implement a package of educational activities, tools, and resources for a Teen
Science Café that is focused on community flood events and response, using
Hurricane Harvey as a model and case study. The materials will focus on advances
in sensor technology, data visualization, social media, and other mobile
communication apps used to detect, monitor and respond to flooding and natural
disasters. The package of materials will be embraced by 20 sites in Maine. The
goal is to engage at least 600 youth in themed Cafés focusing on how technology
was used to respond to Harvey and is being used to manage and respond to
flooding more generally. An important related goal is to conduct baseline
research on what teens currently know about the flood-related technologies, as
well as what they learn about it from this experience derived from recent floods
in Texas, Florida, and the Caribbean islands.