* 1913138
* Study of the Dynamics and Properties of Hot and Dense Quark and Gluon Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Jiangyong Jia, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2021
* USD 137,000.00

It is a well-established fact that protons and neutrons are made up of smaller
constituents called quarks and gluons. In collisions using two beams of heavy
nuclei, a new state of matter is formed from these constituents, called the
quark-gluon plasma (QGP). This project will answer fundamental questions about
the QGP, such as the space-time dynamics of the QGP and its transport
properties. The project will be carried out by studying the collective flow of
fluctuations and particle interactions with the QGP. Studies of high energy
density matter can have a profound impact on our understanding of the theory of
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), which governs the behavior of nuclei and the
evolution of the early universe, supernova explosions and the properties of
neutron stars. The research will be carried out at the Large Hadron Collider in
Europe using the ATLAS detector, and at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider of
Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) using the STAR detector, with an emphasis
on the Beam Energy Scan at BNL. Both the ATLAS and STAR experiments provide
excellent training opportunities for graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed measurements include: 1. Comprehensive model
studies of particle correlations in transverse and longitudinal directions as
compared with measurements to constrain the dynamics and properties of the
matter in A+A collisions. This effort requires inventing new analysis methods,
developing event-shape triggers to take advantage of the upcoming high-
luminosity Pb+Pb run, as well as carrying out similar analyses at lower
collision energy at RHIC. 2. Detailed efforts to map out the QCD phase diagram
and search for the possible QCD critical point, by utilizing the higher-order
cumulants of multiplicity and conserved charges in the STAR beam energy scan
phase II program. The proposed efforts are built upon the group's established
expertise in various correlation measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.