* 1913847
* SBIR Phase I:  Biofabrication  of a collagen fabric by scaled-up electrochemical compaction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Subba Shankar, COLLAMEDIX INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the development of a highly biocompatible
implant material made from collagen that can be used to treat a variety of
medical conditions, including stress urinary incontinence, pelvic organ
prolapse, hernias, and orthopedic injuries. Many people suffer from these
conditions, but the current treatments are suboptimal. Most current implants for
the repair or support of these soft tissue problems are made from polypropylene,
which has significant clinical problems, including chronic inflammation and
pain. The FDA recently ordered the removal of all synthetic implants for pelvic
organ prolapse from sale in the US due to patient safety issues. Stress urinary
incontinence affects 22% of women aged 45-64 years, and an estimated 9.2 million
women in the US alone will have pelvic organ prolapse by 2050. These women have
life-altering disorders, often limiting them from working, caring for their
families, exercising, traveling, etc. New technology to safely treat these
disorders is urgently needed. The current project will advance the development
of a safe, natural, and effective implant material presently not available to
these women. Reimbursement for these procedures under Medicare and private
insurance are in place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to advance the manufacturing of
electrocompacted collagen threads which can be used for a variety of medical
implants. The existing lab-scale manufacturing process for the production of the
collagen threads will be developed into a scaled-up commercial ready process.
Key goals include speeding up the thread production, decreasing the need for
operator intervention, and improving the efficiency of converting the collagen
feedstock into thread, all while maintaining thread strength and process
repeatability. This is critical to ensuring that products developed from this
technology can be produced in commercial volume and will be priced within
existing medical insurance reimbursements. Achieving these goals will greatly
de-risk this technology, enabling the attraction of further investment capital
and the continuation of product development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.