* 1913417
* STTR Phase I:  Scalable Integration of Graphene-Enhanced Coatings for High-Energy Lithium-Ion Battery Cathodes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Mark Hersam, VOLEXION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,927.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR Phase I project is the
commercialization of next-generation lithium-ion battery materials and their
integration into the current battery manufacturing infrastructure. Specifically,
the development of drop-in functionality and roll-to-roll processing pathways
for advanced coating technology will demonstrate its potential for facile
integration with existing commercial battery production lines. The graphene-
based coating innovation also has the potential to accelerate the market
adoption rate of novel, high-performance lithium-ion battery materials and
advance the current trajectory for energy storage capabilities to meet
increasingly rigorous societal demands for electrification (e.g., electric
vehicles). In addition, the successful commercialization of this graphene-based
technology for a high-value application such as lithium-ion batteries will
further validate the commercial potential of graphene and invigorate its growing
market. Finally, since the current list of major battery manufacturers is
dominated by non-U.S. companies, this proposal presents a clear opportunity for
emerging domestic technology to enhance technical competitiveness of the U.S. in
the green energy sector through the development of novel energy storage
solutions and advanced manufacturing innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I Project proposes research activities that will demonstrate how graphene-
based coating technologies can advance to yield powders of emerging cathode
materials in large scale with uniform conformal coatings that maximize their
performance. The resulting innovation will be a unique nanomaterial-based
additive that can be seamlessly integrated into existing manufacturing processes
and facilitate commercialization of next-generation lithium-ion batteries in
emerging applications from drones to electric vehicles. This development effort
concurrently explores the scalability and applicability of the graphene-based
coatings as a protective additive solution to address key technical issues
facing experimental battery active materials, which have significantly higher
theoretical energy density than state-of-the-art but suffer from chemical
instability, high cell impedance, and poor packing density issues. The
overarching goals of the proposed research activities are to develop: (1) a
scalable production approach for a library of novel cathode nanoparticles for
high energy density and maximized rate capability; (2) a scalable production
method of applying uniform conformal graphene-based coatings on cathode
nanoparticles; (3) an optimized slurry and electrode formulation for the
nanostructured cathode particles from the combined efforts of objectives (1) and
(2), which will guide cell fabrication efforts toward industry-format battery
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.