* 1913933
* SBIR Phase I:  Droplet Transport Technology for Ultralight Wearable Cooling System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Terence Davidovits, THERMOBIONICS L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to introduce a novel form of ultralight
wearable cooling technology. Excess weight is a key limitation of active
wearable cooling technology today, restricting its adoption. In contrast, active
indoor heating and cooling, where solutions are stationary and the weight is
relatively unimportant, is a multi-billion dollar market. Significant unmet
demand exists for lightweight active cooling that can work outdoors as well. The
proposed wearable cooling technology would improve performance and comfort while
reducing the risk of dehydration and heat stroke. Users who can benefit range
from specialty applications to recreational uses. For example, military
personnel who are active in hot climates while wearing body armor and struggling
to stay hydrated is one specialty application. Other specialty applications
include welders wearing protective gear in hot environments. Here, extending
work times, improving comfort and thus reducing errors would boost productivity.
Endurance athletes could also benefit from faster times during events of
multiple hours in hot climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address the need for a state-of-
the-art Droplet Transmission Technology (DTT) for Ultralight Wearable Cooling
System (UWCS) to achieve a flexible, ultralight cooling technology that allows
longer-lasting, powerful cooling capabilities for the end-user. The proposed
activity will demonstrate DTT, a novel transport phenomenon. DTT enables a
unique way to manage and generate cooling from two-phase flows. The design of
channels utilized in the product and their dimensions will be studied using
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models and tested via 3D printing of the
experimental prototypes. The final UWCS design for the full torso prototype will
be integrated and the cooling capabilities verified using a thermal
manikin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.