* 1913939
* SBIR Phase I:  High Performance Millimeter-Wave RF Front-End Technology for Multi-Gigabit Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Armin Jam, SKYGIG, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project is
significant since the platform is an enabler of a range of high-speed wireless
applications for the next generation of broadband communications. The proposed
technology platform will solve some of the key challenges of millimeter-wave
(MMW) wireless radios and networks and can serve a wide set of wireless related
applications and markets, particularly the telecommunication backhaul and fixed
wireless access markets, among others. This Radio Frequency (RF) front-end
system, integrated with the base-band circuitry in a wireless module, provides
the hardware necessary to enable the vision of a truly fiber-speed backhaul
network for 10s of millions of 5th generation (5G) cell deployments to provide
the ultimate network robustness, agility, with significant cost savings for the
operators and businesses. This advanced wireless technology will enable rapid
and robust roll-out of the next generation network as well as a wide range of
broadband wireless applications and can play a pivotal role in overall pace of
5G technology penetration. This in turn will impact many industry sectors,
ranging from smart transportation, manufacturing, and healthcare to smart city,
and the Internet of Things.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop an ultra-high performance MMW
wireless RF front-end technology for the next generation of multi-gigabit
applications. Driven by the rising demand of the data-intensive applications,
there is a growing need for more advanced wireless equipment for high data-rate
communications. That is why with the emergence of multi-gigabit applications,
there is a significant focus on MMW technology as the frontier of the wireless
communication. The existing MMW RF front-end technologies, however, are either
limited in their functionality or suffer from high power-consumption, which
makes them not suitable for emerging massive deployments such as 5G backhaul,
last-mile broadband for enterprise and service providers, etc. As a result,
there is a need for new MMW RF front-end technologies to unlock the full
potential of fiber-speed wireless communications. The proposed technology offers
an order of magnitude higher performance compared to the best-in-class wireless
technologies and can serve as an enabler to multiple high-speed
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.