* 1913781
* SBIR Phase I:  The Games and Learning Digital Distribution Platform: Increasing Access with Web-Based Content
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Michelle Miller, GAMES AND LEARNING, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,913.00

This SBIR Phase I project will create the first trusted source where parents and
teachers can easily find, buy and adopt high-quality digital content for their
children. Games, e-books and other digital learning tools show significant
potential for improving lives. Children in low-income families (43% of all U.S.
children) spend more screen time than their higher income counterparts, and
their teachers are twice as likely to report improved student achievement from
using educational technology. Despite increasing supply and demand related to
digital learning tools, great content is buried within current distribution
platforms and educators do not find choices mapped to their needs. As a result,
30 million U.S. children living in low-income families lack access to relevant
content, 55% of parents and 80% of teachers cannot find what they are looking
for and content producers face significant challenges to sustainability. By
offering a broad selection of high-quality, cross-platform digital learning
content via a platform optimized for adoption by educators who serve low-income
communities, this project will achieve significant advances in access, impact
and revenue. Using feedback from a Phase I prototype, this project will scale to
reach the 3 million U.S. teachers who currently use digital learning products in
the classroom and the 30 million U.S. families who use digital learning products
at home. A revenue share with digital learning providers will establish a
dedicated, sustainable channel within the $20 billion global e-learning market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a systemic solution to digital
learning distribution that meets teachers and parents where they are, but
fundamentally disrupts their current expectations for effective content. As the
first project to connect web-based, evidence-based digital learning tools with
educators at scale, there are significant risks. The technical requirements for
creating a one-stop shop for web-based learning tools are evolving daily from
how to support the development of more high-quality HTML5 content, to how to
best sell and deliver access codes for cross-platform/cross-device delivery, to
how to ensure ease of download and adoption by educators despite limited
bandwidth. Development in HTML5 offers an emerging opportunity to more
efficiently target a global audience without maintaining multiple versions of
the same application and improve educational connections between home and
school. However, many digital learning developers lack the resources to convert
high-quality content to HTML5 without the support of a sustainable distribution
platform. This project will create a web-based e-commerce application optimized
for delivery of cross-platform content, a searchable inventory of high-quality
digital learning products mapped to educational standards and a data/feedback
loop designed to improve long-term satisfaction, sustainability and efficacy.
Phase I R&amp;D efforts will use surveys, virtual focus groups and educator
journals/interviews to test the technical and commercial feasibility of both the
supply side and demand side of a new platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.