* 1913434
* SBIR Phase I:  Internet-Connected Urinalysis System for Passive Health Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Brian Bender, Bender Tech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,528.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to help manage and prevent non-communicable chronic diseases by
developing a passive health and wellness monitoring system for personalized
dietary recommendations, early disease diagnosis, and remote patient monitoring.
According to the 2019 Global Burden of Disease Update, suboptimal dietary intake
is responsible for more than 1 out of every 5 deaths globally, making it the
greatest preventable disease risk factor. Decades of research have shown that
tracking nutritional intake can lead to better awareness of dietary intake
patterns and improve nutritional health. Yet diet-tracking mobile apps, despite
their popularity, are inaccurate and overly burdensome and thus often lead to
quitting. In addition, waiting for health complications to develop before
diagnosing most chronic diseases reduces healthspans and leads to more costly
healthcare interventions. There is a societal need for a passive nutrition and
health-monitoring device for helping individuals recognize patterns of
malnutrition on a routine basis for guiding lifelong behavior change and
identifying biomarkers of disease early. This platform technology will reduce
morbidity and mortality associated with most major chronic diseases, decrease
healthcare costs, and reduce lost productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will address the feasibility of integrating a wireless,
electrochemical biosensor testing platform into a toilet for passive urinalysis
testing. Better preventative healthcare requires individuals to monitor health
and wellbeing routinely, long before clinical problems arise. Yet getting
individuals to perform consistent, routine diagnostic evaluations is exceedingly
difficult. The most effective route for routine monitoring of health data is
through pervasive testing where the individual?s burden is as nonexistent as
possible. There is a clinical and commercial opportunity for ubiquitous,
passive, and routine home urine testing using an internet-connected smart-toilet
equipped with biosensors for accurate urine-testing. Key technical hurdles
include the development of a system capable of reliable urine collection and
dilution normalization, contamination accounting, the development of a robust
mechatronic sub-assembly for passively retrieving, translating, testing, and
storing disposable electrochemical biosensors, biometric user identification,
and integration of wireless data transfer capabilities with smart power
management. Error rates associated with false test cycle starts, faulty
biosensor manipulation, dilution and contamination accounting, and false user
identification will be quantified, and the electrochemical biosensors? in situ
test results will be compared against benchtop
equivalents.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.