* 1913403
* STTR Phase I:  Minimally-invasive reversible thermal nerve block for relief of severe pain
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Changfeng Tai, THERMAQUIL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop and test a minimally invasive method and
device that blocks pain. The device will offer patients and physicians a new
non-addictive way of controlling severe pain with the ultimate goal of reducing
or eliminating society's need for opioids and other narcotics. More than 350,000
Americans died from opioid overdose during 1999-2016, and the societal cost of
opioid misuse exceeds $75 billion per year. The number one risk factor of opiate
addiction is receiving a prescription for opiates. The technology developed in
this project uses gentle warm and cool temperatures to block the transmission of
nerve signals without drugs or electric stimulation. Uniquely, this method
appears to block pain signals across all mammalian and amphibian nerves. The
device developed in this project will reduce human suffering and risk of
addiction by giving patients the ability to rapidly adjust how much of a nerve's
firing is felt. The device will also provide researchers studying neurological
mechanisms with precise control over nerve conduction. Thermal nerve blocks
represent a powerful new way of blocking pain and has broad applicability
following surgery and across a number of disorders and diseases. Gently warming
a short section of nerve tissue to 45C and then cooling it to 15C can quickly
initiate complete nerve block that can be maintained by cycling between these
temperatures while avoiding nerve damage from exposure to higher or lower
temperatures. Thermal nerve block will be delivered by the minimally invasive
device developed in this project, which includes an inserted thermal probe and
an external microfluidic controller. The drug-free, non-addictive, device will
provide continuous block of severe pain initially for peri- and post-operative
pain management. This project will build prototype thermal tips that can be
inserted via 5mm introducer sheath, refine the device implantation technique and
optimize thermal performance in vitro before demonstrating the utility of the
system for thermal block of intercostal pain in C-fiber evoked potential
experiments in anesthetized felines. The thermal tips will be held in place with
non-permanent anchoring silicone tynes, while the external wearable controller
will have battery-powered micro-piezo pump, thermoelectric heater/cooler, and
microcontroller. This minimally invasive design offers an effective alternative
for controlling severe pain that does not attenuate over time and brings no risk
of addiction.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.