* 1913313
* RUI: WoU-MMA: Analysis of TeV Gamma-rays from Active Galaxies and Dark Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jodi Christiansen, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 244,677.00

Gamma rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is a ground-based
observatory designed to study high-energy gamma rays. VERITAS has unique
capabilities, providing high sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic
and extragalactic sources. This award supports scientists at California
Polytechnic State University to carry out research with VERITAS and with the new
co-located prototype Schwartzchild-Couder Telescope (pSCT). The group will work
on extensions to the gamma-ray detection algorithms for VERITAS and the pSCT to
further improve the sensitivity of the telescopes. Undergraduate students will
be involved in the research. The group will also work with the Physics Teachers
of the Central Coast through the Center for Engineering, Science and Education
at California Polytechnic State University to develop educational modules around
morphology, spectra, and variability of active galaxies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS has embarked upon a broad program of Galactic and
extragalactic source observations, as well as searches for very-high-energy
electromagnetic counterparts to sources of gravitational waves and neutrinos.
With this award the California Polytech State University group will work on
extensions to the Image Template Method (ITM), a new gamma-ray reconstruction
algorithm. With the improved sensitivity enabled by ITM the group will search
for very-high-energy gamma rays from active galaxies, which are likely to be the
sites of multi-messenger acceleration, and use observations of dwarf galaxies to
set dark matter limits. The group will engage undergraduate students in the
discovery of new very-high-energy emitting active galaxies triggered by the
VERITAS Target of Opportunity program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.