* 1913492
* A Hybrid Brain-Computer Interface for Long-Term Use by Persons with Severe Motor Deficit: Towards Development of Personalized Algorithms
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Yalda Shahriari, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2023
* USD 303,875.00

The inability to communicate is a major consequence of severe motor disabilities
such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
ALS is the most common adult-onset motor neuron disease. Within the past three
decades, Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) technologies have emerged as an
alternative communication channel for persons with neuromuscular disorders.
However, these communication systems typically require adequate eye-gaze
control, which is difficult for those lacking voluntary muscle control. In
addition, most current BCIs are inadequate for long-term use due to significant
day-to-day variation in performance. To address these shortcomings, this project
will combine two technologies to monitor the electrical properties of the
neurons and the blood flow near the neurons. This combined system will adapt as
the disease progresses and improve communication for persons with ALS. If
successful, the system may be generalized to other types of motor control loss,
including minimally conscious and vegetative states. The technologies developed
will be integrated into a university curriculum that educates undergraduate and
graduate students about the field. Furthermore, this research will be broadly
disseminated through k-12 curriculum design and will provide training
opportunities for women and under-represented minorities. Outreach activities
include workshops: "Personalized Algorithms in BCI Systems" and "Hybrid BCI for
Bedside and Home Users," poster presentations to disseminate novel outcomes from
this study among students and researchers and development of a K-12 curriculum,
"Engineering the Brain," designed to promote BCI learning opportunities among
middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on designing
Brain Computer Interfaces (BCIs) based on functional imaging of the human brain
using a combination of two non-invasive techniques: electroencephalography (EEG-
to measure electrical activity) and functional near-infrared spectroscopy
(fNIRS-to measure hemodynamic activity). Algorithms will be developed such that
the system considers both the neuropsychological status and environmental
factors and can be implemented for in-home, long-term care of people with no
motor control. The system will be tested on persons with ALS (amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis), the most common adult-onset motor neuron disease. The
project's hypothesis is that the incorporation of hemodynamic activities into
conventional EEG-based BCI permits superior learning from brain states, provides
unique features of the user's intent, and allows potentially game-changing
solutions to provide end-users with a new level of communication autonomy. To
test this hypothesis, the Research Plan is organized under two objectives. The
FIRST Objective is to explore the associations of BCI performance variations and
design a multimodal augmented predictive platform to improve the robustness of
the BCI systems for nonverbal patients who have residual motor ability to
control their eye-gaze. The two aims of the objective are to explore the
associations of ALS-BCI performance variation with both functional brain changes
in ALS and environmental noise and to establish a set of predictive electro-
vascular features best representative of users' BCI performance, and accordingly
correct for unrelated activities in future BCI experiments. Expected objective
outcomes include (i) longitudinal assessment of brain pattern changes, (ii)
establishing a set of predictive electro-vascular features, (iii) optimizing
subject-specific factors essential for successful BCI performance, (iv)
employing appropriate correction strategies to minimize unwanted activities and
(v) maximizing adaptability with users' needs and environmental factors while
minimizing inter-subject variabilities. The Second Objective is to develop an
autonomous hybrid BCI for non-communicative persons without any residual motor
control (preferably participants in the first objective who have progressed to
the locked-in stage.) The system developed will have seven Degrees of Freedom
(DOF) that can produce seven different commands for an external device based on
the users' ability to modulate their brain signals through motor imagery (5
tasks), mental arithmetic (1 task) and rest. The expected objective outcome is
the introduction of a hybrid BCI that (i) is fully autonomous-signal-based, (ii)
employs personalized techniques to enhance system performance, (iii) has
enhanced information transfer rates relative to single modal EEG and fNIRS and
(iv) can be conveniently set up at users' bedsides for long-term
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Disabilities and
Rehabilitation Engineering (DARE) program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.