* 1913209
* A New Multiscale Framework for Hyperbolic Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Yen-Hsi Tsai, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 444,927.00

In this project, the PIs will develop a novel computational framework for
building numerical algorithms that are capable of fully utilizing the power of
the next generation super computers. By fully using the large scale computing
power, these algorithms will be able to perform highly accurate simulations of
important physical phenomena involving propagation of different types of waves.
These simulations provide important data and information for further decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many physical applications, one typically is
interested in computing certain observables and effective properties from the
given systems that involve many temporal and length scales. However, the
computational complexity required to numerically resolve all the scales in the
given system is unfeasible. Multiscale algorithms have been developed to compute
the effective properties of systems that have sufficiently wide separation of
scales, and certain homogeneity and ergodic properties. As multiscale
computation for these classical settings have reached a relatively mature stage,
it is now necessary to develop new strategies addressing some of the core
problems of scientific computing for the coming era. This project will involve
multiscale hyperbolic problems. Hyperbolic problems characteristically support
oscillations in the solutions, and phase errors typically dominate the numerical
solutions and do not dissipate in time. These properties make accurate long time
simulations very difficult. The project will further tackle a harder class of
hyperbolic problems in which a wide spectrum of non-negligible scales is
present. With the stagnation of processor core performance, parallel computation
for these more challenging multiscale problems becomes inevitable. On the other
hand, computations of hyperbolic problems will not benefit from the available
exa-scale computing power unless parallelization-in-time can be performed, as
the speed-up from spatial domain decomposition has saturated. It is widely
recognized that robust and convergent numerical computation using such parallel-
in-time algorithms still remains a main challenge for hyperbolic problems. The
investigators will leverage success of earlier NSF supported research and
develop a new multiscale framework that enables stable parallel-in-time
computation for multiscale hyperbolic problems. An essential component of the
framework involves making up the deficiencies of the typical multiscale models
by judiciously utilizing data collected from suitable ensembles of the parallel
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.