* 1913229
* Consistent Multi-Scale Treatments of Ion Transport in Biological Environments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Lina Ma, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Modeling and numerical simulations of practical biology processes have always
been limited, either because the model itself lacks the accordance to important
real world physics law or the prohibitively high computational cost to simulate
the process at molecular level. Extensive research in molecular biology shows
that molecules control macroscopic biological function. The communication
between significantly different temporal and physical scales becomes vital in
representing an accurate biological process. This project is designed to bridge
the critical gaps between different physical scales. It emphasizes on adopting
consistent physical laws throughout various scales. It aims to develop multi-
scale models, and further conduct numerical simulations to investigate
biological process. The result of the project will deliver a substantial advance
in both scientific computing and biological modeling. A more complete model
advances the understanding of living organisms, and will have broader impacts in
bioengineering and human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the ionic transport with applications to processes occurring near or
across cell membranes. To study diffusion, ion transport, and heat flow in one
consistent framework, we propose the following approach. (a) In order to ensure
the consistency with important physical principles and the robustness of the
model, we pose the mathematical problem within an energetic variational
framework. Highly accurate numerical method will be chosen to simulate the
model. (b) Based on the full molecular dynamics model, we will choose
appropriate local ion density and current, the local energy and energy flux,
while making sure that the conservation laws are exactly satisfied at every
scale. This coarse-graining procedure reduces the full molecular description to
a system of equations at a much larger spatial, and more importantly, much
longer temporal scales. (c)The longer time regime and the finer time scale will
communicate with each other and update the corresponding coefficients. With this
new integrated mathematical framework, this project will address the fundamental
modeling difficulty, and develop efficient numerical schemes to improve the
realization of the role of ionic solutions in determining biological
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.