* 1913006
* Information-Based Complexity Analysis for Large-Scale Nonlinear Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Yuyuan Ouyang, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 12/31/2022
* USD 243,756.00

Recent years have seen rapid advances in the fields of data analysis, which has
impacts in various disciplines. Optimization has been an important tool in
solving problems arising from data analysis applications. Modern applications
with large volume datasets and sophisticated data structures bring great
challenges to designing scalable and efficient numerical optimization algorithms
for large-scale nonlinear optimization problems. While the goal of optimization
algorithm design is to solve the problems of interest as efficiently as
possible, it is equally important to study the complexity of the problems of
interest themselves. In particular, the complexity analysis of a class of
nonlinear optimization problems reveals the fundamental performance limits of
any algorithms for solving problems in such class. The discovered performance
limits would then encourage one to design efficient algorithms that reach such
performance limits. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;First-order methods are a class of
numerical optimization algorithms that only need to access the information on
function value and first-order derivatives. Due to the computational efficiency
and scalability, first-order methods have been widely used to solve large-scale
nonlinear optimization problems. This proposal addresses the important question
of performance limits of first-order methods through the information-based
complexity theory. The problems of interests are nonlinear optimization with
different special structures. In order to accelerate computation, many special
problem structures have been explored in the literature on algorithm design. By
utilizing the problem structure, several newly designed algorithms are able to
achieve improved computational performance. However, comparing with the rapidly
growing number of new and novel algorithms on structured nonlinear optimization,
the complexity analysis and the design of worse-case instances does not match
with the advancement in algorithm design. This proposal aims to close some of
the aforementioned gaps by constructing several worst-case examples that
demonstrate the performance limits of first-order methods, in the hope of
broaden the understanding of efficiency of first-order methods and the
difficulty of certain nonlinear optimization models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by Computational Mathematics Program, DMS/MPS, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.