* 1913746
* Underground Low-Background Nuclear Astrophysics Studies
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael Wiescher, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,996.00

CASPAR (Compact Accelerator System for Performing Astrophysical Research) is the
first and only deep underground accelerator laboratory in the United States and
only the second existing in the world. It will be located nearly a mile
underground at the Sanford Underground Research Facility in Lead, South Dakota.
Nuclear Astrophysics will be studied there and the focus of the studies will be
the early stages of light elemental synthesis in primordial stars (the first
stars formed after the Big Bang). The nuclear interactions involving light
elements in stellar environments are the foundation for the production of all
elements in the Universe. This work will provide data to explain the abundance
of elements that are observed by astronomers in the oldest stars of our
Universe; and an investigation of the source of neutrons that drive these
processes will provide a more complete picture of the nuclear burning in these
stars that facilitate the production of the heavier
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory studies of nucleosynthesis in stars
are difficult to perform near the surface of the earth due to an enormous
background from cosmic ray interactions in the atmosphere which overwhelm the
experiment. Therefore, this work will utilize a 1 Mega Volt electrostatic
accelerator located 4850 ft underground at the Sanford Underground Research
Facility (SURF) to perform experiments that exploit the low cosmic ray
background conditions at CASPAR. The acceleration and subsequent bombardment of
a range of elements of interest (for example carbon and neon) with proton and
alpha ion beams, will result in the emission of neutrons and gamma rays to be
analyzed with Sodium Iodide (NaI) summing detectors and deuterated liquid
scintillator arrays. The facility is nearly unique in the world. It is
comparable to the LUNA facility in Italy and one proposed in China; but neither
competitor will cover as broad an energy range as CASPAR.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CASPAR is a part of the nuclear astrophysics program at
the University of Notre Dame. The unique nature of the proposed research will
support the education of graduate students working in Nuclear Physics and the
training of the nation's future nuclear workforce. CASPAR is supported by the
National Science Foundation and is synergistic with other important NSF
initiatives such as the frontier center for nuclear astrophysics, JINA-CEE and
the gravitational-wave observatory, LIGO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.