* 1913923
* RUI: Searches for New Physics with the CMS Detector at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Matthew Bellis, Siena College
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 06/30/2024
* USD 201,175.00

This is a project by Siena College to carry out fundamental research with the
Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) experiment at the Large Hadron Collider, at the CERN
laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The Siena group participates in the
experiment through an association with the Cornell University high-energy
physics group. Siena undergraduates contribute to physics analyses that probe
some of the most fundamental questions in physics. The group has contributed to
a measurement of the differential cross section for production of high momentum
top/antitop quark pairs, supported the CMS data preservation efforts with brand
new educational tools, restarted an effort to search for baryon-number violating
(BNV) decays of the top quark, and engaged local high school teachers and their
students to teach them about this exciting work. The group now leads efforts to
search for BNV decays of the top quark with Run II data, developing novel
approaches along the way. New efforts in data preservation and speculative dark
matter searches are also part of this project. Siena will continue this effort
primarily to use these data for education, outreach, and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observed matter/antimatter asymmetry in the
universe is 8 orders of magnitude larger than can be accommodated by the
combination CP violation in the quark sector and baryon-number violating
processes allowed in the Standard Model. The most striking consequence of this
would be proton decay, but extensive searches for this process have yielded no
signal. If BNV is mediated by a boson that operates through a more complicated
flavor/generation structure, then it may manifest more strongly in higher
generation quarks and leptons. The Siena group will expand the search for BNV
decays of the top quark, any observation of which would transform particle
physics. The nature of dark matter is one of the most significant outstanding
questions in physics and a key missing element of the Standard Model. The Siena
group will carry out new speculative dark matter searches in which the CMS
detector is used in a direct detection mode, looking for large deposits of
energy not associated with a bunch crossing, and in indirect detection mode,
searching for standard model particles pointing up from the ground and
originating from the decay of dark matter particles gravitationally trapped in
the Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, Siena College students
have the opportunity to contribute to physics analyses and to present their work
at conferences and carry out their research at major world laboratories. These
efforts will focus on both exciting the general public about what humanity is
learning about Nature and how the Universe works, but also on encouraging young
people to consider careers in STEM fields. The Siena group emphasizes reaching
out to women and other traditionally underrepresented groups in physics in local
high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.