* 1913947
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart IoT System for Rapid Condition Assessment of Bridges under Sudden Events
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Kirill Mechitov, Embedor Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2020
* USD 224,680.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be in the railroad, civil infrastructure, and engineering services
industries, by providing engineering firms and infrastructure owners the means
to enhance public safety while significantly reducing the costs of bridge
infrastructure monitoring and revenue losses due to infrastructure downtime due
to sudden events. Thousands of sudden events, such as vehicle impacts and
overweight vehicle crossings, occur annually on the over 700,000 bridges in the
U.S. Many go unnoticed or unreported, despite their potential to induce
structural failures or hidden damage that significantly reduces the structure's
service life. This project will provide a cost-effective wireless solution to
detect, quantify, and report sudden events on civil infrastructure in near real-
time. The proposed solution will replace three existing types of monitoring
systems with one compact, easy-to-deploy device at a fraction of the cost of
even a single legacy system. The rapid condition assessment capability will
further reduce traffic disruption, thereby lowering daily economic losses that
can range in the millions of dollars and offering the potential to make the
nation's transportation infrastructure safer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project seeks to develop a smart IoT monitoring system for rapid condition
assessment of civil infrastructure under sudden events. Wired systems are
prohibitively expensive for most structures, particularly bridges in remote
locations, and existing wireless solutions following a duty-cycle approach to
reduce power draw are incapable of always-on monitoring needed for sudden event
detection. The objective of the research is to develop a low-cost IoT system to
maintain always-on monitoring, so as not to miss an event, under a minimal power
budget, without sacrificing data fidelity, and with a very low false positive
rate. To this end, an asynchronously-triggered, synchronized data acquisition
method will be developed, using high-fidelity wireless sensors that are tightly
coupled with a programmable event-based switch capable of always-on operation.
This method would enable the system to maintain ultralow-power operation
indefinitely, and upon event detection, to rapidly transition to high-fidelity
measurement. Uniquely, the pre- and post-event data are processed and stitched
together across multiple sensors without the need for a priori synchronization.
Experiments will be conducted to demonstrate the system?s capabilities to
capture the onset of sudden events and present structural damage assessment in
near real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.