* 1913999
* SBIR Phase I:  Harnessing Natural Language Processing for Scalable Text-based Behavioral Health Care
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Satya Prateek Bommaraju, BEACON TECH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,835.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address a systematic behavioral health and
substance use provider shortage, cost-effectively improve patient retention in
treatment, and proactively treat chronic behavioral health patients. Left
untreated, these conditions cost over $1 trillion annually and result in
countless early deaths. Peer support is an effective tool to engage patients
unwilling or unable to access clinical care, particularly in marginalized
populations. However, scaling peer support is challenging, with current online
support forums rife with trolling and abuse. Our Natural Language Processing
(NLP) tools can extrapolate the emotional sentiment of text messages,
automatically flagging clinically relevant or critical content. This allows
clinicians to easily moderate groups by focusing their time on the patients most
in need, while peers generate the touchpoints necessary for day-to-day
engagement.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will greatly enhance the ability of clinicians to track the
mental health of patients within a support group. Currently, a challenge in
managing peer groups is identifying the health of a group as a whole - some
groups can be far more constructive than others. Given the volume of messages
generated in an online support group, together with expected caseloads for care
manager and peer support specialists, who may be managing dozens of groups, this
is an impossible task without the aid of technology. To achieve this goal we
focus on three main areas: 1) improving the performance of our existing NLP
algorithms by developing novel techniques to identify and track multiple
conversations that might be co-occurring in the group, 2) developing a method of
tracking the overall health and stability of a group by analyzing interactions
among peers and 3) design new interfaces that effectively display all of the
insights generated by the algorithms. These NLP tools will power a platform to
give patients more access to support. Providers will have access to a novel
high-fidelity data source to better triage outreach and personalize
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.