* 1913069
* Research in Low-Energy Nuclear Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Richard Furnstahl, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 480,002.00

The strong interaction is responsible for the binding of protons and neutrons
into atomic nuclei. Improved quantitative understanding of how this happens is
essential not only for fundamental nuclear research at US experimental
facilities but for progress in astrophysics, for experiments on the nature of
neutrinos, and for applications to energy and homeland security. This project
enables in part a new era of precision calculations of nuclear structure and
reactions. Activities include extending the range and capabilities of
statistical methods for assessing theoretical uncertainties and for physics
discovery, developing and testing a novel systematic approach to heavier nuclei,
and improving the extraction of information from experiment that minimally
depends on model assumptions. The training received by undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdoctoral research associates in carrying out these activities
contributes directly to the building of a diverse scientific workforce. The mix
of analytical and numerical computation the students and postdocs must employ is
excellent preparation for both academic and industrial research, which is
validated by the strong track record of past members of the group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projects are in three major categories: Bayesian
statistical methods for effective field theory (EFT) uncertainty quantification,
EFT for finite density nuclear systems, and calculation/extraction of process-
independent quantities. The Bayesian methods will be applied to inter-nucleon
interactions, few- and many-body systems, and electroweak probes. They will
address EFT truncation errors, parameter estimation, model selection, and model
mixing. Recent studies of the density matrix expansion and phase-space
contributions to many-body calculations will be the basis for further work on
finite-density power counting and a renewed study of EFT for nuclear density
functional theory. Finally, The PI and his collaborators will build on recent
progress in understanding knock-out reactions from a renormalization group
perspective, which highlights scale and scheme dependence in these interactions
and raises questions about how to best analyze experiments that rely on
factorization assumptions. Applications range from optical potentials to
alternative treatments of short-range-correlation physics. These projects all
contribute to the goal of microscopic, model-independent calculations of nuclei
with quantified uncertainties. They will impact forefront problems in low-energy
nuclear physics as outlined in the Long Range Plan, such as structure and
reactions for the physics of nuclei far from stability, which is relevant for
astrophysics and to the future Facility for Rare Isotope Beams
(FRIB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.