* 1913412
* SBIR Phase I:  A Platform for Label-Free, Numerous-Marker-Based Isolation of Functionally Preserved Single Cancer Stem Cells
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Hany Nassef, Nodexus Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2020
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase I project leverages
node-pore sensing with multi-marker screening for viable, functionally-preserved
isolation of single urothelial carcinoma of the bladder stem cells. This tool
will help enable more comprehensive biomarker discovery and facilitate the
development of targeted therapies. Ultimately, this solution will allow for
clinical, academic, and industrial researchers to selectively isolate single
cells from fragile primary bladder biopsy subpopulations for downstream analysis
and personalized treatment development in the longer term. The ability to screen
for numerous parameters and isolate target urothelial carcinoma of the bladder
stem cells in a walk-up usable, accessible, and low-cost manner will enable
downstream functional studies that will help lead to improved patient outcomes.
In conjunction with the business opportunity here, there is projected to be a
significant positive impact on research output and publications that will be
enabled by the introduction of a low-cost urothelial carcinoma of the bladder
stem cell isolation instrument to research, industrial/biopharma, and clinical
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project involves a multi-
parametric approach leveraging label-free node-pore sensing and low-shear
microfluidics for viable single-cell sorting and dispensing while preserving
viability and functional characteristics for downstream assays. Characterization
and isolation of single, live functionally-preserved urothelial carcinoma of the
bladder cancer stem cells is pivotal for the determination of universally
accepted, clinically-accurate biomarkers for early cancer detection as well as
optimized targeted therapy development. This project is aimed at delivering easy
access to these cells without requiring extensive experimental design and
tuning, enabling operation by untrained, non-expert users. Using the novel
detection and isolation methodologies, the platform can be used to unveil masked
heterogeneity and enable downstream functional studies (such as growth,
invasion, and chemotherapeutic resistance) on individually isolated, viable, and
functionally-preserved isolated urothelial carcinoma of the bladder stem
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.