* 1913035
* Novel Finite Element Methods for Elliptic Distributed Optimal Control Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Susanne Brenner, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 262,254.00

Optimal control problems with elliptic partial differential equation constraints
appear in many optimal design processes in engineering and science. In these
problems the state (output) is connected to the control (input) through an
elliptic partial differential equation, and the objective is to find the control
that will produce a desired state in an optimal fashion. The proposed research
is on the design, analysis and efficient implementation of novel numerical
methods for such problems, with applications to mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
numerical approaches for these optimal control problems treat the control as the
primary unknown. The resulting finite element methods only involve low order
elements. The convergence analysis, where the error estimates for the control,
the state and the adjoint state are intertwined, is substantially more
complicated than the convergence analysis for elliptic boundary value problems.
In contrast, the approach in the proposed research treats the state as the
primary unknown by reformulating the optimal control problems as variational
inequalities for the state. A new analytical framework developed recently by the
PI and the Co-PI shows that the convergence analysis for these elliptic
variational inequalities can be obtained by using the same tools for the
convergence analysis for elliptic boundary value problems. Consequently many
finite element methods originally intended for elliptic boundary value problems
can also be applied to the optimal control problems constrained by elliptic
partial differential equations. The goal of the proposed research is to apply
this new insight to design novel finite element methods for optimal control
problems with general cost functionals, problems with semi-linear second order
and fourth order elliptic partial differential equation constraints, problems
for electromagnetics and problems with rough coefficients that appear in
materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.