* 1913553
* RUI: Experimental Research in Nuclear Astrophysics and Nuclear Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jerry Hinnefeld, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 135,003.00

The broad picture of how elements are produced by nuclear reactions in stars has
been known for decades, but many important details of this process remain to be
discovered. This award supports the participation of the PI and undergraduate
students at Indiana University South Bend (IUSB) in a series of experiments to
study nuclear reactions involving the fusion of a helium nucleus with another,
heavier nucleus, which are important for a complete understanding of the helium-
burning phase of stellar evolution. The experiments utilize the St. George
recoil mass separator, a device recently commissioned at the University of Notre
Dame's Nuclear Science Laboratory that allows measurements of the rates of these
reactions at very low energies, close to the energies at which the reactions
occur inside stars. IUSB students will participate in the collection and offline
analysis of data from these experiments; in particular, by contributing to the
development of analysis techniques that are specific to this new experimental
device. The award also supports the continuing participation of the IUSB group
in experiments using the MoNA-LISA neutron detectors for studies of the
structure of rare isotopes at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory
(NSCL) and the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at Michigan State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The detection system for St. George utilizes
measurements of time-of-flight and energy to distinguish between alpha-capture
reaction products and residual beam particles (aka background) on the basis of
mass. The IUSB group will develop techniques to normalize particle detectors to
the integrated beam flux in St. George, participate in data collection and
online analysis during, and participate in offline analysis and interpretation
of collected data. Work will begin with a commissioning experiment which will be
a study of the 14N(alpha,gamma)18F reaction. This reaction is the first step
toward the production of Ne-22, which is a neutron source for the s-process via
the via the reaction 22Ne(alpha,n)25Mg. St. George is well suited, because of
its large angular and energy acceptances, to extend cross section measurements
for alpha-capture reactions into new energy ranges and reduce uncertainties in
key stellar reaction rates. The award also supports research on the structure of
nuclei near the neutron dripline, utilizing the MoNA-LISA neutron detector array
at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory. IUSB is a member
institution of the MoNA Collaboration, and the PI and IUSB students will
participate in data collection during MoNA experiments at the NSCL and in the
shared data analysis that is a hallmark of the MoNA
Collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.