* 1913372
* SBIR Phase I:  A Microbial Enrichment Device to Reduce the Cost of Sequencing Metagenomes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Lorenzo Damico, AINCOBIO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the acceleration of discoveries in microbiome
science by wider adoption of whole metagenomic and metatranscriptomic
sequencing. These DNA and RNA sequencing techniques are the gold standard for
data generation in microbiome-based drugs and diagnostics, but are prohibitively
expensive for large-scale research efforts. The high cost is due to two factors:
First, customers are required to sequence large quantities of DNA and RNA to
adequately analyze the microbiome; and second, research projects are plagued by
long turnaround times due to lower sample throughput. The proposed product will
enrich microbial cells and will remove contaminants before the sequencing
analysis begins. If successful, the commercial impact of this product for end-
users will be substantial cost savings and the ability to expand their customer
base, enabling scientific progress to accelerate in microbiome research.
Accomplishing the technical aims set forth in this Phase I proposal will
significantly reduce technical risk in the company's commercialization efforts
by demonstrating proof-of-feasibility for a single-use device and bench-top
instrument capable of enriching microbes prior to metagenomic
sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
microbial enrichment tool to significantly reduce the cost and difficulty of
analyzing microbiomes using DNA and RNA sequencing. At present, sequencing
laboratory directors only are able to analyze microbiomes at tremendous expense
because samples are highly contaminated with DNA and RNA derived from host
cells. The proposed solution is a disposable cartridge and a control instrument
that will enable lab personnel to rapidly enrich microbes directly from samples
without the use of bioengineered tags or labels that introduce bias, and enable
the generation of sequencing libraries composed primarily of bacterial DNA and
RNA. The technical challenges in this proposal are to convert the current
laboratory method for enriching bacteria demonstrated previously into a bench-
top instrument that uses a simple and disposable device compatible with current
sequencing workflows that requires minimal operator steps. The system's
performance in Phase I will be evaluated using spike-in samples with bacterial
isolates and mock communities to simulate realistic
microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.