* 1913293
* Mathematical and Computational Studies on Bose-Einstein Superfluid
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Yanzhi Zhang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 175,000.00

Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC), predicted by S. Bose and A. Einstein in the
early 1920s, is a state of matter near absolute zero temperature for which all
atoms lose their individual properties and condense into a macroscopic coherent
'super-wave'. Since its first experimental realization in 1995 (2001 Nobel Prize
in Physics awarded to E. A. Cornell, W. Ketterle, and C. E. Wieman), BEC has
been the focus of active research both experimentally and theoretically. It not
only provides a new platform to investigate quantum properties of matter but
also opens new perspectives for understanding the phenomena of superconductivity
and superfluidity. The recent launch of the Cold Atom Laboratory to the space
station on May 21, 2018 has once again drawn the spotlight to BEC superfluidity.
This project focuses on the fundamental mathematical and computational issues
arising in the study of Bose-Einstein superfluids to understand its behavior
under the influence of artificial gauge fields and long-range dispersive
interactions. It could potentially benefit the development of advanced
technologies, for instance, superconducting quantum interference devices and
atom interferometer-based sensors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of
this research are to build mathematical and computational treatments for the
magnetic Schrodinger equations, to promote the understanding of Bose-Einstein
superfluidity, so as to advance the experiments and applications of BEC. This
project proposes systematic research on the mathematical modeling and numerical
simulations of BEC superfluids in the presence of long-range dispersion
interactions. On one hand, new mathematical and numerical issues introduced by
the long-range dispersion will be investigated in detail. First, effective
absorbing boundary conditions will be developed to avoid the artificial
reflections of waves at the computational boundary, one persistent problem in
wave simulations. Then accurate and efficient numerical methods will be designed
to discretize the magnetic Schrodinger models. On the other hand, the solution
properties of BEC will be studied analytically and numerically to understand the
influence of long-range dispersion interaction and its interplay with nonlinear
interactions. Both stability analysis and numerical simulations will be carried
out to study the modulation instability and wave collapse due to the competition
of dispersion and nonlinear interactions. Moreover, the properties of quantized
vortices in the presence of artificial gauge field and nonlocal dispersive
and/or nonlinear interactions will be investigated, so as to advance the
understanding of BEC superfluidity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.