* 1913693
* RUI: Neutron Star Oscillations as Probes of Dense Matter Properties and Phases
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Prashanth Jaikumar, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 287,352.00

Neutron stars are astrophysical objects that weigh as much as the Sun but are
only about as large as a city. Little is known about the state of matter inside
neutron stars, yet, the properties of matter in such extremely dense conditions
is crucial to understanding the complexities of the strong nuclear force, which
determines the sub-structure of neutrons and protons out of which all atoms are
made. The recent discovery of gravitational waves from merging neutron stars
opens a unique avenue for the study of this dense matter inside neutron stars.
This project will quantify the properties of such matter by studying how it
impacts the amplitude and frequency of observed gravitational waves. This will
be accomplished by using Einstein's general theory of relativity and a judicious
selection of models describing the strong nuclear force. The main outcome of
this research will be discovering the best lines of scientific evidence for new
states of matter from the analysis of gravitational wave data. In addition, the
PI will train students on advanced computational methods in the course of this
research and share cutting-edge scientific knowledge with high school students
via teacher-training workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the
converging domain of nuclear theory, neutron stars and gravitational waves. In
this project, the PI will calculate the spectrum of non-radial neutron star
oscillations, with particular attention to modes that are most likely to
manifest in gravitational wave signals from continuously emitting sources and
which can constrain key properties of dense matter such as the symmetry energy.
The emphasis is on applying accurate and efficient numerical methods known from
quantum scattering theory to the computation of the spectrum of fluid
oscillations in full General Relativity, while employing select equations of
state (cold or hot conditions) for neutron star matter that satisfy current
experimental and astrophysical constraints, including the recent tidal
polarizability data. The research will also address relatively unexplored
features of dense matter that impact neutron star oscillations, such as
superfluidity and phase transitions, by sifting through a database of equation
of states for select models that include these aspects. The project will involve
several graduate students culminating in their Masters thesis, and the PI will
work with experts in science education to communicate current knowledge of
topics in astrophysics to local high school teachers involved with implementing
next generation science standards (NGSS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.