* 1913287
* Fundamental Symmetries using Lattice QCD with the Gradient Flow
* MPS,PHY
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2022
* Andrea Shindler, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 10/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

Even with the extraordinary success of the the Standard Model of Particle
Physics (SM), certain phenomena observed in the Universe that have profound
consequences to life as we know it, such as the matter-antimatter asymmetry, the
hierarchy problem, and the existence of dark matter and dark energy, remain
unexplained. Therefore any physical description of such phenomena requires a
theory that goes beyond the Standard Model (BSM), while at the same time
encompassing the Standard Model and its predictions related to ordinary matter.
A physical quantity sensitive to the symmetry breaking responsible for the
matter-antimatter asymmetry is the electric dipole moment (EDM) of particles
such as neutron and proton. The PI will study the impact of theories beyond the
Standard Model on the matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe, calculating
the electric dipole moments of protons and neutrons induced by such theories. In
addition to investigating the role played by theories beyond the Standard Model
on the observed matter-antimatter asymmetry in the universe, which is one of the
biggest unanswered questions in particle and nuclear physics, the PI will mentor
a student engaged in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a new
method, based on the so-called gradient flow, for the determination of the
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) component of key BSM matrix elements related to
quark and strong theta-CP violations. This set of matrix elements impacts the
understanding of electric dipole moments (EDMs) within nucleons and nuclei (a
key signature of BSM physics) and their determination will lay the foundation
for extraction of BSM observables from future low-energy, high-intensity
experimental measurements. The use of the gradient flow will circumvent some of
the big challenges posed by the determination of the above-mentioned matrix
elements, introducing a new scale, the flow time, that will mitigate divergences
present in the calculations. Additionally the gradient flow is perfectly suited
to be adopted on QCD calculations on the lattice. Lattice QCD is, as today, the
only robust and theoretically sound approach to non-perturbative QCD
calculations. The new method the PI has developed is ideally suited to calculate
all the CP-violating contributions to the EDM of nucleons and light nuclei. Most
of the tools and technique developed in this project are alternative to
traditional methods and can be easily applied to other matrix element
calculations contributing to the study of dark matter
candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.