* 1913531
* Simulating Core-Collapse and Electron-Capture Supernovae: from the Central Engine to the Supernova Remnant
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* William Hix, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2024
* USD 356,556.00

Core-collapse supernovae, the culmination of the lives of massive stars, are the
principle actors in the story of our elemental origins. Our understanding of
these events centers around a stalled explosion brought back to life by a
neutrinos streaming from the newly-formed neutron star. This award will support
two projects to improve our understanding of the impact that the turbulent,
neutrino-driven nature of supernova explosions has on observations of supernovae
and galactic chemical evolution and the elemental history of our Galaxy. First,
the PI will seek to investigate the explosions that result from the lightest
stars to produce supernovae, those with cores composed initially of oxygen and
neon, with much greater fidelity than has previously been achieved. Second, the
investigator team will continue our prior project to determine the full range of
nucleosynthesis products in the ejecta as realistically as possible within our
simulations of the central engine of core-collapse supernovae and then extend
these models of core-collapse supernovae beyond the initial epoch where the
explosion is formed. To compare with observations, the PI will extend these
simulations to the epoch when the shock reaches the surface of the star and the
visible supernova is born.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Core-collapse supernovae,
including the collapse of iron-cored stars, but also the collapse of less
massive stars with oxygen and neon cores as electron capture supernovae, are the
principle drivers of galactic chemical evolution. Our understanding of both of
these events, while still incomplete, centers around a neutrino-driven central
engine which is highly hydrodynamically unstable. Though the stalled shock is
brought back to life by neutrino heating, the development of the supernova
explosion is inextricably linked to three-dimensional fluid flows. Regrettably,
this is ignored in most studies of supernova nucleosynthesis. This award
supports two projects to improve our understanding of the impact that the
turbulent, neutrino-driven nature of supernova explosions has on observations of
supernovae and galactic chemical evolution. First, the investigator team will
investigate the explosions that result from electron capture supernovae with
much greater fidelity than has heretofore been achieved. Second, the
investigator team will continue a prior project to realistically examine the
full range of nucleosynthesis products that may be observed in the ejecta by
extending state-of-the-art core-collapse supernova models to the epoch when the
shock reaches the surface of the star and the supernova is
born.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of "Windows on
the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas
for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.