* 1913303
* SBIR Phase I: Thermal Expansion Reduction Study of Neutron Shielding Material
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Danielle Castley, Neutroelectric, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable safer and more economical nuclear
power. This project will help increase the safety of nuclear power plants by
reducing radiation damage to reactor components and reducing radiation exposure
to power plant workers and personnel. In addition, it will reduce overall plant
life cycle costs by reducing the cost of spent fuel management and
decommissioning. By these means, this project will support the public benefit
from continued and expanded use of nuclear power as a clean energy
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project goal is to reduce the thermal expansion properties of a
lightweight, high-temperature neutron shielding material. The key value
proposition provided by this material over existing products is the unique
increase in the operating temperature without producing a notable increase in
weight or reduction in neutron stopping power. However, to enable its practical
use, the material must be further adapted to reduce the coefficient of thermal
expansion to meet reactor design requirements. With success, the proposed
project will overcome the technical hurdle of reducing the coefficient of
thermal expansion without altering other key material properties such as neutron
stopping power, radiation resistance, density, and maximum operating
temperature. Three approaches applied separately and in combination, if
necessary, will be explored for reducing the coefficient of thermal expansion.
These strategies may also be applicable for reducing the coefficient of thermal
expansion in other neutron shielding materials with design
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.