* 1913616
* SBIR Phase I:  Deep Learning Hydroponic Forecasting System for Precision Farming
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Graham Smith, BABYLON MICRO-FARMS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2020
* USD 223,102.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the introduction of urban farming as a viable new
industry for small businesses by driving down the barrier of entry to hydroponic
farming. Conventional hydroponic farming necessitates complex systems in which a
variety of variables must be monitored and controlled by a skilled operator in
response to changes throughout the plant lifecycle and care must be taken to
control these variables precisely. This need for demanding management by a
technically-educated farmer has restricted the widespread adoption of urban
hydroponic farming. This project will result in a fully-automated precision
farming platform managing the full scope of urban farming operations. The
platform uses trends in a hydroponic grown zone to forecast changes to system
variables and crop growth and to automatically and intelligently adjust vital
parameters to optimize resource usage and maximize output. Because the precision
doser will not require extensive agricultural expertise, it will make hydroponic
farming accessible to small-scale farmers, restaurateurs, and private consumers.
Once it becomes possible for non-industrial operations to establish hydroponics,
urban farms can place sources of fresh, organic produce right in the heart of
food deserts without reliance on GMOs, herbicides, or
pesticides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a
hydroponics farming control platform which intelligently predicts crop growth,
forecasts vital system variables including the pH and electrical conductivity,
and tunes environmental parameters in accordance with the forecasts, precisely
adjusting the growing zone to maximize crop output while minimizing wasted
resources. More than one-tenth of households in the United States cope without
adequate nutrition or rely on processed foods, leading to the dual crisis of
food insecurity and obesity throughout urban environments. Because they do not
have the same extensive land and water requirements as traditional farming,
hydroponic operations can take root in urban environments where access to fresh,
nutritious produce is restricted. This project will target two aspects of
hydroponic agriculture essential to the development of a precision farming tool:
crop output and system parameters. By analyzing trends in plant growth, the
platform will inform decision-making around resource usage, allowing the grower
to adjust system parameters that promote the most successful crops. The final
platform will directly address the concern of food deserts in urban localities,
by offering a means to grow fresh produce locally, reducing the production costs
of standard farming operations, and optimizing crop output in hydroponic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.