* 1913083
* Finite Element Exterior Calculus with Smoother Piecewise Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Johnny Guzman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Finite element methods are the computational workhorse in simulating many
problems in engineering, physics, chemistry and biology. For each particular
application, different type of finite elements are needed. In 1980, Nedelec made
a monumental connection between different finite elements that has found even
more applications. This project will generalize these connections to different
finite elements of smoother type. These connections will allow us to tackle new
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will build and analyze finite
element spaces on simplicial meshes in arbitrary dimension that fit in a finite
element complex following the framework of the finite element exterior calculus
(FEEC). The distinctive feature of this proposal is that we will build spaces
that are smoother than traditional spaces (e.g. Whitney/Nedelec forms). Smoother
spaces are more natural for some applications: plate problems, fluid flow
problems. We will accomplish this by using splits of simplices that provide more
structure than an arbitrary simplicial decomposition of a domain. The left most
spaces of the complex will coincide with functions spaces that have been studied
in the spline community. The far right spaces are ones that are associated with
inf-sup stable finite element spaces for fluid flow problems. Thus, we plan to
connect these function spaces in a natural way into a finite element complex. In
addition, we will explore connections with the spline and applied algebraic
geometry communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.