* 1913698
* Collaborative Research: Assessment of Student Understanding of Measurement and Uncertainty in Experimental Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Heather Lewandowski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2023
* USD 244,378.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving assessment of student understanding in
introductory physics laboratory courses. The project focuses on two critical
concepts that are central to physics: experimentation and measurement
uncertainty. Experimentation plays a central role in physics for the development
of both new knowledge and technology. Many students' introduction to
experimentation happens in physics laboratory courses. A common learning
objective for these courses is for students understand how to make measurements
and that these measurements have a level of uncertainty. This project is
significant because it will use modern assessment frameworks that draw on
learning and measurement theory to develop a better tool to measure students'
understanding of these concepts. This assessment will be available to all
instructors of introductory laboratory courses, so that they can measure student
outcomes and use this information iteratively improve student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the need to assess
student learning outcomes in physics laboratory courses. This work will document
the collective needs of the physics laboratory community regarding assessing
student understanding of measurement and uncertainty. Its scope will include
documenting the myriad ways in which students present their understanding of
these concepts. By using modern assessment frameworks (e.g., Evidence Centered
Design) with well-established validity frameworks (e.g., Item Response Theory),
the PIs will provide the first assessment of student understanding in physics
that is grounded in the current best practices of assessment design. Although
this research is foundational, with direct implications for future studies of
student learning in laboratory settings, it will also have practical value in
teaching physics. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.