* 1913096
* Sparsity Preserving Algorithms for Rank Structured Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Stewart, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 186,676.00

This project focuses on developing reliable and
efficient&lt;br/&gt;computational methods for solving equations obtained
from&lt;br/&gt;discretization of elliptic partial differential equations that
arise&lt;br/&gt;in engineering and science. The methods are expected to be of
direct&lt;br/&gt;use in the fast solution of various problems in electrostatics
and&lt;br/&gt;materials engineering and also to have utility in
accelerating&lt;br/&gt;computations associated with numerical methods for time
dependent&lt;br/&gt;simulations. The project will extend a class of highly
stable&lt;br/&gt;orthogonal methods based on sparse banded representations to
equations&lt;br/&gt;with more complicated structures than have been considered
before in&lt;br/&gt;the context of this class of algorithms. The stability and
efficiency&lt;br/&gt;of the methods will be analyzed and an efficient
software&lt;br/&gt;implementation of all the methods will be developed and
released.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the development of fast
direct algorithms for&lt;br/&gt;elliptic partial differential equations. The
methods are based on&lt;br/&gt;Givens-weight techniques that exploit rank
structure in order to limit&lt;br/&gt;fill-in when computing a QR or LQ
factorization. There are four main&lt;br/&gt;components to the project: The
extension of orthogonal Givens-weight&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to strongly
admissible rank structures, the development of&lt;br/&gt;efficient block
operations acting on blocks that are obtained from&lt;br/&gt;discretization of
particular subdomains, the analysis of the methods&lt;br/&gt;for numerical
stability and complexity, and the development of an&lt;br/&gt;efficient software
library implementing the algorithms. The&lt;br/&gt;overarching goal is to bridge
a gap between the more flexible classes&lt;br/&gt;of methods that have uncertain
numerical stability and the highly&lt;br/&gt;stable orthogonal methods that are
applicable only to problems with a&lt;br/&gt;restricted weakly admissible rank
structure. The techniques used are&lt;br/&gt;expected to lead to algorithms with
linear or near-linear complexity,&lt;br/&gt;good practical efficiency, and
provable backward stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.