* 1913752
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced microgrid control system based on decentralized optimization techniques
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Francisco Morocz Bazzani, Heila Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2020
* USD 221,022.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a viable control system that will
optimize microgrids in a decentralized manner and create additional flexibility
for electric grid operators. Current microgrids' combinations of power
generation, storage, and consumption that may or may not be integrated with the
broader electric grid?mostly depend on a centralized dispatch approach, with one
single operator making decisions regarding which assets to utilize and when.
Centralized systems require large efforts to set up and do not efficiently adapt
to changes in generation or consumption. The proposed technology will employ a
different logic for controlling assets, automatically and continuously
optimizing the dispatch decisions by using a decentralized blockchain ledger.
The benefits of this control system include dramatically increased flexibility
when assets are added or removed from the system, and much greater resiliency as
there is no single point of failure of the system. Electric utilities will be
able to leverage the system to more effectively manage the grid and deploy
"virtual power plants" rather than depend on inefficient and costly "peaker"
plants. Overall the technology will accelerate adoption of microgrids, improving
the nation's energy infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to design the decentralized
control logic for microgrids, test it via computer simulations, and conduct a
limited physical test at an active site with solar panels, batteries, and other
types of energy assets. Current control systems generally utilize a rigid,
centralized dispatch logic that does not automatically adapt to changing
conditions. A substantial body of research has been conducted demonstrating the
benefits of decentralized ledgers in controlling electric grids. The proposed
research will put the theoretical foundation into practice by developing the
related algorithms to be able to commercialize a microgrid control system. While
the benefits of decentralized systems are clear, the complexity is also
drastically increased when compared with existing centralized systems. The
software must be robust enough to handle the transactions with stability and
redundancy, while also simple enough to not strain telecommunications and
computing resources within the system. The proposed research is expected to
establish proof-of-concept dispatch logic based on a blockchain ledger,
producing an effective and scalable solution that will optimize microgrid
operation, nearly reaching the theoretically ideal
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.