* 1913598
* SBIR Phase I:  Anti-Microbial Graphene Oxide Nanofiltration Membrane
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Humeyra Erol, CatalyzeH2O LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project results from the ability to design a reusable
nanofiltration membrane platform for wastewater treatment. Energy-efficient and
effective wastewater treatment for water purification and reuse remains a
tremendous challenge because safe and reliable approaches are often capital and
energy intensive. The production of clean water from wastewater for municipal or
industrial reuse requires the removal of a wide range of organic and inorganic
contaminants, including many hazardous and toxic substances (e.g., pesticides,
heavy metals, pharmaceuticals, etc.). Energy costs are driven even higher by the
high fouling propensity of polymeric membranes with the wide array of water
contaminants. Preventing fouling and enabling high contaminant rejection with
low energy requirements remain the two core challenges of membrane filtration
for wastewater treatment. The proposed technology will address the two core
challenges through the use of an anti-fouling surface chemistry. The low energy
requirements, contaminant rejection, and anti-fouling properties of the proposed
membrane make it a disruptive innovation that can easily penetrate the market,
providing a cost-effective solution that is lacking in current membrane
purification systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop a nanofiltration technology utilizing surface chemistry modification for
the creation of an anti-fouling membrane for the rejection of pesticides. The
United States spends nearly $9 billion a year on pesticides, which account for
16% of the world pesticide market. Out of the 25 most common active ingredients
in pesticides, 76% are water soluble, which leads to contaminated soil,
groundwater, and nearby bodies of water. The objectives of this project are to
remove common commercial pesticides from water while investigating the
advantageous effects of an anti-fouling membrane surface. Performance of the
membrane will be investigated through cross flow filtration experiments to
identify rejection, stability, and anti-fouling properties. The vision is to
create a nanofiltration membrane with a broad contaminant rejection while
decreasing energy requirements and fouling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.