* 1913401
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced in-home technologies for infant thermoneutrality
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Oliver Smith, INNOGIZED TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2020
* USD 210,899.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
Project is to enhance the well-being of babies and the quality of life of their
caregivers and/or parents. Each week more than 2.5 million members of
"Generation Alpha" are born globally to parents who expect and require
technology driven feedback and support. Currently, this is not available in the
area of sleep-time clothing choices, and so the ambiguous burden of these
"art"-based decisions bears heavily on the minds of new parents. Medical bodies
warn about limited capacity for infants to thermoregulate and the link between
overheating and Sudden Infant Death Syndrome (SIDS). Under-dressing is also
problematic and can result in serious infant hypothermia. Caregivers are
educated that they must dress babies optimally, as over or under-dressing babies
can lead to significant problems, but they are not armed with any technologies
to do so. We will develop a system of advanced technologies to scientifically
guide and quantify the right sleep-time choices, leading to optimal conditions
for safe, regenerative and developmental growth, while alleviating the burden of
doubt from the caregiver. Uniquely, we will couple advanced technologies with an
engaging education platform to deliver a highly impactful product, designed to
immediately capture a sizable portion of the rapidly growing $23 billion USA
baby care industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop
advanced technologies capable of determining the thermal resistance of baby
sleep clothes and sleep-sacks, and evaluating suitability with respect to the
measured conditions of the sleep environment. Developed technologies will be
deployed at the consumer level, in-home. Current technologies for measuring the
thermal resistance of fabrics are prohibitively expensive, time consuming and
laboratory based. Rapidly and robustly approximating to this technology for in-
home and portable deployment is extremely complex. Research objectives include
exploring and developing a variety of novel ways to characterize the physical
properties of fabrics as they relate to thermal resistance, using complementary
sensor-based suites to create new technologies, and creating powerful
multifaceted algorithms that synergistically combine inputs and make
deterministic conclusions. Results will be comparatively analyzed and the user
will be provided with guidance to assist their choices through a graphical
interface that also provides other state-of-the-art sleep-time education
information, reaffirming best practices, right where they are vitally needed, at
the point of sleep-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.