* 1913624
* Probing the Quark Gluon Plasma with Jet Tomography
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sevil Salur, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 587,421.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the fundamental theory of the strong nuclear
force, predicts the existence of a novel state of matter with liberated quarks
and gluons known as the Quark-Gluon Plasma (QGP). During ultra-relativistic
heavy ion collisions, nuclei melt into fundamental constituents, forming a QGP.
At the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), this unique form of matter was
discovered to behave like a nearly perfect liquid. Nuclear physicists continue
to explore new regions of this phase transition and to reveal its detailed
signatures, with RHIC providing the widest range of collision energies and
systems and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) reaching the highest temperatures
and energy densities. This award will support the PI's research on
quantitatively characterizing properties of this hot QCD matter through a study
of energetic quarks and gluons in collisions at LHC and RHIC. The PI will
combine active research with outreach and education to increase minority
participation in STEM careers, including nuclear
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will measure discriminative jet observables
in relativistic heavy ion collisions along with their reference collisions. To
map out the phase diagram at varying length scales, the PI and her group will
measure center of mass energy dependence of jet shapes and heavy flavor quark
jets at lower kinematic regions where the mass effects are expected to be non-
negligible. By finalizing the small radii dependence of inclusive jets at large
kinematic range, the PI will improve the pp baseline for 5 TeV collisions to
distinguish between competing physics mechanisms of parton energy loss. These
complementary and robust measurements will determine key features of the QGP
including thermodynamical and transport coefficient of plasma, how the hot QCD
medium responds to jet energy loss, and how it affects jet structures. The PI
will foster a diverse and competitive work force by emphasizing the education of
female and underrepresented minority students in STEM majors in general, and
nuclear physics in particular, via integration of education with active
research. To reduce the loss of potential students of all ages, she will
encourage female middle and high school students to pursue university education
in STEM fields by bringing them to Rutgers, recruit undergraduate physics majors
by incorporating forefront high energy nuclear physics research into her
introductory physics courses, and mentor women and underrepresented minority
students and include them in all phases of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.