* 1913076
* Numerical Methods for Wave Equations in Time and Frequency Domain
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Daniel Appelo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 04/30/2022
* USD 303,373.00

An intrinsic feature of waves is their ability to propagate over large distances
without changing their shape. This ability allows waves to carry information, be
it through speech or electronic transmission of data. Waves can also be used to
probe the interior of the earth, the human body or engineered structures like
buildings or bridges. This probing can be turned into images of the interior by
the means of solving inverse problems, and in the extension, mitigate seismic
hazards by accurate predictions of ground motion caused by earthquakes. In this
project the principal investigator will develop computational simulation tools
that increases our ability to exploit the properties of wave propagation for the
common good. The tools developed in the project can also be used to design
modern materials with exotic properties that cannot be found in nature. Such
metamaterials can enable better sensing technologies and faster acoustic and
electromagnetic circuit components such as miniaturized speakers, 5G components
and other millimeter wave technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
use a new idea that enables the use of time domain methods for wave equations to
design frequency domain Helmholtz type solvers. The approach is remarkable in
that the underlying linear operator corresponds to a symmetric positive definite
matrix allowing the solution of a coercive problem rather than an indefinite
Helmholtz problem. As the proposed Helmholtz solvers rely solely on evolving the
wave equation they will be massively parallel, scalable and high order accurate.
A goal of the research is to solve the Helmholtz equation in three dimensions at
higher frequencies, and on a larger number of cores than is currently possible.
The research will also seek to improve the time-step constraints of time domain
discontinuous Galerkin methods by exploiting approximation spaces built on
discrete periodic extensions from equidistant node data. Such improvements will
result in faster simulation times and more accurate predictions. Applications of
the methods to modeling of micropolar materials and to simulation of seismic
waves will be carried out in collaboration with researchers from academic
institutions and national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.