* 1913789
* Experimental Nuclear Physics and Fundamental Interactions at Indiana University
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Scott Wissink, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 5,672,847.00

The strong interaction inside and between neutrons and protons, one of the four
forces of nature, possesses some features that are poorly understood and other
features that enable sensitive searches for new forces. The PI and his
collaborators will measure different contributions to the angular momentum of
the proton. The team will also search for nuclei which recoil from collisions
with neutrinos and will use this data to search for new interactions and
calibrate detectors to be used in the future to look for the neutrons from
supernova explosions. In addition, the team will use neutrons to search for
possible new forces of nature and measure the radioactive half life of free
neutrons to test aspects of the Big Bang theory. The scientific impact of this
work lies in the fields of nuclear physics, particle physics, astrophysics, and
cosmology. In the course of conducting these experiments the PIs will provide
excellent opportunities for a thorough scientific and technical education to
many young researchers. The sensitive instrumentation and techniques developed
for this research can be applied to neutron imaging of magnetic fields inside
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of the strong interaction, QCD, is
still the most poorly-understood part of the Standard Model of particles and
interactions. This project will support several PIs at Indiana University to
collaboratively pursue selected scientific questions in strong interaction
physics. The team will probe the poorly-known gluon helicity and quark orbital
motion contributions to the angular momentum of the proton by analyzing data
from polarized proton-proton collisions measured in the STAR detector at the
Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider. The PI and his collaborators will also measure
coherent neutrino-nucleus cross sections in various nuclei, including argon in a
liquid argon scintillation detector, for neutrino energies that would be
produced in a supernova explosion. This data will also constrain possible exotic
interactions of neutrinos with nucleons. In addition, the team will search for
parity-odd neutron spin rotation in liquid helium and for exotic spin dependent
neutron interactions with matter at the NIST Center for Neutron Research. As
such, this project will make possible better theoretical predictions of the
primordial helium abundance from the Big Bang by measuring the decay rate of the
neutron. The team will prepare apparatus for experiments to be mounted at Los
Alamos and Oak Ridge National Laboratories to search for an electric dipole
moment of the neutron with improved sensitivity to search for new sources of
time reversal violation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.