* 1913761
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Peripheral Nerve Matrix Conduit to Enable Nerve Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Lorenzo Soletti, RENERVA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project involves the advancement of biomaterials development for
nerve repair. Each year in the U.S. alone, surgeons perform around 550,000
procedures to repair peripheral nerves affected by traumatic or iatrogenic nerve
injury, which are associated with an economic burden due to loss in employee
productivity in excess of $150B per year. Peripheral Nerve Injury (PNI) can
severely impact the quality of life, productivity, and interpersonal
relationships of injured patients. Existing materials are primarily indicated
for use as passive support or to prevent complications (e.g., mechanical
instability, neuroma, or donor site morbidity associated with autograft). None
of these products has shown clinical improvement in functional outcomes. As
such, any technology or method that can accelerate or improve nerve repair is of
significant interest as it can improve quality of life for those with nerve
injuries and reduce the economic burden associated with long term disability for
those with nerve injuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to undertake the initial development and testing of a porcine tissue-
based nerve conduit. The objective of this proposal is to fabricate conduits
that have suitable mechanical, structural, and biological properties to provide
an ideal environment for nerve repair and regeneration in nerve gap injuries.
The proposed work includes the development and in vitro characterization of the
conduit, as well as in vivo testing in a small animal model of nerve gap repair.
The animal study will compare the functional outcomes obtained with the proposed
conduits with those obtained with commercially available conduits and
autografts. Pilot studies have suggested that the proposed conduits have the
potential to promote key early events in the nerve regeneration process leading
to the formation of functional nerve tissue. The expected outcome is that the
proposed conduits will be superior to existing nerve guides and allografts,
enabling improvements in nerve repair and providing improvements in the clinical
care of affected patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.