* 1913677
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing a Novel Platform for Teaching Emotional Literacy
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Ilya Lyashevsky, AFFECTIFI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to produce a first of its kind educational
technology application for the development of emotional literacy among
adolescent and adult learners. Emotional literacy is increasingly recognized as
a universal need that is critical to one's academic and professional success and
psychological health, as well as for society's cohesion and tolerance. At the
same time, modern emotion science indicates that emotions operate on the basis
of certain basic, universal principles, which represent the deep structure of
our social and emotional life. The present application will focus on teaching
these fundamental principles, encapsulated by a comprehensive emotion system
model developed based on the latest scientific research. To foster deep
learning, the training will emphasize inference-making and the use of
simulations, while being grounded in high quality narrative such as literature
and film. Training exercise generation will be partially automated to provide
content variability. The project has the potential to have a broader impact on
education practice and outcomes by leading to more robust, transferable, and
measurable learning of social-emotional concepts and skills. It promises to make
a further valuable societal contribution by offering an affordable, effective
and engaging mobile solution for enhancing emotional literacy among the general
population, helping to build a more aware, tolerant, just, and peaceful society.
At the same time, the application has the potential to capture a significant
portion of a combined $1.5 billion social-emotional learning and consumer
emotional wellness market, resulting in a self-sustaining business generating
jobs and significant income for tax revenue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails a number of technical
innovations, including: a data model and management system for the encoding of
emotion episodes in literature and film; an emotion exercise generation engine
for automating the creation of training exercises; an effective user interface
for the presentation of emotion principles and the associated training
exercises, particularly those involving emotion system simulation; and emotion
knowledge performance analytics dashboard(s). The main goals of the proposed
R&amp;D include: assessing the viability of developing the emotion exercise
generation engine and a production-ready version of the application; evaluating
the benefits of the training for application users; and assessing the commercial
viability of the product in the educational and consumer markets. The technical
goals will be achieved through rapid, agile development using technologies such
as python, a cross-platform mobile development framework such as React Native,
and a graph database like Neo4J. Platform training benefits will be evaluated
using randomized control studies at multiple stages of product development to
allow for iteration and improvement. Commercial viability will be assessed
through direct outreach to schools and other educational institutions, as well
as a beta launch aimed at the consumer market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.