* 1913146
* Hybrid Multiscale Methods with Applications in Biomaterials and Bioengineering
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Yi Sun, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 179,133.00

On the research side, this project aims to develop experimentally guided, hybrid
multiscale models and methods to study complex biological systems and problems
arising in biomaterials and bioengineering (a) sprouting angiogenesis during
vascularization; (b) bacterial swarming during biofilm formation. This research
will have many benefits to multiscale problems and relevant applications in
biomaterials, tissue regeneration and biomedical engineering, which include
bioprinting technology for fabricating tissues and organs, study of cell
motions, drug design and ultimately regenerative medicine. These methods can be
used as hypothesis generating and testing tools for biologists and bioengineers.
Through collaboration with experimentalists, the PI will develop a hybrid
multiscale approach to better understand complex mechanisms in the
vascularization and the biofilm growth. On the educational side, this project
will not only provide multidisciplinary research training to graduate and
undergraduate students, but also promote awareness and interest in computational
mathematics and mathematical biology among underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the thrust (a), motivated by new
findings in sprouting angiogenesis in bioprinting technology, the PI will
integrate models for angiogenic signaling pathways with that for the mechanical
motion. In particular, we employ typically coarse-grained continuum models
(reaction-diffusion (RD) systems) to describe the dynamics of vascular-
endothelial-growth-factor (VEGF) and nutrients/oxygen, a mechanical model for
the extra-cellular matrix (ECM) based on the finite element method (FEM), and
couple a discrete multicellular lattice model based on the kinetic Monte Carlo
(KMC) algorithm to describe the cellular dynamics. Communication between the
microscale model and the continuum ones is carried out via a suite of multiscale
protocols. For the thrust (b), the PI will study several mechanisms responsible
for bacterial swarming during biofilm formation, such as bacterial chemotaxis,
interaction between bacteria, bacterial shapes, etc. In the proposed hybrid
agent-based model, bacteria are characterized by self-propelled particles (SPP)
or self-propelled rods (SPR) and the dynamics of extracellular polymeric
substances (EPS) in the environment is described by continuously changing
fields. The multiscale model is described by a system of ordinary and partial
differential equations. The research outcomes consist of a set of hybrid
multiscale models, detailed implementation of the models, and accompanying in
silico analysis tools for simulating tissue formation and ultimately 3D
biofabrication involving angiogenesis and vascularization. The tools can provide
efficient ways to systematically test the influence of individual cellular
features under a spectrum of environmental conditions and to study the
collective behavior of bacterial colonies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.