* 1913885
* Structural Characterization of Protein and Protein Assemblies by Solid State NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Ann McDermott, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,150,000.00

Structures inside living cells are often built from numerous copies of one
protein. Like a brick wall made from many individual bricks, an oligomer can
have size and strength unattainable by individual proteins. For example, during
bacterial growth and division, a cell is pinched into two daughter cells by the
action of a protein called FtsZ, many copies of which assemble into a ring that
can constrict. In another example, when cells are stressed they respond by
halting cellular activity. To do this they create a "mesh" of protein from many
copies of TIA-1, which stalls protein synthesis by trapping mRNA in the
&lt;br/&gt;"mesh". Oligomeric structures can be exquisitely sensitive to events
in the cell, much more than an individual protein could be, as illustrated by
the classic example of oligomeric hemoglobin which is much more sensitive to
oxygen than a single hemoglobin protein. Although oligomeric structures are
crucially important, little is known about how the protein molecules pack
together to form the larger structures. It is expected that knowledge of the
oligomeric structures gained through this project will enhance our understanding
of the biological role of these proteins in the cell. This project will have
broad impact through mentorship, teaching and outreach. The investigator has a
strong record of mentoring women in science and these efforts will continue.
Research activities will be showcased through outreach activities for middle and
high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although our knowledge of protein
structure has advanced considerably over the past 50 years, oligomeric proteins
specifically have lagged behind, because they are difficult to study using
traditional structural methods. This project pursues oligomeric structures
through technical developments in solid state NMR, a promising new method that
is well suited for determining structures of oligomeric proteins. In these
studies, the signal strength is enhanced through the use of low temperatures and
by transfer of signal from electron spin to nuclear spin, in a method called
Dynamic Nuclear Polarization. Optimization of sample freezing protocols, and
multidimensional detection schemes pursued in this project are expected to
improve the low temperature linewidths and enable the process of determining
structures. Although most studies will be carried out with in vitro samples,
additional methods are developed for elucidating structures within living cells.
The strategy for detection within the cell is to selectively enhance signals for
the oligomeric protein of interest using a combination of selective isotopic
enrichment and selective transfer of polarization from radicals tagged onto the
protein of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.