* 1913328
* Research in Elementary Particle Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Pran Nath, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 876,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Pran Nath, Brent D.
Nelson, and Tomasz R. Taylor at Northeastern
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thus far, data from the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) has been highly successful and has led to the discovery of the Higgs boso,
which was the last missing piece of the Standard Model of particle physics.
However, future data expected from the LHC will explore the nature of physics
beyond the Standard Model. As part of their research, Professors Nath, Nelson,
and Taylor will conduct studies aimed at finding clues of such new physics in
upcoming data from the LHC and well as in astrophysical data. In their work,
Professors Nath, Nelson, and Taylor will use models based on a symmetry known as
"supersymmetry" which relates particles of different spins to each other, and on
string theory, an approach to physics at very high energies which purports to
unify all forces of nature, including gravity. This area of research serves the
national interest as it advances our knowledge of the fundamental laws of nature
at the frontiers of current knowledge. In addition, there is a strong
educational component to this research. Several Ph.D. thesis students will be
involved in these research projects. Likewise, Professors Nath, Nelson, and
Taylor will disseminate their research through publications, conference and
workshop presentations, and popular lectures. In addition, an important element
of the proposal is "TheoryNet". This is an outreach program consisting of direct
interactions between Boston-Area theorists and high-school students, through
lecture presentations and demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
Professors Nath, Nelson, and Taylor will conduct studies of dark matter in
unified models based on supergravity and strings which contain possible dark-
matter candidates, including those in a hidden sector. They will also conduct
further theoretical work related to unified models based on strings and F-theory
and they will conduct further investigations into the structure of string
amplitudes. They will also investigate areas where particle theory overlaps with
cosmology, specifically in the study of inflation and dark energy, and search
for a unified framework for both. Finally, they will develop strategies to
search for new physics in precision analyses which have the potential to probe
physics at scales far beyond the reach of current or future
accelerators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.