* 1913027
* Plasma Oxidation Laboratory: Construction of a Multi-Sample Instrument
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Karen Steelman, SHUMLA SCHOOL INC, THE
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 82,500.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Karen Steelman of Shumla
Archaeological Research &amp; Education Center will construct a multi-sample
plasma oxidation instrument used to process ancient rock art paint samples for
radiocarbon dating. An oxygen glow discharge converts organic material in rock
paintings samples to carbon dioxide, which can be radiocarbon dated using
accelerator mass spectrometry. Plasma oxidation has been used to radiocarbon
date organic binders in mineral-pigmented paintings, as well as many charcoal-
pigmented paintings. In recent years, there has been an increased demand by rock
art researchers to use the plasma extraction technique for dating studies. The
ability to place rock art in a chronological context allows an inventory of
images to be studied together with excavated cultural remains from a given
archaeological time period. This incorporation of rock art studies alongside
other archaeological specialties, such as lithics, ceramics, and weaving
techniques, is crucial for developing a synergistic approach to studying past
cultures. Before dating methods were developed, only relative ages and
approximate age ranges for some distinct genres of rock art were possible.
Without a way to place the images in time, archaeologists had mostly ignored
these insights into past human cultures. The integration of chemistry and
archaeology through this project will directly address a national need for
interdisciplinary research. NSF support for the plasma oxidation laboratory
fosters collaborations among archaeologists worldwide. In addition, we will
train university students interested in archaeological science as interns. More
scientists with interests in applying chemical knowledge to archaeological and
cultural applications are needed. Public outreach for archaeological science
will be accomplished via Shumla's blog, popular magazines/websites, the Shumla
Scholars STEM program, and public outreach events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Steelman has designed a 10 chamber system that has the ability to oxidize 10
paint samples in tandem for batch processing. This will increase sample
throughput, decrease analysis time, and reduce costs for rock art dating. By
constructing a multi-sample plasma oxidation laboratory, batch processing of
paint samples will allow Shumla to expand research for additional archaeological
projects. USGS coal (C14-free) and ANU sucrose (modern) radiocarbon standards
will be used to test the accuracy and precision of results. At sites where
calcium oxalate coatings are present, both oxalate dates from accretions and
plasma oxidation dates from paintings agree, suggesting valid
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.