* 1913911
* SBIR Phase I:  Integration Of Anatomical Hydrogel Phantoms With Augmented Reality And Deep Learning To Enable Automated Independent Surgical Training
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Steven Griffith, Simulated Inanimate Models LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2020
* USD 224,964.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project will develop novel technology to more efficiently
train surgeons and reduce the risk to patients in the operating room. Current
surgical education is inadequate, and as a result inexperienced surgeons
inevitably end up operating on live patients during their training. The proposed
work will be performed outside of the operating room and allow them to train in
a simulated, educational environment on non-patient specific models. This work
carries enormous potential for public benefit as it seeks to reduce surgical
error and increase the health and safety of all patients undergoing surgery. The
proposed work will integrate technology with surgical simulation in an
unprecedented manner, combining educational hardware/software packages with
physical anatomical models to create an immersive, highly effective training
experience. The project carries high potential to broadly improve training for
all medical fields, as the educational hardware/software packages developed can
be used to teach any complex task or procedure. The commercialization of the
prototype developed in the project will generate substantial income for those
involved in its production, sale, and usage; additionally, the project will
improve both the well-being of the public as well as the educational and
training of the healthcare industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop a prototype hardware and software training system that delivers
educational content in real time, guiding a training surgeon through a simulated
surgical procedure. The developed prototype will visually recognize state
changes and objects in three-dimensional space, using these cues to trigger
prompts and deliver instructions, guidance, and medical curricula in a timely
manner as the surgeon interacts with a non-patient specific physical models;
this product will require the integration of physical models with software and
augmented reality technology on a level unparalleled on the market today. The
project will directly test and validate the assembled hardware and programmed
software and apply statistical testing to develop an initial product that
performs within acceptable parameters. The proposed work will yield an assembled
prototype, a combination of hardware and software that can guide a surgeon
through a complete training procedure performed on a synthetic anatomical model.
This prototype will have undergone technical validation and an initial round of
educational validation, in preparation for the broader clinical and educational
validation planned in Phase 2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.