* 1913821
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A model system for understanding the evolution of human language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Stephanie White, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2020
* USD 28,104.00

Language is a trait that sets humans apart from all other species, and
researchers are interested in understanding how, when, and why complex language
evolved in hominins. This doctoral dissertation project will use a non-human
model to understand neuro-genetic changes that correlate with increased social
learning and flexibility of vocal behavior. These data will be compared with
human and chimpanzee genomic data to identify potential shared evolutionary
mechanisms in the evolution of birdsong and human language. By illuminating the
molecular mechanisms of auditory perception that support learning of a more
flexible vocal behavior in the model system, the research may shed light on our
understanding of normal functionality and disorders of human speech. The project
will also include public and K-12 science outreach activities in the San
Francisco Bay Area.

This project will empirically investigate the genetic and evolutionary processes
that correlate with increased flexibility of vocal learning and behavior in the
White-Backed Munia (WBM)/Bengalese Finch (BF) songbird system. The researchers
will then investigate potentially analogous genetic and functional pathways
involved in the evolution of flexible human vocal learning capacities with
respect to those of other primates. Specific aims of the project include: (i) an
investigation of the evolutionary forces underlying the changes in vocal
behavior in BF relative to WBM utilizing whole-genome sequencing of individuals
within the two bird strains and subsequent scans for signatures of positive or
relaxed selection, thus allowing identification of candidate genes modified in
this transition; (ii) an analysis of genetically regulated differences in
neurological function correlated with differences in the flexibility of adult
vocal production between BF and WBM, by comparing measures of gene expression
for whole transcriptomes from main birdsong-related brain areas of BF and WBM
adult males exposed to unfamiliar conspecific song; and (iii) a comparison of
the birdsong data to neuroanatomical and genomic data provided by studies of
human divergence from closely related primates (e.g. chimpanzee) to identify
possible evolutionary parallelisms.