* 1913507
* SBIR Phase I:  Handheld Portable Impulse Oscillometer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Michael Wolfe, Medical Innovation Through Technology, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/29/2020
* USD 222,910.00

The broader impact/commercial of this Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR)Phase I project directly addresses the scope of Asthma in the United
States. Respiratory specialists say they are in a quandary in their attempts to
obtain definitive diagnoses of lung diseases because they lack a reliable
pulmonary functions test device that can be used on all patients and have a high
degree of accuracy. Spirometry has a long list of shortcomings that are well
known, and the specialists are asking for a better device. A growing body of
international research, that includes ten plus years of NIH studies, is showing
that impulse oscillometry is the most accurate PFT for respiratory diseases and
that it can often worsening lung status several days before symptoms appear. The
overall costs of asthma alone in the U.S. are estimated to be approximately $56
billion a year. Much of this is attributed to the fact that maintaining asthma
control in a patient is difficult to do without frequent objective measurement.
Losing control leads to increased asthma exacerbations, ER visits,
hospitalizations, lost work and school days, and higher medical costs. Having an
easy to use and clinically accurate pulmonary functions test device is the key
element in this process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project has a revolutionary design that incorporates the
advanced technology of impulse oscillometry into a handheld and cost effective
medical device that fulfills the lung measurement requirements requested by
respiratory specialists during our customer discovery process. The core of IOS
methodology is that gentle impulses of air are pulsed into the lungs of a
patient via their normal tidal breathing. The low frequency impulses pass
through the central lungs, travel throughout the peripheral lungs (resistance)
and rebound back to the IOS device (reactance). The differences between the
resistance and reactance pressures are then measured and analyzed, revealing the
extent of the obstruction in the peripheral airways. Test data from each device
is automatically sent to a secure cloud server where it is analyzed and compared
to other demographically similar patients. The analyzed results are then
transmitted to a proprietary application on the patient's smartphone, the
caregiver's smartphone, and to the patient's primary care manager electronic
medical record. The home version of the device will allow objectively measured
pulmonary status to be remotely and frequently measured, and automatically sent
to the provider. This is the breakthrough that the Asthma community has long
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.