* 1913872
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable DNA Archiving
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Tyson Shepherd, Trove Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of an ambient-temperature nucleic
acid sample management system that can efficiently and cost-effectively scale to
meet the demands of life science and data science needs. Recent market trends
show a significant expansion in DNA archival and access requirements, with
applications in personal genomics services for health and ancestry; forensic,
precision medicine, and agricultural sample storage; and future digital
information storage using DNA sequences. Current market-available DNA storage
methods rely on cold-temperature storage in room-size chambers, with the DNA
typically kept in biologically active media that is prone to degradation by
freeze-thaw cycling, power failure, sample contamination, or sample loss. The
goal of this work is to develop a method of DNA sample management that allows
ambient sample storage combined with rapid access with native chemical and
thermal protection. This work will lead to a device-based approach for sample
management that will scale with the growing demands of industry.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop technological and engineering
requirements for scalable bead-based encapsulation of DNA samples, retrievable
with molecular-biology grade purity for downstream cloning and sequencing.
Micron-scale DNA sample archival and access will be accomplished by a two-stage
method for protecting and barcoding individual samples. New processes and
protocols will be developed for the precise and reliable encapsulation of DNA in
10 micrometer condensed particles that additionally allow for barcode
identification. Methods will be specifically developed such that the retrieval
of the sample out of the particle will be nondestructive and of high quality for
downstream applications. Random access will be achieved by enrichment of those
particles displaying the barcode of interest. This research will lead to a
revolutionary micron-scale DNA management architecture for archival, offering
massive improvement in capacity, decreased operating costs and increased sample
integrity. Specific technical innovations include DNA encapsulation methods for
long-term DNA archival and molecular barcoding of microparticles for retrieval.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.