* 1913753
* STTR Phase I:  Increased Scalability for Blockchains applied to Healthcare
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Lucas Hendren, Simplyvital Health, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project is
to drive down healthcare costs by enabling access to data through blockchain
technology. The healthcare system is plagued by inefficiencies, many of which
boil down to the inability to access the right data at the right time because of
technological and business barriers. Leveraging blockchain for data access can
drive an identified $100 billion in savings. However, while an estimated 40% of
senior finance executives expect their firm to invest in blockchain over the
next 2 years because of its transformational qualities, the transaction speed of
blockchain needs to be improved. This project addresses this need, bringing a
critical scaling innovation to Health Nexus - the open source, HIPAA-compatible
blockchain.

This STTR Phase I project proposes to address several technical hurdles that
will lead to successful commercialization. The project will deploy novel
Graphene protocol for efficient propagation of completed transactions across the
Health Nexus network. Graphene is a recent breakthrough in block propagation
technology that requires a small fraction of network costs compared to existing
technology, promising to improve performance of Health Nexus while lowering its
costs. The project's research and development will seek to deploy Graphene on
Health Nexus and quantify its performance in practice. Additional goals include
designing and deploying fast methods for encoding blocks and selecting protocol
parameters, methods for managing variation in the level of transaction
synchronization among peers, and robust methods of recovery from failure. Early
consensus identifies opportunity in supply chain management, drug distribution,
and claims processing and billing, but there are innumerable amount of potential
applications of blockchain in healthcare that cannot be predicted now - just as
it would have been impossible to predict smartphones in early Internet days. The
economic impact of bringing down healthcare cost has the potential to benefit
millions of lives in ways we cannot imagine. This infrastructure is crucial as
the foundation of blockchain innovation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.