* 1913886
* Particle Physics at the Energy Frontier with the CMS Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Philip Baringer, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This program of research aims to better understand the Universe at the smallest
scales by probing nature's basic symmetries and their relation to the origin of
mass. The 2012 discovery of a Higgs boson with mass close to 125 GeV represents
both the crowning achievement of the standard model of particle physics and a
hint beyond it - how can a light Higgs boson possibly survive huge,
destabilizing quantum effects without new, undiscovered physics? Further, dark
matter is known to exist from astronomical observations; however, the particle
properties of dark matter remain shrouded in mystery. The combined activities of
the University of Kansas (KU) group address such basic questions puzzling
physics - the origin of mass and the particle nature of dark matter - and have
the potential for surprising discoveries that may change the way we understand
our physical world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support for
the KU group's work on the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
CERN, a particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. Analytically, the
group has a broad range of physics interests, including searches for vector-like
quarks and the initiation into new searches for evidence of supersymmetry, with
emphasis on signatures that emphasize compressed spectra and "ewino"
cascades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, KU will continue to work with the
CMS tracker system, both to support the current operations and to develop new
components for the future high luminosity HL-LHC era. KU will design, test and
build cables that will bring the high-speed electronic signals from the HL-LHC
inner pixel tracker modules to optical links on the detector and assess how the
full chain of electronic readout performs. This pixel tracker system is critical
to the reconstruction of many event types of special interest to the CMS program
of discovery science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group has two major continuing
outreach efforts: a long-standing QuarkNet center, through which it engages with
area high school physics teachers and their students, and the multimedia
Quarked! project that presents modern physics concepts to youth through games,
videos, and other web content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.