* 1913286
* Microscopic Properties of Hot and Dense QCD Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Ralf Rapp, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2022
* USD 350,000.00

A few micro-seconds into the cooling process of the early Universe, an extremely
hot plasma of elementary particles (quarks and gluons) condensed into bound
states called hadrons, the building blocks of the visible matter in the
Universe. The condensation of the quark-gluon plasma (QGP) confined the quarks
and gluons into hadrons and generated about 98% of the visible mass. The
discovery of the mechanisms of quark confinement and hadron mass generation are
central goals of fundamental research in particle and nuclear physics.
Experimentally, small droplets of QGP, at record temperatures exceeding 2
trillion Kelvin, can be re-created in the laboratory by colliding atomic nuclei
at high energies, at the Relativistic Heavy-Ion Collider and the Large Hadron
Collider. However, it is very challenging to infer the properties of the QGP and
its hadronization from the measured particle spectra. The PI, together with his
graduate students and collaborators, will develop theoretical methods and apply
them to unravel fundamental properties of the QGP from experimental data. His
research and educational activities also encompass undergraduate research and
outreach to high-school students within the Saturday Morning Physics program at
Texas A&amp;M. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The heavy charm and bottom quarks, as well
as electromagnetic (EM) radiation, are particularly valuable probes of the QGP.
The PI will use state-of-the-art quantum many-body theory of the strong nuclear
force to analyze the diffusion of heavy quarks (Brownian motion) and their
subsequent hadronization. A systematic analysis of the experimental spectra of
baryons (3-quark states) and mesons (quark-antiquark states) containing heavy
quarks will unravel mechanisms of hadronization and provide unprecedented
precision in the extraction of the heavy-quark diffusion coefficient, a key
quantity to characterize the interaction strength in the QGP. The PI will
further use EM radiation, which can penetrate the QGP formed in heavy-ion
collisions, to analyze the mechanism of mass generation. He will investigate the
spectral modifications of baryons near the hadronization transition and extract
the electric conductivity, another fundamental transport parameter of the
medium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.