* 1913602
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a computer-guided orthopedic laser surgical system
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Nathan Monty, SPATIAL SURGICAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,700.00

This SBIR Phase I project addresses the current unmet need associated with the
use of traditional tissue ablation tools in surgical applications. Surgical hand
tools, such as saws and drills, inherently injure tissue during ablation through
shearing and tearing forces, forcing patients into an arduous recovery path
accompanied by risk of surgical site infection. In orthopedic joint replacement
surgery, bone and soft tissue injury from hand saws and drills contributes
significantly to postoperative joint pain, infection risk, and long-term implant
loosening and revision surgery. To improve surgical outcomes for these patients,
this SBIR Phase I project aims to develop an entirely innovative tissue ablation
system that is comprised of a surgical laser controlled by the first-ever ultra-
high speed, or UHS, lens positioning system. The laser system, which employs a
wavelength never used in medical applications, reduces the tissue trauma
associated with traditional hand tools by leaving healthy, vascularized tissue
at each ablation site. The current size of the joint replacement market (>$15
billion annual) positions this technology for a strong commercial future with
the potential for thousands of new jobs and sustainable revenues. Successful
implementation of the laser system will allow the laser ablation system to be
applied across numerous delicate surgical specialties, such as brain and
neonatal surgery.

The key innovation in this SBIR Phase I project is an optical system that
provides real-time intraoperative viewing on a 3D monitor, ablative fluence
patterns with a new laser wavelength in surgical applications that eliminates
tissue necrosis, and instantaneous software-controlled feedback for automatic
positional and angular control of the laser beam. In order to enable these
capabilities and maximize precision, the all-tissue orthopedic surgical device
requires the use of dual ultra-high speed, or UHS, optical systems that operate
with microsecond response times to control the new wavelength pulsed in
necrosis-free ablative patterns. Because the laser is not in direct contact with
the tissue during ablation, as is the case with hand tools, the beam can be
susceptible to inadvertent hand movements that direct it off the desired path.
The UHS optical system automatically detects any inadvertent movements and
stabilizes the laser beam onto the correct ablation pattern in real-time. The
high-definition images are also displayed onto a 3-dimensional overhead monitor
to allow the surgeon to continuously monitor the ablation in real time. AI
software measures the distance and geometrical features of the tissue ablation
site as the surgeon is ablating tissue as an additional safeguard against any
inaccurate movements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.