* 1913907
* SBIR Phase I:  Tablecraft, A Next Generation Introductory STEM Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Guillaume Bailey, NOT SUSPICIOUS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 224,997.00

This SBIR Phase I project is dedicated to creating a whole-classroom virtual
reality (VR) experience for middle school students to be exposed to Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) topics interactively as a supplement to
the existing curriculum. While immersed in their very own 3D virtual treehouse
lab, students will be able to join other student labs and collaboratively
explore a variety of Next Generation Science Concepts, such as the Periodic
Elements and their properties. This is facilitated by a teacher-oriented desktop
and VR interface that makes it possible to manage an entire class of students
simultaneously participating in VR activities. By leveraging the use of
affordable standalone VR headsets, and elevating VR beyond its current one-
student-at-a-time use case, the project will be pioneering the highly
anticipated market of virtual field trips for use in authentic learning
environments. This is aligned with the National Science Foundation's Education
Research Area, which seeks to achieve excellence in U.S. STEM education at all
levels in all settings, because the value of classroom-VR rests on its unique
ability to provide more effective learning settings to more students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop an immersive
multiplayer virtual reality (VR) learning game for authentic classroom usage.
The project will apply the advantages of a modular game design built around
self-directed goals to test a classroom-management system built to allow an
entire class of students to collaborate in or outside virtual reality. While
immersed in individual 3D virtual environments, students will be able to join
virtual spaces belonging to other students, in order to accomplish shared goals
set by the teacher at a class level. The project also seeks to further the
general field of learning games, by applying the Universal Design for Learning
framework to its local goal of enhancing middle-schoolers' relationships to and
content knowledge of STEM topics. This permits the project to be a test-bed for
educational VR content design and interaction schemes. In Phase I research, the
project team will examine whether students are able to understand how to play
the game with minimal or no external help, whether teachers can integrate the
product with their classroom environment, how large of a group a teacher can
manage while keeping students on-task, whether student relationships to the
subject matter change, and whether teachers and students see the fully realized
product as a potentially effective learning tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.