* 1913909
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel position sensor and controller for free piston engines
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Matthew Viele, VIELETECH INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2020
* USD 224,692.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to assist in the commercialization of a new type of
engine. Macro-scale vehicle electrification has opened doors to new types of
engines not previously practical. Amongst the most interesting of these is the
free-piston engine. Free-piston engines (FPE) and Free-piston linear generators
(FPLG) are well-suited to electrification because they directly produce
electricity instead of torque and do it in a way that is cleaner, more
efficient, and better suited to work with advanced electrified vehicles. These
engines are inherently more capable of running on a diversity of fuels to
enhance both low-carbon fuel consumption and US energy independence. Key to this
technology is advanced controls and development of new sensors. This project
focuses on development of a new sensor whose lack is a key roadblock to the
commercialization of these advanced engines. This new sensor will be employed
immediately in the laboratory and test vehicle development of these
engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop the
framework of a new integrated circuit (IC) that will enable the mass adoption of
clean, efficient free-piston engines. In order to realize practical free-piston
engines a position sensor able to measure piston position to 0.1micron (4
millionths of an inch) and up to speed of 30m/s (over 1000 inch/second) is
needed. Currently there is no sensor that gives the required speed and
precision. The sensors that are close in functionality are large devices that
nearly double the length of the engine. The proposed sensor must survive in the
harsh thermal and vibration environment of an engine. In phase 1 the company
will build a proof of concept from available discrete circuits; to build the
actual custom IC in phase II. This sensor will be combined with distributed
high-speed computation allowing high-speed piston control at a rate of greater
than 10kHz. This IC will serve additional secondary markets for other fast, high
power linear machines in robotics and factory
automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.