* 1913038
* Geometric Approximation and Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Thomas Yu, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

The proposed research program address problems in geometric numerical methods.
Besides numerous engineering applications, accurate computational methods for
approximation and estimation of geometric information can help understanding and
saving lives. Numerical treatment of biomembrane problems is one example of
application to life sciences. Approximation methods of manifold-valued data can
be applied to diffusion tensor image data for reconstructing white matter
structure of human brain; such techniques have shown promises in diagnosing
psychiatric disorders. Due to the success in applications such as machine
learning, signal processing, and control system, large scale numerical
optimization is now considered as a key component of engineering, a patient
study of optimization methods for specific geometric problems with practical
relevance will contribute to the understanding of solving large scale
optimization problems. The projects outlined in this research also provide
interdisciplinary research and training opportunities for graduate students, and
stimulate collaboration among computational mathematicians, engineers and
scientists. The publicly available software implementation of our research
results further facilitates such training and
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of projects under the headline of
"geometric approximation and variational problems". Extensions of the Wmincon
software with applications to geometric variational problems in general
relativity This work details a line of research related to geometric
approximation and variational problems, including systematic studies of
numerical solution of biomembranes and bilayer plate models from mechanical
engineering, as well as approximation and analysis of geometric data. The
projects will lead to a cross fertilization of geometry, optimization theory,
computational mathematics, as well as application areas such as engineering
simulation, processing of novel geometric signals, and geometric machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.