* 1913325
* Space Weather Workshop 2019; Boulder, Colorado; April 1-5, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2020
* USD 24,999.00

This award is to organize the 2019 Space Weather Workshop held April 1-5, 2019
in Boulder, Colorado. This is a four-day workshop that focuses on the impacts of
space weather and explores recent scientific advances in predicting and
forecasting. Space weather originates at the sun, which is constantly emitting
material and electromagnetic waves. Impacts in the near-Earth space environment
stimulates a complex response including geomagnetic storms, induction of the
aurorae, ionospheric disturbances, and a variety currents are induced on the
ground. There are resulting impacts to infrastructure such as satellite drag,
disruptions to electronic components in space assets, induced currents in the
power grid, and many others which will be discussed at the workshop. The
participants are expected to be (based on past workshops) a mixture of
scientists, and representatives from industries impacted by space weather,
including those from electric power, commercial airlines, satellite operations,
and navigation/ communication. The workshop is intended to foster collaboration
across academia, industry and government on space weather issues, and promote an
active forum among science, technology, economic, policy and security
communities.

The organizing committee is comprised of representatives from federal agencies,
knowledgeable experts from the academic community and from the private sector,
and includes student representatives. The organizing committee is responsible
for identifying and recruiting speakers for workshop sessions on the basis of
qualities of merit, educational career objectives, and potential contribution to
the overall conference experience. The workshop is structured around plenary
sessions, poster sessions, and a roundtable discussion. Undergraduate and
graduate students are encouraged to participate and present posters at the
workshop. A website for the workshop has been created at
https://www.cpaess.ucar.edu/events/space-weather-workshop for handling meeting
logistics, registration, and coordinating multimedia activities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.