* 1913772
* SBIR Phase I:  High Throughput Cryopreservation of Aquaculture Seed
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Kieran Smith, Ecto, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to advance cryopreservation technologies for the
development of a seed banking product for commercially important aquaculture
species. Genetic banking of plant cells, tissues, seeds, and embryos is common
practice in agriculture to ensure important genetic lines are not lost due to
disease outbreak or environmental catastrophe. However, genetic banking of
embryos and larvae within the aquaculture industry is nonexistent to date, and
the investments made toward genetic improvements are susceptible to catastrophic
loss without a proper seed banking product. The inability to reliably preserve
seed for long periods of time is currently a barrier to the formation of an
aquaculture seed storage product. This research will enhance scientific and
technological understanding for the cryopreservation of aquatic organisms and be
a transformative step to protect genetic resources vital to the commercial
aquaculture industry. These technological advancements also can be adapted for
the conservation of threatened or endangered aquatic organisms important to food
security and ecosystem health domestically and abroad.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a technology to implement a
genetic banking product that allows aquaculture facilities to "cryobank"
thousands of seeds from family lines developed over years of selective breeding
programs. Recent advancements in rapid cooling for storage at liquid nitrogen
temperatures (-196 degrees C) and ultra-rapid rewarming (~107 degrees C/min)
have led to major breakthroughs in cryopreservation research. These advancements
will be utilized to develop a low throughput, high efficacy strategy for the
successful cryopreservation of an important aquaculture species, Litopenaeus
vannamei or Pacific white shrimp. Protocol optimization for cryoprotective agent
loading/unloading, vitrification, and ultra-rapid warming will result in high
revival, survival, and grow out to post larval stages. Once proven, the
technique will be scaled up to develop a high throughput process to successfully
cryopreserve >10,000 samples per day. This technology will enable the commercial
aquaculture industry to conserve important genetic strains and stockpile
cryopreserved seed at the levels necessary to avoid interruptions to food supply
commonly caused by disease outbreaks and environmental catastrophe.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.