* 1913560
* SBIR Phase I:  Computer Science for All with Spreadsheet Modeling:  Researching How Low-Cost Video Training for STEM Teachers Leads to High-Value Programming Skills for Students
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Michael McConnell, SPREADSHEET LAB MANUAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase 1 Project will seek to solve the problem of how to incorporate a
new and standardized approach to computer science instructional modeling
experiences for students using a combination of video training, instructional
materials, and assessment materials that can be accessed by teachers from an
online platform. Models that simulate realistic behavior are usually inherently
complex using mathematics such as calculus or differential equations. As a
result, many teachers do not recognize the many possible ways that these models
can be developed on spreadsheet programs. While teachers and students already
can access and have baseline familiarity with spreadsheets, there exists many
new computational modeling applications that can fundamentally change the nature
of the way students learn Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) as
separate subjects by unifying them into one instructional modeling experience.
This project will develop and investigate methods of training inexperienced
teachers in computational spreadsheet modeling that are designed to enable easy
to follow pathways for teachers to deliver spreadsheet modeling experiences to
their students with in-person training or having to develop and test their own
student experiences. This will serve to expand the use of computer science in
classrooms in compliance with the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) and
open the realistic modeling capability intrinsic to calculus and differential
equations, to high school students while exclusively using algebraic equations.
Teachers will also be able to contribute newly developed ideas for authorship
credit and compensation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
seek to develop, adapt, and assess the effectiveness of an inexpensive video-
based demonstration and teacher training regimen that is intended to make
delivering this instructional methodology to students happen quickly,
efficiently and become self-sourcing by teachers from many different schools.
This will be done by automating the training to keep cost to a minimum and
maximize teacher time savings and the value added to the student instructional
experience of computational modeling on a spreadsheet. For typical spreadsheet
modeling objective students follow procedures employing numerical methods (such
as slope of lines, areas of trapezoids, difference equations, Euler's Method)
incrementally over large numbers of cells (102-104) to build a realistic
mathematical model on a spreadsheet. By doing this, the error associated with
the numerical approach drops well below the error associated with model
assumptions making it possible to model non-ideal continually changing variables
with linearity assumptions. The computational power of the spreadsheet enables
instantaneous replication of the linearized formulas, which when pattered
properly with fixed and relative references, can produce pivot tables in which
variables can be altered by students using inquiry and curiosity to investigate
a model that they programmed starting from a blank spreadsheet. By building from
a variety of curriculum aligned applications and crafting the instructional
experience using a carefully tested pedagogy, teachers will be provided with
high value skills to pass on to their students, so they will be able to first
program, then simulate, experiment and solve problems on a variety of new
quantitative spreadsheet modeling scenarios in STEM
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.