* 1913798
* Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS and pSCT Pathfinder towards CTA
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Rene Ong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 04/30/2023
* USD 1,208,516.00

Gamma rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. This award supports scientists at the
University of California, Los Angeles to carry out gamma-ray astrophysics
research with two ground-based gamma-ray experiments, the Very Energetic
Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System (VERITAS) and the newly commissioned
prototype Schwarzschild Couder Telescope (pSCT), both located at the Fred
Whipple Observatory in southern Arizona. The group will participate in both
technical aspects of operations and scientific investigations of Galactic and
extragalactic astrophysical sources. In addition, the award supports the
leadership roles and activities of the group members in the development of a
next-generation international gamma-ray observatory, the Cherenkov Telescope
Array (CTA). The group is deeply engaged in education and outreach efforts by
involving high school students in astrophysics research and attracting the
public, both in Arizona and in the Los Angeles area, to scientific exploration
of the Universe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of California, Los Angeles
group will contribute to the operations and maintenance of VERITAS and the pSCT
and to the scientific analysis of the data. With this award the group will focus
on studies of Galactic and extragalactic sources with significant angular
extension including the Cygnus region, the Galactic Center, galaxy clusters and
active galactic nuclei, in which the signatures of primordial magnetic fields
might be detectable in their gamma-ray emission. The development of novel data
analysis techniques for sources with angular extension or poor localization
capitalizes on the new capabilities offered by pSCT and the future CTA and is
essential for the advancement of multi-wavelength and multi-messenger research
as well as progress in time-domain astrophysics. The group is notably involved
in CTA through the advancement of the pSCT technology for the observatory,
through the development of its core science program, and through the top-level
management provided to this worldwide project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.