* 1913628
* SBIR Phase I:  Electrochemical Separation Device for Co-Ni Recovery from Li-ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Megan O'Connor, Nth Cycle, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,773.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address a critical need for a new source of
strategic materials for the clean energy and electronics markets. The U.S. is a
major consumer of cobalt, a critical component in rechargeable lithium-ion
batteries. Over the next five years, the rapid increase in electric vehicles on
the road will cause a drastic shift in the market, becoming the largest and
fastest growing end-use of this critical material. This projected increase in
demand, combined with the unstable global supply and difficulties with scaling
mining productions, puts our cobalt supply at high risk. Discarded lithium ion
batteries could be a viable secondary source of cobalt if viable recycling
technologies were available. Achieving efficient, low-cost recycling of Li-ion
batteries will facilitate a secure source of cobalt for our U.S.-based
manufacturers with large societal impact, offering a high net-benefit concerning
air emissions and climate protection, and incentives for collecting high
priority waste. The commercial impact of this technology will enable further
innovation for clean energy technologies where humans ability to literally wield
power where and when they want it that will not be limited by the availability
of critical metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will provide a recycling technology for the li-ion
battery market, helping to solve the supply crisis for cobalt in the electronics
and clean energy sector. Currently, there are no viable alternatives for cobalt
separation and capture, except for large, expensive, and energy consumptive
hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes. While these techniques work
well, they require high capital and material transportation costs. The technique
proposed here provides a new and efficient method for separating and reclaiming
cobalt oxide for direct reuse in advanced manufacturing, designed with a small
footprint so that it can be added onto existing recycling and manufacturing
processes to capture these metals, without large upfront capital cost. The
research objectives of this SBIR project will demonstrate feasibility of
recovering cobalt from Li-ion battery waste using a plug-and-play, high-
throughput electrochemical deposition method. To achieve this, we will utilize
high surface area, flexible carbon material to enhance the selectivity and
efficiency of our process. The anticipated technical results include a 5-10x
reduction in cost and 1-4x reduction in CO2 emissions compared to incumbent
recycling technologies, ultimately redefining our current wastes as resources,
providing a secure source of cobalt to the U.S.
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.