* 1913356
* Experimental Research in Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Stephen Schnetzer, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 11/30/2022
* USD 3,719,856.00

Particle physics is focused on the search for the most basic building blocks of
the Universe and the rules that bind them. The CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
located near Geneva, Switzerland is the world's most powerful particle
accelerator, able to reach the highest particle energies in a laboratory
setting. The CMS detector at the LHC is one of the world's most powerful and
sophisticated cameras, observing the collisions of protons and recording the
outcomes for detailed study by CMS experimentalists. The members of the high
energy physics group at Rutgers University have been crucial to the
construction, maintenance, and continued improvement of the device itself. They
have initiated and guided several studies of the data collected, including ones
that led to the discovery of the Higgs boson in 2012. The data being gathered
now and in the coming years will allow a greater understanding of the basic
structure of nature, perhaps including insights into the huge difference in the
strengths of the fundamental forces, or even glimpses of new fundamental
particles. The Rutgers high energy physics group will continue to be at the
forefront of these investigations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rutgers high energy
physics group is carrying out several with the CMS experiment at CERN, studying
proton-proton interactions at a center-of-mass energy of 13 TeV. They continue
to innovate and implement new data analysis techniques in searches for new
physics signatures with leptons, photons, jets and missing energy. They are also
incorporating ideas like high-speed pattern recognition, deep multivariate
neural networks, self-guided machine learning, and image recognition into the
search for new physics at the deepest levels. The group has a history of
leadership in CMS, including leading major analysis groups and leading efforts
on detector hardware and operations in the areas of tracking, calorimetry and
luminosity measurement. They work closely with theorists to bring forth new
ideas, leading to a rich program of physics analyses that has originated from
their efforts. This award also allows the Rutgers group to continue deploying an
improved version of front-end electronics they designed for the pixel detector,
as well as testing and installation of the front-end electronics for the forward
hadron calorimeter. They are also working on longer-term upgrades, specifically
the Outer Tracker and a fast Track Trigger, introducing innovative ideas that
promise to increase the reach for new physics to regions not previously capable
of being probed by any collider. They plan to host a production and testing
facility for the upgrades. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the Rutgers QuarkNet
program, the group runs summer workshops for high-school teachers and students
from across New Jersey, analyzing LHC data and building cosmic-ray telescopes.
They also mentor undergraduate students from Rutgers and the NSF REU program, as
well as qualified high school students. These students work closely with the
group and contribute to ongoing studies and physics analyses. To address the
underrepresentation of women in STEM fields, they are helping develop programs
to provide research opportunities to collegiate and pre-college women. They have
developed a highly successful intensive instructional program for high school
physics teachers in AP-level physics which has led to improved student
understanding of physics, and a marked increase in perfect scores on the AP-
physics exam. The Rutgers group continues to convey the excitement of particle
physics with frequent talks at local high schools, libraries, and other
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.