* 1913620
* Nuclear Structure and Reactions from Effective Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Gautam Rupak, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 270,000.00

The fundamental interactions in nuclear physics are described by the theory of
Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD). At low energies, QCD is a strongly interacting
theory that cannot be solved from first principles in a pencil-and-paper
calculation. The effective field theory (EFT) formulation provides a
complementary framework where nuclear properties at low energy can be
systematically calculated. As such, EFT calculations can provide accurate input
for astrophysical models of element synthesis that cannot be obtained in direct
experimental measurements. In this project, the PI and his collaborators will
use numerical methods defined on a space-time lattice to calculate properties of
medium-light atomic nuclei (mass number up to around 40) using EFT. The PI will
use Bayesian statistics to quantitatively compare competing EFT formulations.
The latter is useful in constructing an accurate and systematic theory for low
energy nuclear physics. Broader impacts of the research include training of
graduate students in numerical and analytical work for an academic or industry
career benefiting society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project builds on
the lattice EFT pinhole algorithm that was previously introduced by the PI. This
algorithm allows for the calculation of the charge and matter distribution (in
the center-of-mass coordinate) in Monte Carlo simulations that is necessary to
couple external electro-weak currents to atomic nuclei. The PI aims to calculate
electromagnetic moments of light nuclei. The same method will be used to
calculate neutrino-nucleus coherent scattering that is sensitive to the neutron
matter distribution. This cross section serves as a background in dark matter
search experiments. The PI will study also low energy nuclear reactions
involving halo nuclei using Bayesian statistics. Halo nuclei are characterized
as weakly bound quantum systems and play an important role in element synthesis
in the Big Bang and stellar burning. Bayesian analysis provides a natural
framework to incorporate EFT assumptions about naturalness of sizes of couplings
in parameter estimation. It also allows quantitative comparison of competing
theories and aids in model selection. This project will support the science
programs at planned major U.S. investments in rare isotope beam
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.