* 1913119
* Certification Algorithms for Polynomial System Solving
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Michael Burr, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 72,387.00

Certified algorithms are computations that are guaranteed to never produce a
wrong answer when implemented on a real-world computer. These algorithms are
important in any setting where the correctness of a computation is critical and
errors cannot be tolerated. Such algorithms have potential applications in many
fields, including optimization, automation, and graphics. For example, with
self-driving cars, it is vital that the decision-making algorithms do not make
errors. For instance, if a non-certified algorithm were to miss a small, but
important detail, a car might not fit through a gap or cause an accident. As
this type of automation becomes more common, the need for corresponding
certified computation will increase. The work in this particular project
involves the design, development, and implementation of efficient certified
methods for finding common solutions to systems of polynomials. The development
of the algorithms described in this project fills a current gap in the field of
numerical algebraic geometry since previous approaches are either non-certified,
i.e., may make mistakes in some cases, or impractical certified methods, i.e.,
take too long to produce an answer in practical situations. The work in this
project is intended to solve these problems, i.e., to be practical and
certified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For many computations, algorithms can only
produce an approximation to the true answer. Certified algorithms not only
produce a final result from a computation, but they also provide estimates on
the error between the final answer and the true answer. Developing certified
algorithms is a (new) challenge for computational mathematics and computer
science. A certified algorithm must, first, be proved to be correct when
assuming that a computer can represent all real numbers. Second, the correctness
of the algorithm must be justified when the allowed numbers are approximated by
the much smaller set of numbers that can be represented on a computer.
Therefore, two of the main challenges in certified methods can be summarized as
(1) Since many problems involve discretizing a continuous variable, the theory
must be developed to ensure that the choice of discretization does not miss any
interesting behaviors between discrete steps and (2) Since not all real numbers
can be represented on a computer, all tests and computations must be developed
to work with approximations, but still produce meaningful data about the
underlying real number. The project involves the design, implementation, and
development of an efficient and certified homotopy continuation algorithm in
dimensions greater than one. The work generalizes the preliminary exploration
and implementation developed by the PI in the univariate case. This prototype is
very efficient because of its use of new subroutines, based on interval methods,
which have more flexibility than previous approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.