* 1913671
* STTR Phase I:  Microfluidic Technology for Full-Page Digital Braille &amp; Tactile Graphics Display
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Alexander Russomanno, NEWHAPTICS CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2022
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to reduce the burden
of accessing information for the 1.5 million blind people in the United States
by making a full page of refreshable braille text and tactile graphics available
in a device resembling a tablet computer. This assistive technology will provide
increased access to braille and enable blind students to read digitized spatial
content including mathematical equations, graphs, and figures with their
fingers, creating parity with their sighted counterparts interested in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields. The proposed product will
improve braille literacy, opportunities in STEM careers, and ultimately lead to
the employment success and independence of blind Americans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project relies on microfluidic technology to create a highly manufacturable
device that combines an underlying rigid layer supplying pneumatic signals and
an overlying soft layer containing membrane actuators at braille spacing. The
successful commercialization of a full-page refreshable braille and tactile
graphic display requires very tight packaging, high refresh rates, and a
materials/manufacturing solution that scales gracefully to a tablet-size
product. The proposed solution harnesses existing capabilities in the
microfluidics lab-on-a-chip industry and deploys pneumatic actuators to achieve
a scalable design. The development project involves identifying compromises to
device refresh rates by characterizing timing constraints of the integrated
microfluidic chips and membrane actuators. The results of the technical
objectives will demonstrate the scalability of the innovation for achieving a
full-page refreshable braille and tactile graphics
display.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.