* 1913107
* SBIR Phase I:  Sonar Arrays for Maximizing Aquaculture Yields
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Suzan Shahrestani, MINNOWTECH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be a method to improve shrimp farming using sonar
and analytical software. The $45 billion shrimp industry operates with little
understanding of how many shrimp are in a pond. Farmers take a "best guess" type
of approach using incomplete and often inaccurate information to make daily
decisions that results in poor feed to biomass conversion rates, suboptimal
harvest timing and a variety of supply chain traceability and management issues.
The goal of this project is to develop a noninvasive sonar-based assessment
system to improve the accuracy and convenience of estimating shrimp abundance
and growth in-situ. The proposed system will provide the farmer with actionable
data that lead to the following value propositions: reducing the feed conversion
ratio (feed titration), increasing profitability (determine harvest time),
accounting controls (farmers with multiple sites controlling production),
maximizing growth conditions (stocking density), reducing risk factors
(biosecurity), and taking emergency action (crop triage).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a sensor and
analytics platform that would allow for estimation of shrimp biomass and
behavior in real-time, informing decision making and best practices in shrimp
aquaculture. By optimizing a series of networked underwater sonar sensors, it
will be possible to non-invasively capture the species-specific abundance of
shrimp in the challenging of environment of a highly aerated farm. In addition,
algorithms will produce improved estimates of abundance, size, growth and
behavioral abnormalities to the end user and informing go/no-go decisions as
well as reducing sunk costs associated with uncertainty-based inefficiencies.
Making "big data" available to the farmer, the buyers, as well as the scientific
community. The controlled setting aquaculture provides for research is an
untapped resource because the data are not standardized across ponds, regions or
countries. The development of the proposed technology would be key in
disseminating important research to the public via peer-reviewed publications on
sensor optimization, animal growth, production, behavior and disease. Though the
scope of this research and this product focuses on the shrimp sector, the model
can be extended to other cultured species and applications (i.e., salmon and
tilapia).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.