* 1913158
* Hadron-Hadron Interactions and Exotic States using Lattice QCD with the Stochastic LapH Method
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Colin Morningstar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2022
* USD 330,000.00

Protons and neutrons, which make up atomic nuclei, are comprised of fundamental
particles known as quarks and gluons, whose interactions are described by
quantum chromodynamics (QCD). This theory suggests that many other types of
composite particles, known as hadrons, should exist in Nature as unstable
resonances. As such, this project will make possible a study of the properties
of excited hadronic resonances as predicted by QCD, using large-scale computing
resources. Understanding such resonances will help us gain insight into the key
physical mechanisms at work inside hadrons and nuclei. The proposed research
lends support to current experiments, such as the GlueX experiment in Hall D at
the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab). Scattering involving
one particular hadron known as a Delta baryon will be another focus. Detailed
determinations of how the Delta baryon interacts with other particles will be
crucial for experiments studying neutrinos, an important elementary particle
that permeates the universe. The PI will mentor a graduate student engaged in
this research, and the graduate student will also receive training in the use of
state-of-the-art parallel computing resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physics
of excited hadrons and hadron-hadron interactions will be studied using Monte
Carlo estimates of path integrals involving quark and gluon fields on a space-
time lattice. Quantum operators designed to probe exotic states, such as
glueballs, hadrons with excited gluons, and tetraquarks, will be used to explore
the nature of the excited states in quantum chromodynamics. Pion-pion, kaon-
pion, nucleon-pion, nucleon-nucleon, and nucleon-hyperon scattering phase shifts
will also be computed, yielding important information on hadron structure. New
computational techniques, such as the stochastic LapH method, have made possible
such computations in lattice QCD, which involve estimating temporal correlation
matrices of multi-hadron and excited-state operators. Form factors involving the
Delta baryon will be a particular focus since they are crucial to accelerated-
based neutrino experiments, such as the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment
(DUNE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.