* 1913441
* SBIR Phase I:  Nanotechnology-Enabled Implant for Controlling Intraocular Pressure
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Samuel Nicaise, Avisi Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to improve the surgical treatment used for
patients suffering from open angle glaucoma (OAG), through the development and
testing of the world's thinnest ocular implant. OAG is the most common form of
glaucoma, the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the world. By 2020,
glaucoma will affect 3.4 million people in the U.S. and 80 million people
globally. In the U.S., glaucoma incurs over $4 billion in medical and societal
costs per year. For patients with glaucoma, elevated eye pressure must be
lowered to protect the optic nerve from damage. However, conventional surgical
implant treatments are bulky, highly invasive, and cause chronic discomfort.
While newer, smaller devices are less invasive, they present issues with long-
term efficacy as they inadequately sustain lower eye pressure when scarring
occurs. This project will develop an implant many times thinner than a human
hair to safely reduce eye pressure while minimizing the risk of patient
discomfort and failure from scarring. The nanotechnology-enabled device will be
designed to facilitate biocompatibility, patient comfort, and physician
insertion through a combination of mechanical and materials engineering. Beyond
the application in glaucoma, the technology developed will play a key role in
future permanent and efficacious ocular implants - a rapidly growing component
of vision care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This innovation involves careful
engineering of the materials composition and microarchitecture of an ultrathin
implant to treat glaucoma. Specifically, the project will optimize a novel
corrugated microstructure for a unique combination of mechanical and fluid flow
properties. Specific corrugations will provide the stiffness required for
handling by physicians, as well as the flexibility to conform to soft eye
tissues. Microchannels from the corrugations will also be patterned to provide
adequate flow for reducing intraocular pressure, while providing enough
resistance to prevent overly low pressure. Microscale architecture and materials
will first be engineered through experimental testing of tensile stiffness,
bending stiffness, shear strength, aqueous stability, and pressure flow
characteristics. The implant with the optimal materials microarchitecture will
subsequently be studied in an in vivo leporine eye model. This study will
monitor intraocular pressure, scar tissue formation, levels of inflammation,
adverse events, and implant stability. Together, the bench and pre-clinical
tests will provide critical data for further refinement of this implant and
facilitate progress towards realizing an optimal defense against
blindness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.