* 1913606
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacturing USA: Ultra-thin radiative-cooling fabric
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Gregg Young, MetaRe,Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is twofold. (1) Capturing business opportunities
in the athleisure market by providing functional textiles with radiative cooling
capabilities. As climate change has led to more hot summer days, clothing with
advanced cooling features will have significant public safety values. The global
cooling fabrics market is projected to grow at a 10% annual rate from $1.8
Billion to $2.9 Billion by 2021. Cooling fabrics conventionally rely upon sweat
wicking, and no major brand has incorporated radiative cooling technologies in
textiles. MetaRE fabrics will address this unmet need by delivering a novel
cooling technology substantially more efficient than sweat wicking. (2)
Alleviating the environmental impact of the textile industry. Each year, 63
million tons of synthetic fibers are produced. These fibers turn into 300
billion square meters of textiles, which go through the clothing value chain,
and ultimately turn into textile waste. This vast and growing stream of textile
waste is creating a massive environmental burden. By introducing nanoscale air
voids into fibers, MetaRE fabrics will reduce the consumption of petrochemicals
by 30% and will use 50% less dye to reach desired color brightness and
saturation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will establish design and manufacturing technologies for
creating radiative cooling fibers and fabrics. The prototype polymer fabrics
will have three unique features: superior opacity, radiative cooling, and
brilliant metallic luster, all resulting from nanoscale air filaments embedded
in the fibers. The radiative cooling feature, in particular, is due to a
combination of strong and broadband reflectivity of the fiber in the solar
spectrum and high emissivity of the fiber in the thermal radiation spectrum.
Research objectives of this SBIR Phase I project include: Develop melt and wet
extrusion recipes to produce nanostructured polymer fibers with proper
morphology, optical and thermodynamic properties, and mechanical strength;
Demonstrate optical, thermodynamic, and mechanical performance of radiative
cooling fabrics. To overcome obstacles to industrial adoption, the fiber
production processes will require relatively minor changes to existing fiber
extrusion equipment, and fibers produced will need to meet mechanical and
throughput requirements comparable to those for conventional fibers. A set of
optical and thermodynamic techniques and tools will be developed to characterize
the spectral properties of the fibers and fabrics from the ultraviolet to the
long-wavelength mid-infrared and to quantify the radiative cooling capabilities
of the finished fabrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.