* 1913435
* STTR Phase I:  A Novel Approach to Manage Nitrogen Fertilizer for Potato Production using Remote Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Zhenong Jin, INSIGHT SENSING CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2021
* USD 245,000.00

The broader impact/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer
Research (STTR) project is to reduce the environmental impact of agricultural
production while optimizing net income to producers. Over-application of
nitrogen fertilizer contributes to groundwater contamination via nitrate-
nitrogen leaching, and puts substantial financial burden on rural municipalities
and private well owners who are required to install and pay for treatment of
their drinking water. An estimated 1% of global energy consumption is attributed
to the production of synthetic nitrogen fertilizer. Producers operate under
tight margins, and face pressure to maximize crop yields to remain profitable
and sustain their business. The proposed technology aims to optimize nitrogen
application and minimize the susceptibility of loss to the environment, while
accounting for the year to year weather variability that poses the largest
production challenge. The technology not only determines the optimum nitrogen
rate for achieving maximum profit, but it also provides transparency in nitrogen
management and can serve as a means for demonstrating compliance with incentive
or regulatory programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes
to refine and test a novel algorithm for making real-time nitrogen fertilizer
recommendations during the growing season using remote sensing. The need for
this technology is rooted in the issue that producers are not satisfied with
current methods for in-season nitrogen management because of lack of accuracy
and poor temporal and spatial resolution. The research objectives of this
project are to: (i) predict crop nitrogen concentration using multispectral
information, (ii) compare the algorithm to conventional methods, (iii) calibrate
and validate a crop growth model for prediction of above-ground biomass, (iv)
develop predictive algorithms for radiation use efficiency, and (v) optimize the
algorithm and develop a software application suitable for use by producers. The
algorithm needs to account for yearly variability in crop growth dynamics caused
by climatic conditions, crop variety, and nitrogen management practices. A field
experiment will be conducted to collect data necessary to evaluate these
objectives. It is anticipated that this technology will perform with reasonable
accuracy and have similar or superior performance to existing N management
methods, making it a vast improvement over current practices because of its
ability to consider spatial and temporal variability in a scalable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.