* 1913545
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel, active acoustic wearable for real-time deterioration assessment in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Maria Artunduaga, Respira Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 10/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from the development of a next-
generation product that will revolutionize COPD management by empowering
patients, providers and caregivers to monitor the disease, prevent respiratory
attacks, and receive timely care at home. Currently, COPD kills one American
every four minutes and costs nearly $72B a year - almost half of that cost is
attributable to ER visits and hospitalization. Projected benefits include early
detection of lung deterioration, which will facilitate preventive interventions
at home and thereby reduce the $36B/year spent on ER and hospital visits. A
recent CMS regulatory change (CMS-1689-FC) permits reimbursements for remote
monitoring of COPD patients, indicating market readiness by recognizing the
success of remote monitoring in reducing admissions and long-term acute care
use. Our solution has a validated business model (through over 220 I-Corps
customer interviews) that drives value for patients, physicians, provider
networks and payers. Successful development of this product is forecast to
create 42 new jobs (2024) with an annual payroll exceeding $6.5M. As a direct
result of this award, this innovative product can reach the U.S. market in 2023,
with $100M in projected revenue by 2027. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a new gold-
standard for detecting COPD deterioration. The product is based on low-cost
audio sensors paired with AI algorithms on a Smartphone platform that track lung
resonance and flag any changes in lung volume. Current methods for tracking lung
function at home are sub-optimal. Home spirometers are difficult to use, and not
reimbursable. Pulse-oximeters are highly inaccurate and only provide data at
discrete points, leading to late diagnosis. This lack of timely information
manifests in excess hospitalizations because detection often occurs too late to
prevent an attack. This product creates a fundamental shift in the technology
employed at home by identifying air trapping, a more sensitive biomarker for
lung deterioration. The novelty is affirmed with two pending patent applications
and a freedom to operate analysis that found no prior art of concern. Currently
lung resonance measurement is not used in other respiratory monitoring devices,
providing the company with a strong competitive differentiation. The goal of
this project is to create a Minimum Viable Product that can be used for human
testing. By the end of this award the company will test and validate the concept
in a small cohort of patients and controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.