* 1913554
* Windows on the Universe: Nuclear Astrophysics at the NSCL
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Hendrik Schatz, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2023
* USD 5,570,292.00

The nuclear astrophysics group at the National Superconducting Cyclotron (NSCL)
will use their experimental facilities to address long-standing questions about
the origin of the elements in the Universe. The goal is to restage, in the
laboratory, the same nuclear reactions that produce new elements in nova and
supernova explosions, merging neutron stars, accreting neutron stars, the Big
Bang, and other extreme astrophysical environments. The interacting atomic
nuclei are unstable and need to be artificially produced at the NSCL rare
isotope facility. Experiments can then be carried out, where the relevant
isotopes are produced and detected within fractions of a second. The nuclear
data will be used in computer simulations of stars that are then confronted with
multi-messenger astronomical observations using light, gamma rays, gravitational
waves and neutrinos from various astrophysical sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
the era of multi-messenger astronomy the interpretation of astronomical
observations using light, gamma-rays, gravitational waves, and neutrinos
requires an understanding of the nuclear processes that create these messengers.
The NSCL group proposes to continue their experimental nuclear astrophysics
program and other facilities to provide this important nuclear physics data.
They will carry out a synergistic and interconnected experimental program using
stable and rare isotope beams that employs a wide variety of existing
experimental equipment, and continued development of key experimental
capabilities. The experiments either measure astrophysical reactions directly
(as they occur in nova and supernova explosions, neutron star mergers, accreting
neutron stars, and other astrophysical sites) or provide indirect constraints on
the reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interpreting multi-messenger observations
with accurate nuclear physics measurements obtained in this program will open a
new window on the universe providing insight into element synthesis and nuclear
matter in extreme astrophysical environments. This provides the opportunity to
address long standing questions in nuclear science identified in the NP2010
National Academy study and the nuclear science long rage plan, including the
questions we aim to address here; Where do the chemical elements come from, and
how did they evolve? How does structure arise in the universe and how is it
related to the emergence of the elements in stars and explosive processes? What
is the nature of matter at extreme temperatures and densities? and "What is dark
matter". These questions will be addressed by advancing our knowledge of stellar
nuclear processes through laboratory experiments in close collaboration with
nuclear theorists and astrophysicists. This group will perform experiments
providing new data on proton capture in Novae, X-ray bursts, and Supernovae.
They will measure a range of nuclear properties needed to understand the
synthesis of heavy elements by rapid and intermediate neutron capture, study
weak interactions in supernovae and neutron stars, and search for new nuclear
decay modes that may shed light on element synthesis in the Big Bang.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The proposed program of studies at the
intersection of nuclear physics and astrophysics will attract a diverse group of
undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs to nuclear science by
taking advantage of the compelling science of the NSF Big Idea "Windows on the
Universe". Students and postdocs will receive interdisciplinary training by
taking advantage of the synergistic connections available at MSU with the Joint
Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics (JINA-CEE), the MSU Astronomy group, and the
new MSU Department of Computational Mathematics Science and Engineering. This
will help prepare the students and postdocs for successful nuclear careers in
academia, industry and the US national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
further increase interest in STEM careers in general, and nuclear-science
careers specifically, especially among women and minorities, the PI team will
expand the very successful annual Nuclear Science Summer School at NSCL. The
School provides undergraduate students access to nuclear science education that
is not available at their home institutions and takes advantage of the
compelling science in this proposal to attract and educate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.