* 1913180
* RUI: Computational Methods for Measuring Topological Entanglement in Polymers
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Eleni Panagiotou, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 125,000.00

This project aims to investigate the effects of polymer entanglement and
architecture on material properties using computational and mathematical
techniques. Entangled polymer physics are a subject of study since Edwards'
original model in the 60's which is still under examination. Under some
conditions we can see polymer chains as mathematical curves in space and measure
their topological complexity. However, the use of topological entanglement for
the study of polymer entanglement has not been fully explored, due to the
difficulty of bridging the two notions, requiring background from topology and
polymer physics and engineering. The project consists of an inter-disciplinary
effort with researchers from Mathematics and Chemical Engineering to solve the
problem of quantifying the effects of topological entanglement and polymer
architecture to material properties of polymers. Our contribution is an
innovative approach that integrates analytical, computational and experimental
methods to solve a problem at the interface of polymer physics, topology and
geometry. Understanding how microscopic properties affect material properties
will lead not only to the smart manufacturing of new materials, but also to the
understanding of living matter. This award will support 1 graduate student for
each of the three years of the project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In order to
understand and quantify the interplay between microstructure and macroscopic
properties of polymers, we propose to use mathematical concepts from topology
and investigate properties of polymers at different length-scales through
computer simulations. Our results will be complemented and validated by
experimental data. The proposed works can be summarized as follows: (1) the
creation of new methods to account for polymer entanglement in Self-Consistent
Field Theory (SCFT) simulations, (2) the development of new partitioned
algorithms to simulate the fluid-structure interaction for entangled polymers
(3) the development of new computational user-packages for measuring topological
entanglement of open curves and (4) the combined application of all the above
mentioned tools to understand the self-assembly, organization and viscoelastic
properties of polymer melts of varying architecture using simulations and
experiments. This study advances knowledge at the area of topology and geometry,
by defining and studying new tools for measuring the geometrical/topological
complexity of open curves in space and also advances computational
infrastructure, by designing and prototyping algorithms in reusable code that in
particular studies aspects in entangled polymer simulations (such as fluid-
structure interactions for such systems and topological interactions). This work
also extends SCFT simulations to account for topological aspects of polymers in
a way that it is computationally feasible, which is presently absent in SCFT
simulations. This holistic approach will thoroughly study entanglement in
polymers of varying architecture that are currently of great interest in
materials and manufacturing and nanotechnology, with the potential of immediate
impact of our results to practical manufacturing. Our results also provide
valuable tools for studying biopolymers with potential impact in biotechnology.
This project has educational objectives including strong impact on undergraduate
research with a commitment in promoting underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.