* 1913409
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobile Environmental Exposure Personal Sensors (MEEPS)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Krishna Naishadham, Wi-Sense LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop wearable sensors for monitoring
environmental pollution triggers of a chronic respiratory disease, asthma, and
empower patients to mitigate exacerbations. The initial target for
commercialization is a wearable sensor array, integrated with a smart phone, to
detect ozone and nitrogen dioxide, known to cause increased morbidity and
mortality in asthma patients. The anticipated product, functionally referred to
as Mobile Environmental Exposure Personal Sensor (MEEPS), will use disruptive
nanotechnology and signal capture methods to provide superior performance at a
lower cost, size, weight and power than competing technologies, such as optical,
UV photometry, heated metal oxide semi-conductor (HMOS) and electro-chemical
methods. MEEPS will influence proactive healthcare by implementing personalized
mitigation approaches tailored to individual symptoms triggered by local
exposure, and alerting the caregiver or the physician via mobile phone, as
necessary. MEEPS can potentially decrease healthcare costs and financial losses,
improve productivity and overall quality of life of asthma patients worldwide.
Furthermore, MEEPS enables uploading continuous airborne pollutant exposure data
from several users to the cloud for off-line analysis to produce pollution maps,
participatory sensing, epidemiological studies, asthma community activism, and
increased environmental awareness in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop low-cost
mobile sensor arrays for simultaneous exposure measurements of multiple
chemicals in the ambient personal microenvironment. No such device exists in the
market today. MEEPS utilizes functionalized carbon nanotubes (CNTs), deposited
as thin-films on small flexible electrodes, for the gas-sensitive element. The
innovation lies in improving the sensitivity to the target gas while
simultaneously reducing the interaction with other oxidizing chemicals present
in the environment. This is achieved by controlling the concentration of
functional groups covalently attached to the CNTs at the sensor surface. The
baseline drift is corrected by differential comparison with the reference
signal, periodically monitored prior to gas exposure. MEEPS will integrate CNT
detector films with a commercial on-chip low-power impedance measurement
circuit, which tracks changes in complex impedance caused by molecular level
chemical adsorption of gases on the film surface. In contrast to the well-known
chemiresistor, which measures only the change in resistance, MEEPS uses both
amplitude and phase to reduce cross-sensitivity to interfering chemicals. The
goal of the Phase 1 effort is to mitigate the technical risks of selectivity and
sensor drift in ambient microenvironment by utilizing transformational
nanotechnology integrated with patent-pending on-board electronics for impedance
measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.