* 1913890
* NSF-BSF: Correlations and Entanglement: From CGC Wave Function to Particle Production at High Energy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alexander Kovner, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 270,000.00

The strong force governs the interactions between protons and ions at very high
energies. Complete understanding of strong interactions is a long standing
problem in theoretical high energy and nuclear physics. For more than a decade,
it has been known that under certain conditions these interactions can lead to
very intricate collective behavior, like for example formation of a Quark-Gluon
plasma. One of the central parts of the experimental program at the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) is the study of possible collective and correlated behavior in
heavy ion collisions as well as proton-ion collisions at high energy. The latter
are particularly interesting, since understanding collectivity may allow for
progress in understanding the structure of the proton. As such, in this project
the PI and his collaborators will study how collective behavior can originate in
the properties of the wave function of the colliding objects. This project will
provide excellent training of graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the development of an
approach based on the so-called Color Glass Condensate (CGC) - a modern approach
to high energy interactions. The PI will study the possible connection between
quasi collectivity and quantum properties of the hadronic wave function at high
energy. The PI aims to improve the current knowledge of the CGC wave function at
high energy. This involves resummation of large logarithmic corrections to
current next-to-leading-order (NLO) calculations via a consistent use of the
Born-Oppenheimer approach to a multiscale system, and extending the current
calculations to denser projectiles via the WKB approximation. Furthermore, the
PI will study the correlated behavior of particles produced from this state in a
high energy collision, in particular effects of quantum entanglement of modes,
as well as effects of quantum statistics and other properties of particle
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.