* 1913787
* SBIR Phase I:  Robust High-Throughput Mass Spectrometry Through Vacuum Matrix Assisted Ionization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Charles McEwen, MSTM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a newly discovered spontaneous
ionization process for use with mass spectrometry that is combined with a novel
sample introduction device. This technology has the potential to drive mass
spectrometry into new application areas that are currently underserved by this
premier analytical tool. The resulting method is capable of analyzing biological
and environmental samples in &lt;3 sec/sample directly from the biological
matrix without instrument contamination. The method reduces cost, energy use,
and required user expertise, while providing high sensitivity and speed of
analysis with unprecedented robustness. These attributes address the need for
accurate and timely information in medical diagnostics, biothreat detection, and
environmental damage control among others. This has the potential to advance
science through improved measurement technology with societal benefits of
improved healthcare, environmental remediation, and safety through sensitive,
rapid, and reliable detection of drugs to proteins. New instrumentation built
around this technology has significant commercial potential because it addresses
current shortcomings such as high cost, requirement for operator expertise, lack
of robustness to contamination, and need for high-throughput automatable
analyses, attributes that currently limit the appeal of mass spectrometry in
important applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to advance mass spectrometry by implementing novel ionization technology first
discovered in 2012 through NSF-funded research. The ionization process of this
proposal converts large and small compounds regardless of volatility to gas-
phase ions simply by exposure to sub-atmospheric pressure through association of
the sample with certain small molecule compounds without the need for a laser,
high voltage, or the application of heat. A key feature is rapidly exposing
successive samples to vacuum directly from atmospheric pressure providing
simplicity of operation, speed of analysis, reduced operating cost, and
elimination of risk of contamination. The instrument and associated method are
broadly applicable for fast analyses of a wide array of compounds, including
drugs and their metabolites, and biological fluids and tissues without the need
for purification and without instrument contamination. Additional objectives
include designing and building a novel sample introduction method for this new
ionization technology and an associated ion transfer lens to fit specific
commercial mass spectrometry instruments as well as demonstration of proof-of-
concept for important applications such as rapid bacteria
identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.