* 1913763
* SBIR Phase I:  Mechanized clothing to enhance productivity and low back health in the logistics industry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Matthew Yandell, HEROWEAR, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop mechanized clothing technology to reduce
physical disability, healthcare costs and missed work for material and package-
handlers in the logistics industry. Workers in this industry are at high risk of
developing low back pain (LBP) due to the physical demands of repeated leaning
and lifting. There are currently no solutions for this occupation that are
effective, affordable, practical and unobtrusive. This project is focused on
mechanized clothing, a game-changing new device to reduce fatigue and incidence
of low back pain amongst material/package-handlers and other occupations that
involve repetitive lifting and leaning. For employers, mechanized clothing
creates the potential for a happier, healthier and more productive workforce
with reduced employee turnover, medical costs and understaffing issues. For
workers, mechanized clothing means the potential for less low back pain, fatigue
and missed work. For society, it means the potential to improve well-being for
millions of individuals worldwide and to reduce the burden on the healthcare
system and reliance on painkillers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to develop an exoskeleton that is able to integrate into the
normal workflow of material/package-handlers. Mechanized clothing has been shown
in lab tests to reduce loading on the low back. The key to demonstrating
commercial feasibility is proving to logistics companies that their workers can
be assisted in a real world environment without interfering with daily workflow.
The SBIR project plan is to (i) design a multi-stage clutch to prepare for real-
world testing; (ii) use a robotic emulator system in the lab to quantify optimal
assistive spring stiffness for leaning and lifting biomechanics, to inform
spring selection in the new mechanized clothing prototype; and (iii) demonstrate
feasibility of device integration into a real-world package-handling environment
by testing users with the mechanized clothing prototype and assessing the degree
to which it can assist users without hindering
workflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.