* 1913948
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhanced Light Generation in Printed Displays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Shakeel Dalal, ALIGN SCIENCES LTD
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will stem from the advancement of material processing techniques for
carbon-containing (organic) materials. Carbon is ubiquitous on Earth and conveys
to materials made from it a variety of strategic and technical advantages.
Advances in chemistry and materials science are increasing the utility of
organic materials in the semiconductor industry. This is enabling organic
materials to replace rare metals which can be ecologically damaging to mine or
must be sourced from politically sensitive parts of the world. The $100 Billion
display industry is leading this revolution with the commercialization of the
organic light emitting diode (OLED). Critical weaknesses make the manufacturing
of OLEDs extremely expensive, especially for large displays. The result is an
industry-wide effort to move away from conventional semiconductor manufacturing
techniques and to printing. Printed OLED displays are substantially less
expensive but are 50% less power efficient. As a result, they are not suitable
for devices reliant on battery power. This limits their commercial potential to
less than 25% of the total display market.

The proposed project will leverage recent discoveries in the properties of
organic materials to develop a new processing technique for printed OLEDs.
Incumbent OLED manufacturing technology orients the light emitting component of
the device in a way which maximizes power efficiency. This is not currently
possible in printed displays. We will develop new methods of depositing thin
films of OLED materials to create oriented emitters. Based on the results of
experiments, we will gain knowledge of the fundamental mechanism which enables
molecular orientation in solution deposited thin films. We will use this
mechanism to demonstrate that our processing technique is compatible with the
display printing supply chain and facilitate future integration of our
technology into OLED printers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.