* 1913428
* SBIR Phase I:  Vianair Airspace Information Model For Airspace Design And Planning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Stavros Sidiropoulos, VIANAIR INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from improving the efficiency of air
traffic operations and unlocking runway and airspace capacity utilization, thus
enabling reduction of emissions, noise impact, flight delays, and operational
cost of airports and airlines. As urban metropolitan areas have grown and air
traffic has increased, capacity constraints at airports and their surrounding
airspace result in daily delays, which propagate throughout the entire National
Airspace System affecting almost every person in modern society with negative
impact on the economy, the environment, and airport neighboring communities. The
proposed innovation will enable airport authorities, airlines and air navigation
service providers in the US and worldwide to more efficiently plan, design and
manage airspace and airports systems, facilitating the seamless sharing of
information between stakeholders, ultimately enabling the transition of the air
traffic management system into the future and resulting in significant benefits
for the traveling public and the local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
first-of-its-kind Airspace Information Model (AIM), a dedicated software
platform for airspace and airport system planning and design. Currently, airport
authorities, airlines and the air navigation service providers use a plethora of
tools for airspace and airport system design, planning and performance
evaluation. However, existing tools only cater for specific aspects of the
operation in isolation and fail to properly evaluate the interactions between
system design components and the trade-offs between different performance
objectives. As a result, system performance is sub-optimal. The proposed AIM
platform combines the functions of Design, Performance Evaluation and
Optimization in a single parametric model addressing the airspace design and
planning process from a holistic perspective. It also makes an immediate
evaluation of all performance trade-offs possible, while accounting for design
rules and criteria. Furthermore, this SBIR proposes the development and
integration into the AIM platform of the Dynamic Route Concept (DRC), a novel
airspace design optimization method that automatically matches airspace design
configuration to dynamic air traffic demand, thus enabling pre-tactical
decision-making and optimal system performance. The proposed technology has the
potential to become the industry-wide standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.