* 1913949
* STTR Phase I:  Pilot-scale Advanced, High-Rate Wet Weather Treatment Scale-up and Optimization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Paige Peters, RAPID RADICALS TECHNOLOGY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,953.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to demonstrate feasibility and determine the capacity
of an innovative advanced, high-rate wet weather treatment technology to cost-
effectively protect environmental and public health during high-intensity rain
events by eliminating sewer overflows and basement back-ups. The wastewater
utility industry has demonstrated a great unmet need for reliable, cost-
effective, end-of-pipe wet weather treatment as an alternative to expensive
long-term plans that emphasize large capital projects. The innovative approach
being scaled and optimized during this project seeks to achieve the same or
higher level of treatment in 35 minutes as conventional wastewater treatment
achieves in 10-14 hours. A lower treatment time means a smaller system footprint
and, ultimately, cost savings for the utility and ratepayers. The technology
will address customer needs by identifying potential sewer overflow "hotspots"
that act as "drains" in the utility sewershed during storm events. Each drain
solution would alleviate overburdened collection, conveyance, and treatment
systems by treating wet weather flows and safely releasing them into waterways.
This innovative technology can also be applied at a water reclamation facility
to handle overburden or as a mobile unit during disaster relief efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes the evaluation of novel
concepts including the application of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) for
wet weather treatment, the combination of rapid solid removal technologies with
AOPs, and the use of a sustainable waste material as a catalyst for enhanced
hydroxyl radical production in catalytic ozonation. None of the above aspects
have been commercially implemented. The work proposed will demonstrate the
ability for advanced technologies to be cost-effectively applied for wet weather
treatment, disrupting the standard of partial combined sewer overflow treatment
by providing a viable option for rapid wet weather treatment that meets or
exceeds Clean Water Act discharge standards. These concepts will be applied at a
pilot scale treating real wastewater to determine the technical and chemical
scaling factors for commercial feasibility. Metrics for success within the
research plan include aggressive conventional contaminant removal goals,
increased flowrate for overall decreased treatment time and footprint, and a
targeted cost ($/gallon treated) analysis to ensure competitive edge in the
market. It is expected that the results will further demonstrate the importance
of solids removal ahead of AOPs, and the implementation of catalytic ozonation
will demonstrate increased efficacy and flexibility as the technology
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.