* 1913011
* WoU-MMA: Multi-Messenger and Multi-Wavelength Particle Astrophysics with HAWC
* MPS,PHY
* 08/31/2019,08/31/2022
* James Linnemann, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 618,355.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed with unique capabilities to observe very high-energy
gamma rays. This award supports scientists at Michigan State University doing
research with HAWC. In addition to activities in support of HAWC operations, the
group will use HAWC data to explore the origin and acceleration of particles in
extreme physical environments. They will also use HAWC observations to search
for gamma-ray counterparts of high-energy neutrinos detected by the IceCube
Neutrino Observatory. The group will engage in education and public outreach
activities, including installing a HAWC exhibit at the Michigan State University
Abrams Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HAWC is a wide field of view,
continuously operating observatory. Unlike more traditional ground-based
telescopes that point at a small region of sky on clear nights, HAWC has the
ability to study very extended regions of gamma-ray emission and to nearly-
continuously monitor time-varying phenomena. The Michigan State University group
will capitalize on these abilities by compiling a catalog of time-varying gamma-
ray sources and looking for correlations with high-energy neutrino events
recorded by the IceCube Neutrino Observatory and lower energy gamma-ray emission
recorded by the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope. The group will also conduct a
search for dark matter signals coming from the extended halo around the Galactic
Center. This work directly addresses the goals of NSF's "Windows on the
Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.