* 1913122
* Symposium to advance multidisciplinary perspectives on minority languages in diaspora; June 29-30, 2019; Davis, CA
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Lauren Clemens, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2020
* USD 14,206.00

Millions of people around the world are displaced by war, disaster,
environmental degradation, and the economic conditions of their countries of
origin. While modern anthropological and sociological research is increasingly
oriented toward the transnational nature of cultures and languages, other
disciplines, like linguistics, may lag in comparison. Moreover, because many
displaced people are speakers of minority languages, the pressure to shift to
more politically and culturally advantageous languages threatens the
transmission of minority languages to future generations. As a result, linguists
are increasingly finding themselves conducting time sensitive work with speakers
of understudied languages in diaspora communities. This award will convene a
symposium to address this gap in linguistics, bringing the field into a fuller
dialogue with other social sciences, as well as emerging research on
transnational networks and their relevance to the economic, medical, and legal
problems of the modern world. The broader impacts of the symposium include
enabling community language experts who are personally affected by the threat of
linguistic and cultural attrition in diaspora environments to connect with
others in similar situations in order to develop mutually beneficial solutions,
as well as to prepare a set best practices for linguistic research in diaspora
contexts that incorporates perspectives from migration studies and can be
disseminated to enhance the training of those involved in linguistic research
with diaspora communities. The symposium will bring together linguists working
with threatened languages spoken in diasporic contexts in both urban and rural
communities around the United States of America to interact with specialists in
different areas of migration studies, including political conflict, refugee
studies, and urbanization. Best practices in the social sciences must adapt to
the changing social and political circumstances in our world, in particular the
worldwide flows of immigrants and refugees. Yet many of the widely accepted best
practices in linguistic research fail to take the sociopolitical situation of
speakers into account and start from assumptions about language communities that
are inapplicable to languages spoken in diasporic contexts. Working in diasporic
contexts also raises questions beyond the scope of traditional training. These
questions pertain to how a language community is defined; how to work with
communities in conflict; and how language change takes place in hyperdiverse
contexts. Symposium participants will write a consensus-based white paper
proposing best practices for linguistic research in diaspora contexts and
promulgate this text for wider scholarly discussion among linguists and other
researchers with overlapping specializations. Such a collaborative effort has
the potential to increase the efficacy of future work on languages spoken in
diaspora communities. Project activities will be valuable to scholars already
working in diaspora contexts and will offer foundational training to both
undergraduate and graduate students in anthropological, descriptive,
documentary, and theoretical linguistics programs. Activities also have the
potential to enhance multidisciplinary research beyond linguistics with the
involvement of other social scientists.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.