* 1913420
* SBIR Phase I:  INNOVATIVE RADIATION AWARENESS FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT AND FIRST RESPONDERS
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Lara Kirkham, AL VENTURES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes protection of
municipal-level first responders and local communities from radiological hazards
through affordable continuous wide-area radiation monitoring (RM). Radiological
threats range from the ultimate high-consequence-rare-event posed by
radiological dispersal devices and stolen or unaccounted for special nuclear
material to more common and routine radiological events triggered by
radiological sources from construction, power, medicine, and industry.
Regardless of the threat, current radiological equipment and training is
inadequate, and first responders are ill-equipped to deal with radiological
incidents that occur in urban environments. Due to technology and training
costs, comprehensive radiation surveillance systems can be adopted by only the
largest and wealthiest cities, leaving most municipalities and local first
responders unprotected. The project will develop an RM system that is easily
deployed, alerts to spectral anomalies as well as radiation levels, requires no
specialized training for front-line operators, and is vastly more cost effective
than existing systems. This RM system can be deployed in a variety of complex
environments regardless of size or density. The end result is accurate, real-
time mapping of large geographical areas that can be used to detect, analyze,
and interpret radiation levels in a variety of environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project provides innovative approaches in building a spatial-temporal-spectral
database of gamma radiation to monitor change detection over large urban areas.
The concept is to improve general radiation awareness as well as source
detection capability by having continuous monitoring. Rather than attempting to
identify specific isotopes in spectral observations ? which is difficult at long
distances and requires highly sensitive detectors ? it is possible to detect
temporal anomalies in spectral shape by keeping a database of past observations.
This provides for profound increases in detection distance or likewise, in faint
source detection. For successful commercialization of the RM system, innovative
research is needed in two main areas: 1) universal multi-sensor integration
through boot-strapped autocalibration and integrated continuous health
monitoring, which this proposal will address via field deployment of multiple
sensors to characterize with novel sensor-to-sensor fusion methodologies; and 2)
municipal infrastructure optimization that will permit surveys to be conducted
in a distributed fashion without dedicated survey vehicles, which this proposal
will address by collecting data and building operational research optimization
models for key aspects of the mobile sensor deployment concept, answering
critical questions on the economic viability of the
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.