* 1913594
* SBIR Phase I:  Rechargeable Hybrid Aqueous Battery with Novel Freeze Tape Cast 3-D Zinc Electrode
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Adam Weisenstein, ZAF ENERGY SYSTEMS, INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,755.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the advancement of a
Rechargeable Hybrid Aqueous Battery (ReHAB) containing a novel freeze tape cast
zinc electrode that will contribute to meeting global battery demands. The two
chemistries dominating the majority of electrification markets are lithium-ion
and lead-acid. However, both of these chemistries have drawbacks, which include
the low cycle life and energy associated with lead-acid batteries, and the high
price and safety risks associated with lithium-ion batteries. These drawbacks
open the door for the ReHAB battery chemistry to become a drop-in replacement to
the lead-acid and lithium-ion markets such as stationary, heavy trucking, data
center backup, and industrial motive. The primary goal of the ReHAB battery will
be to step into these established markets as a lower cost and safer replacement
to current technologies. These target markets total more than $50 billion in
annual sales and continue to grow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will advance the ReHAB battery by
utilizing freeze tape cast (FTC) zinc electrodes. The ReHAB is an emerging, high
efficiency rechargeable battery technology that utilizes the high specific
energy density of lithium intercalation electrodes with affordable, nontoxic
zinc electrodes. The electrolyte is water-based and is more conductive than non-
aqueous electrolytes, which makes ReHAB cells a safe, alternative battery for
high rate applications. Despite the enormous potential of the ReHAB technology,
poor performance of commercially available zinc foil electrodes and difficulties
with fabricating zinc plated electrodes have prevented practical implementation
of the ReHAB battery. The Phase 1 project will be comprised of three major tasks
to advance the emerging technology and establish the novel FTC anode, including
initial characterization of the FTC zinc electrode, fabrication of ReHAB pouch
cells with the FTC electrode, and the initial performance of the chemistry under
varying operating conditions. The FTC novel electrode is anticipated to provide
directionally aligned active metallic struts that will allow for ordered zinc
plating, help control shape change, and dramatically reduce dendrite formation
due to a more homogeneously distributed current, which will provide much longer
cycle life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.