* 1913664
* 13th International Workshop on High-pT Physics in the RHIC/LHC Era; March 19-23, 2019 at the University of Tennessee Knoxville.
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Christine Nattrass, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 01/31/2020
* USD 6,028.00

This award provides support for students to participate in the 13th
International Workshop on High-pT Physics in the RHIC/LHC Era, devoted to the
study of partonic energy loss in the Quark Gluon Plasma (QGP), which is a state
of matter thought to have existed shortly after the Big Bang. This topic is
particularly interesting now, as the field adapts from a discovery phase of the
QGP to the phase where the quantitative properties of the medium are determined.
The workshops in this series are intended to provide an informal forum in which
theorists, experimentalists, senior researchers, and junior researchers interact
and learn from each other. The workshop will take place at the University of
Tennessee in Knoxville, TN, March 19 - 23, 2019.

Undergraduate students will also present their research and the PI will discuss
her course-based undergraduate research experience with applications to partonic
energy loss in the QGP. This will not only highlight undergraduate researchers
but propose a model for how other researchers can incorporate undergraduates
into their research and broaden participation in the field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.