* 1913637
* SBIR Phase I:  A STEM curriculum platform using augmented reality for real-time collaboration and problem solving
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Amanda Thompson, Explore Interactive, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 224,524.00

This SBIR Phase I project develops a collaborative augmented reality (AR)
learning platform to build knowledge and skills targeted by Next Generation
Science Standards through early, hands-on design of scientific systems.
Troubleshooting - diagnosing, explaining and fixing errors - is an element of
the design process often missing from educational activities as it is difficult
to execute with large groups of students, but AR can address elegantly.
Furthermore, expert instructors and peers need not be in the same room to
collaboratively solve problems presented as interactive three-dimensional system
models. Collaborative AR, requiring only common devices, will substantially
increase affordability and access to substantive and engaging science,
engineering, technology and math (STEM) within formal and informal, as well as
classroom and home learning environments. Without the barriers of expensive
equipment, dangerous materials or trained facilitators, educational AR is poised
for dramatic growth, commanding an estimated $12B globally by 2020. Earlier and
more effective STEM education provides fundamental knowledge to motivate the
scientists and engineers of tomorrow to aspire and contribute to leading-edge
discoveries and innovations. At the highest level, this work will benefit
society by increasing the supply of collaborative, STEM-proficient, critical
thinkers who are poised to prosper in the workforce of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative AR must surmount technical
hurdles in image recognition, integration and pedagogy to achieve acceptance in
elementary education. Capabilities of existing AR technologies suffer
shortcomings in the functionality required for real-time recognition of three-
dimensional space with common devices, including issues with the camera, image
projection, and processing. Technical innovations are required for new methods
to identify and place targets within the uniformity of learning environments.
The additional challenge of implementing live collaboration in a multi-user
setting requires technical innovations around the seamless integration of
various devices as well as the development and testing of intuitive user
interfaces from both student and instructor perspectives. These include how to
measure behaviors, handle conflicting actions, and how to give, receive and
respond to the dynamic instructor feedback. Understanding, measuring and
reporting the educational advantages and shortcomings in motivating and
developing diverse learners in distinct learning environments cannot be
overlooked in implementing technology tools. Meaningful pedagogical innovations
must occur to effectively leverage the new power of AR without overlooking
unintended impacts on students or their educational outcomes. These
specifications require novel curriculum design both to achieve the cross-
disciplinary understanding through increasingly complex problems and to deliver
the full impact promised by educational AR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.