* 1913374
* RUI: A Program of Undergraduate Participation in the Search for Rare Events with CUORE
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Thomas Gutierrez, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 213,574.00

California Polytechnic State University is a primarily undergraduate institution
that provides opportunities for undergraduate students to participate in
fundamental physics research. The Cal Poly students will have the opportunity to
participate in hands-on activities at one of the world's finest underground
laboratories and to participate in fundamental research. This will give students
invaluable experience working with a cutting-edge physics experiment in a world-
class underground laboratory. These experiences facilitate important personal
and professional growth which accompanies travel and study abroad. Undergraduate
research opportunities such as those in this project allow students to
contribute to real science and generate formative experiences for early
technical careers, which ultimately contribute to a competent and competitive US
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principle investigator and his students
will work on the CUORE experiment at the Gran Sasso National Laboratory, an
underground laboratory, in Italy. CUORE is designed to measure the half-life of
one of the slowest radioactive decays ever observed: two neutrino double beta
decay (2vBB). It is also searching for the never-before-seen neutrinoless double
beta decay (0vBB).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Neutrinoless double beta decay is
impossible unless the neutrino has mass and the neutrino is distinct from its
own antiparticle. But the Standard Model of physics suggests that the neutrino
does not have mass and it treats the neutrino as distinct from its antiparticle.
Therefore, observation of neutrinoless double beta decay would imply new and
exciting physics beyond the Standard Model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CUORE
collaboration has built an experiment that is ideal for detecting neutrinoless
double beta decay with a half-life up 10^26 years, which is trillions of times
older than the age of the Universe. The Cal Poly group will contribute to the
experiment by providing on-site support each summer. They will do data analysis
in their home laboratory and they will develop machine learning algorithms for
pulse-shape identification and classification. They will also use the data to
test for violations of Lorentz and CPT invariance, directly testing the limits
of Einstein's special theory of relativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both neutrino
physics and underground physics are subjects that spark the imagination of
students and so these topics provide a unique platform for vigorous public
outreach. The PI and students will create outreach activities and work with
local schools and community organizations to sponsor physics demonstrations and
discuss current events in science. In particular, the Cal Poly group will
develop an interactive visualization scheme for CUORE physics. The interactive
software will serve as a channel for the public to gain insight into the
scientific process and explore the mysteries of particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.