* 1913723
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Wireless pH Sensing Stir Bar
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Kristian Scaboo, GATE SCIENTIFIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2020
* USD 220,185.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project involves the evolution of wireless technologies for sensing,
communication and control in modern laboratory and manufacturing processes. pH
is a fundamental measurement in numerous processes and this project will bring
the technology involved in creating a wireless pH sensing stir bar to the
prototype stage, ready to be transitioned to manufacturing. It will also provide
the technological foundation to develop wireless sensing capabilities that will
fundamentally change the measurement paradigm in the wet laboratory. Wireless
sensing and communication will allow for in situ measurements that have not been
previously convenient or even possible as well as remote monitoring and control.
This will increase quality, safety, productivity, and convenience in both
laboratory and manufacturing environments. Scientists and technicians will
benefit from easier processes and data acquisition. Companies will benefit from
increased quality assurance and yield cost savings. Consumers will benefit from
better quality control of staples such as food, water, pharmaceuticals and
medical devices.

The proposed project will develop a wireless pH and temperature sensing magnetic
stir bar that will communicate wirelessly with a base chemical workstation. The
goal of the project is to produce a prototype pH sensing stir bar that is ready
to be transitioned to manufacturing. A completely submersible pH sensor is not
available on the market and will provide unparalleled convenience. The technical
hurdles involve developing and incorporating the sensor and reference electrode
portions of the stir bar, designing an electronic circuit that can sense in a
high rf field used for communication and power, and sealing all components in a
completely submersible form factor. Custom sensing and reference electrodes will
be evaluated and tested independently. Circuits will be designed and shielding
options will be investigated. Sealing methods will be evaluated to protect the
system from harsh environments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.