* 1913028
* Examining Nuclear Structure with Fast Neutrons
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Steven Yates, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

The nucleus is billions of times smaller than is visible with the human eye and
so we cannot merely take a photograph to understand its properties and
structure. At UKAL, we employ a particle accelerator to produce nuclear
reactions that create gamma rays which are characteristic of the nucleus we wish
to study. From these gamma rays, we can develop an image of the nucleus of an
atom and gain an understanding of how the neutrons and protons interact within
it. In addition, students at the undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate
levels gain a world-class education while participating in these studies.
Graduates of our program receive hands-on experience and emerge as well-trained
nuclear scientists who are capable of important contributions to our national
energy, medical, and security needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of the
research program at the University of Kentucky Accelerator Laboratory (UKAL) is
to address open questions in nuclear structure and outstanding problems in
related areas of nuclear science to which we can uniquely contribute. This
broad-based research program includes selected studies in several forefront
areas: nuclear structure relevant to neutrinoless double-beta decay; nuclei
undergoing shape transitions; deformed structures and shape coexistence; nuclear
structure contributions in support of studies of fundamental symmetries. The
most unique capability of the laboratory is the availability of a mono energetic
beam of fast neutrons to do inelastic scattering experimenst to investigate low-
energy collective modes in nuclei. With the inelastic scattering of neutrons, we
are able to obtain information which is not accessible at other facilities.
Experimental innovations in our laboratory include the development of
capabilities for measuring lifetimes in heavy nuclei with the Doppler-shift
attenuation method following the inelastic scattering of the fast neutrons.
These advances, coupled with the unique capabilities of our laboratory for the
production of high-quality, time-bunched monoenergetic neutrons, have permitted
us to address important questions and make meaningful contributions in nuclear
structure physics and fundamental symmetries. We have also opened other areas of
study and engaged in complementary experiments with collaborators at other
nuclear accelerator laboratories. Education at all levels continues to be an
emphasis in our laboratory activities and research at a small accelerator
laboratory permits the mentoring of young scientists on a daily
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.