* 1913218
* HRRBAA: Paleontology and paleoanthropology of a potential Late Miocene site in the Laikipia highlands
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* William Barr, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2023
* USD 26,581.00

The period between 11.6 - 5.33 million years ago (the Late Miocene) was a major
turning point in human and ape evolution, with the human, gorilla, and
chimpanzee lineages all originating during this interval. The recognizable fauna
of the African savanna as we know it - dominated by elephants, zebras, and many
kinds of antelopes - was also established during this critical interval of
environmental change, characterized by expanding C4 vegetation (predominantly
grasses). Despite the importance of the Late Miocene in human and mammalian
evolution, the fossil record from the Late Miocene in eastern Africa is
restricted to only a handful of sites in the East African Rift System (EARS).
This high-risk research project will improve our understanding of human and
mammalian evolution in the Late Miocene by developing the scientific potential
of a newly discovered fossil site called Tumbili Estate, located outside the
EARS in the highlands of Laikipia County, Kenya. This project will provide
research experience for American and Kenyan undergraduate and graduate students,
which will bolster the researcher pipeline and lead to a more globally engaged
workforce. Through our partnership with the Laikipia Forum, a consortium of
local Kenyan stakeholders, this project will enhance the understanding of human
evolution among community members, and give local people a voice in the science
being conducted on their land. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA evidence has firmly
established that the human, gorilla and chimpanzee lineages originated during
the Late Miocene. However, the fossil evidence for the origin of these lineages
is meager. The known ape fossils from the Late Miocene are fragmentary, and the
potential links between the fossils and the modern apes are largely unknown. The
recovery of additional fossil ape and/or hominin (i.e., human ancestor) fossils
from this time period is the key to understanding the origin of the hominin,
gorilla, and chimpanzee lineages. This research project will confirm the age and
extent of sediments at the Tumbili Estate, which likely date between 9 - 10 Ma
based on fossils previously recovered, and also allow survey of nearby areas for
additional sites. Analysis of the paleoenvironment at Tumbili will provide
valuable new data bearing on the timing of the C4 vegetation expansion and the
modernization of the African mammalian fauna. The fact that Tumbili is located
on a high-elevation plateau far outside the EARS will add significantly to our
understanding of the spatial and altitudinal variation of the habitats on the
landscape during the Late Miocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.