* 1913998
* STTR Phase I:  Thermal Runaway and Pressure Suppression (TRAPS) for Lithium-Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Kevin Marr, ALTECT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) or STTR Phase I project is to develop and commercialize a
technology to mitigate safety concerns associated with lithium-ion (Li-ion)
battery technologies in electric vehicle, transportation, and energy storage
applications. Li-ion battery technology is one of the most transformative
innovations in the past decade and continues to provide a platform for future
technology development. The potential market size for Li-ion battery technology
is substantial. Fueled by growth in energy storage and electric vehicle
industries the Li-ion battery market is expected to grow to over US$100 billion
by 2025. Adoption of Li-ion battery technology in the energy storage market
being impeding by safety concerns, namely fire and explosion hazards. The
technology to be developed in this Phase I project has the potential to be a
low-cost, passive solution to mitigate these hazards, and alleviate these
concerns. The technology has potential to have high market penetration in energy
storage and transportation industries, and will enable adoption of
transformative technologies that pushes us toward a greener and more sustainable
energy future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project will explore and develop technology for passive
mitigation of Li-ion battery fire and explosion hazards. For large multi-cell
battery systems in energy storage, vehicle applications and among others, these
hazards can damage nearby infrastructure and cause injury or death. Li-ion
batteries can undergo a self-heating failure called thermal runaway that
releases flammable gases. Thermal runaway poses significant challenges for
available fire and explosion suppression systems because the gas release can
continue unabated despite suppression of the incipient fire. Current mitigation
approaches treat the consequences of the fire and do not address the root cause
of the hazard, namely the production of flammable gases. The approach here is to
develop technology to mitigate the root cause of the hazard and reduce the
flammability of the battery gases. There is a clear need to increase the
scientific understanding of passive mitigation mechanisms of hazardous and
flammable gases in the thermal runaway environment. The overall objective of
this project is to further the scientific understanding of these passive
mitigation techniques and demonstrating proof-of-concept performance for Li-ion
battery applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.