* 1913509
* RUI: Laser Probing of Proton-Rich Rare Isotopes
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Andrew Klose, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2021
* USD 77,173.00

This award engages undergraduate students and faculty at Augustana University in
Sioux Falls, South Dakota in experimental nuclear physics research. The research
will be carried out at Augustana as well as the National Superconducting
Cyclotron Laboratory (NSCL) and Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) at
Michigan State University. Laser spectroscopy will be performed on rare isotopes
at NSCL/FRIB to elucidate systematic changes in the shape and size of nuclides
with extreme proton-to-neutron ratios. The data will provide vital input to
nuclear theories that are used to understand the fundamental forces that bind
nuclei together at the edges of stability. Additionally this award, to a
primarily undergraduate institution, provides a unique educational experience
for students at the forefront of nuclear science. The cutting-edge research and
instrumentation that will be funded by this award will continue a tradition at
Augustana University to attract and inspire students, an especially important
outcome in a geographical area that has traditionally lacked significant
research infrastructure. The skills students will gain with precision
measurements, such as spectroscopy, are important for the STEM workforce, which
is, in turn, a key component of a prosperous and innovative national economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collinear laser spectroscopy will be used to study
electromagnetic moments and charge radii of proton-rich rare isotopes.
Additionally, a high accuracy and high precision laser frequency determination
system will be installed at the existing BEam COoling and LAser spectroscopy
(BECOLA) facility at NSCL/FRIB. The improved laser system will enable studies of
nuclear structure effects such as the location of shell closures and nuclear
pairing in light mass nuclei. Collinear laser spectroscopy will be performed on
rare isotopes, and nuclear charge radii, electromagnetic moments, and nuclear
spin of neutron-deficient nuclei will be deduced from atomic hyperfine structure
and isotope shifts. Studies of proton-rich 40,41Sc in the vicinity of the proton
drip line will reveal if the charge radii of Sc isotopes keeps the decreasing
trend across the N = 20 shell closure. These measurements are important for the
global and microscopic understanding of the mechanism for the abnormal behavior
of charge radii as a function of the proton number around Ca isotopes at the N =
20 shell closure. These data will also be a critical test of a successful
Density Functional Theory model using a novel Fayans energy density functional
for the Ca chain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The saturated absorption spectrometer
will provide a means to determine the probe laser frequency to better than 1
MHz, 10 times more precise than currently achievable using the existing
wavelength meter. The greater precision will reduce the systematic errors in the
deduced isotope shifts from several percent to much less than one
percent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Experimental
Nuclear Physics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.