* 1913093
* Lubricated Immersed Boundary Method: Numerical Analysis, Benchmarking, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Thomas Fai, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2023
* USD 226,102.00

Fluid-structure interaction is common in biological problems and engineering
applications. In many cases of interest, such as red blood cell motion through
the microcirculation and the opening and closing of the heart valves, small-
scale fluid flows between structures in near-contact are important for the
overall behavior. The presence of multiple scales in these problems poses
challenges for both modeling and simulation. Whereas existing methods such as
adaptive mesh refinement use algorithmic techniques to bridge these scales and
incur significant computational costs, here the research develops an alternative
method in which the governing equations are replaced at small scales by a much
simpler asymptotic limit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop an improved version of the immersed boundary method that uses
lubrication theory to model fluid flows between structures in near contact. The
immersed boundary method is a widely used approach for modeling fluid-structure
interaction. A longstanding limitation of this method is that structures that
are in near contact tend to stick together, so that they require unphysically
large forces to separate. The lubricated immersed boundary method uses
lubrication theory as a subgrid model to overcome this difficulty of the
classical method. Because lubrication theory is exact in the limit that the
spacing between two structures goes to zero, the accuracy of the subgrid model
improves as structures come closer together. This research analyzes and
benchmarks the lubricated immersed boundary method. Specific aims include
performing a multiscale numerical analysis, developing efficient implementations
in three dimensions, and investigating higher-order accurate extensions based on
the immersed interface method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.