* 1913722
* STTR Phase I:  Scalable thermochemical conversion of carbon dioxide to commodity chemical intermediates
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* John Kuhn, CL CHEMICAL COMPANY
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR project is to chemically
recycle carbon dioxide, which would otherwise be released to the atmosphere, to
useful fuels and products thus providing a closed loop for production and
emissions for many common products. Virtually every industry uses petroleum
and/or natural gas, either through transportation or plastics (e.g., packaging),
and there is no current commercial CO2 /carbon recycling process. The current
routes for CO2 conversion are crippled by one or more of the following
challenges: (a) very low rates of CO2 conversion, (b) high temperature of
operation, (c) non-selective product formation, and (d) issues with scalability
of the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to re-
purpose CO2 from a pollutant to a feedstock for fuels and chemicals. Recent
research has achieved a proof-of-concept on reverse water-gas shift chemical
looping (RWGS-CL). Carbon monoxide (CO), a major component of synthesis gas, is
selectively produced, which can be used as the backbone to any chemical or fuel
through existing processes. Preliminary performance results and literature
findings indicate that this process operation could contribute to unprecedented
efficiencies and potential scalability within a small footprint compared to
other futuristic technologies that convert CO2. The RWGS-CL process operates at
reasonable temperatures with high CO2 conversion rates and highly selective
towards CO formation. The RWGS-CL process is thus, unique and transformative in
that it addresses all of the major challenges and paves the way for a
sustainable generation of greener hydrocarbon fuels at industrial scale. This
project aims to enable prototype construction of the technology at 100 x scale
of lab tests using formed materials (pellets) capable of operating at industrial
scale, a reactor model to capture the performance and size of the RWGS-CL unit,
and a techno-economic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.