* 1913144
* Fast Algorithm for Interface Relaxation and Efficient Computational Modeling of Molecular Binding and Unbinding
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Li-Tien Cheng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2023
* USD 325,000.00

This project develops rigorous scientific theories and powerful computational
tools to investigate the principal mechanisms by which drug and protein
molecules associate and dissociate. Often, a drug molecule moves around in a
crowded environment, and finds a spot of the surface of a protein to bind to,
stays there, and can also leave, unbinding from the protein. During such binding
and unbinding events, often repeated, both molecules constantly change their
internal atomic positions. They also interact with other molecules, particularly
the water molecules, in the surrounding environment. There are two key
scientific questions on such complex processes that are characterized by
multiple spatiotemporal scales and many-body effects. One is how stable the
drug-protein bound unit is. Such thermodynamic stability severs as a criterion
for searching drug molecules capable of binding to targeted proteins. The other
is how fast or slow the binding and unbinding can occur. Such kinetics has been
found recently in experiments and computer simulations to be critical to the
drug effectiveness and efficacy. For decades, the scientific communities have
made an enormous amount of effect, searching the quantitative answers to these
questions to guide the computer-aided drug design and discovery. A recent
assessment by the National Institutes of Health of the existing such computer
programs, however, has concluded that advanced scientific theories are needed
urgently to improve the practice. The success of this project can therefore
provide a solid theoretical foundation as well as computational algorithms for
drug design and discovery, potentially helping reduce the very high cost often
needed for laboratory experiments and speed up the process of drug discovery. In
addition, this highly interdisciplinary research project provides unique
opportunities for students at different levels to receive training at the
interface of mathematical, computational, and biological sciences, keeping our
nation's strength in scientific research in a highly competitive international
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To tackle the extreme complex problem of
molecular association and dissociation, the investigators design, implement, and
analyze a very fast binary level-set method for interface relaxation to capture
the molecular interfacial structures in the framework of an advanced,
variational molecular solvation theory. The new method combines the strength of
the threshold dynamics and the binary level-set representation, and utilizes the
locality of the underlying energy landscape, and new pixel-flipping techniques
to achieve very high efficiency. They also develop a new and hybrid
computational approach to the kinetics of interface stochastic dynamics,
coupling the interfacial energy minimization by the fast algorithm, the string
method for transition pathways, and a novel, multi-state Brownian dynamics
simulations. All these are applied specifically to investigating the molecular
binding and unbinding kinetics for which, some of the conventional methods such
as the standard Brownian dynamics simulations may fail. It is expected that this
project will advance significantly the basic research in scientific computing
and numerical analysis, particularly those of the interface dynamics and
stochastic modeling. If successful, this research can help resolve some of the
bottle-neck issues in solving very complex scientific
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.