* 1913471
* SBIR Phase I:  WeighCam: A Non-invasive Screening Tool to Detect Overweight Trucks on Roads in Real Time
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Shervin Taghavi Larigani, STL SCIENTIFIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2021
* USD 224,995.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to decrease the number of overweight trucks on the roads by
developing a financially and technically practical screening tool to detect
overweight vehicles on most roads in real-time. Overweight commercial vehicles
are a significant cause of the nation's crumbling roads and bridges besides
being a prime threat to transportation safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses the issue of effectively detecting overweight trucks on roads
using real-time video-images while neither interfering with the traffic flow nor
integrity the pavement. The proprietary system, WeighCam system, includes
proprietary electro-optical system, algorithms, and system design. It will be
easy to operate and robust in the sense that it will reliably work in most
ambient environmental conditions such as ambient luminosity changes, etc. The
purpose of this research will be to validate the basics of the system and
calibrate the measurements using known weights to deduce the system limitations
and to establish the feature sets of the Minimum Viable Product (MVP), a
necessary step to start the manufacture of a commercial prototype. The final
prototype will be a practical, autonomous, quick to install, and continuously
operating continuous system sending data in real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.