* 1913742
* Testing DAMA with the COSINE Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Reina Maruyama, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2024
* USD 793,166.00

Astrophysical observations and cosmological data have led to the unambiguous
conclusion that nearly a quarter of the Universe consists of dark matter. The
search for dark matter addresses one of the fundamental questions in particle
astrophysics. Current models predict that our galaxy is encased in a halo of
dark matter. As the Sun orbits around the Milky Way Galaxy and the Earth around
the Sun, we expect there to be an annual modulation in the flux of dark matter
that passes through the Earth. Weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) and
axions (which have been introduced to explain the smallness of the violation of
the Charge-Parity (CP) symmetry in Quantum ChromoDynamics, the theory describing
the action of the strong force) have been proposed as theoretically favored
candidates for dark matter. Despite the strong evidence for the existence of
dark matter, neither WIMPs nor axions have been conclusively detected. One
experiment, DAMA/LIBRA, claims to have directly detected the expected annual
modulation signal. Despite concerted efforts, no other experiment has detected
WIMPs. COSINE-100 was designed, built, and started taking data in 2016 to test
DAMA/LIBRA's claim of detection of dark matter and provide a definitive
resolution to the longest-standing controversy in the dark matter field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An essential component will be to engage and educate
students and postdocs in the proposed research. As a woman co-spokesperson of an
international experimental collaboration, the PI has a unique opportunity to
serve as a role model to the next generation of scientists. The program builds
on the PI's record of continued commitment to public outreach and education. The
PI strives to maintain an inclusive environment in her group and is committed to
recruiting and training future scientists from all racial and socioeconomic
backgrounds, especially those from under-represented groups. The PI and members
of her group will communicate the excitement of this science to the surrounding
communities through outreach activities, leveraging outreach programs such as
the Day of Instrumentation, Girls Science Investigations, and the Yale Pathway
to Science, organized by the Yale University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sodium
iodide detector technology was developed under the previous NSF grant, and
follows the successful deployment and operation of DM-Ice17 together with
IceCube at the South Pole. COSINE-100 uses the same target medium and detector
technology as DAMA/LIBRA. The experiment consists of 106 kg of thallium-doped
sodium-iodide crystals deployed at the Yangyang Underground Laboratory, operated
by COSINE-100 collaborators at the Center for Underground Physics of the
Institute for Basic Science in South Korea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.