* 1913729
* From Gluon Topology to Quark Chirality: Novel Phenomena in Heavy Ion Collisions
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Jinfeng Liao, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2022
* USD 269,953.00

Nuclear matter is at the heart of all visible matter in our universe. Its basic
law has been identified as a quantum field theory (known as Quantum
Chromodynamics or QCD) based on fundamental particles called quarks and gluons.
Precisely how the various forms and properties of nuclear matter arise from
these quarks and gluons remains one of the grand challenges in physics. This
project will help address this challenge by studying nuclear matter under
extreme conditions such as at super hot temperatures or in super strong magnetic
fields, which are available via high energy collider experiments. The PI will
study the topological component of QCD, characterize the properties of this
component via collider experimental data, and seek direct evidence of its
presence through a novel transport phenomenon called the Chiral Magnetic Effect.
The PI will mentor students engaged in this research at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. In addition the project will develop outreach activities
that bring current research to K-12 students as well as the general public
through a variety of local events and online platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate the non-
perturbative dynamics of Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) in its quark-gluon plasma
(QGP) phase at extremely high temperatures, such as those produced in today's
laboratory experiments at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) and the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC). The key approach is to study the properties of the
gluon topological component as well as to search for its manifestation via novel
transport phenomenon related to quark chirality. Three specific topics will be
explored. The first is to develop a statistical ensemble model of the
topological component and study how it can explain the QCD confinement
transition and quantitatively describe relevant lattice QCD data. The second is
to quantify the contributions to key transport properties of QGP from the
topological component by systematical comparison with experimental data
utilizing Beyesian inference methodology. The third is to investigate the
manifestation of gluon topology via quark chirality fluctuations which could be
experimentally probed through the Chiral Magnetic Effect and theoretically
simulated by a state-of-the-art modeling framework developed by the PI's group.
With all these combined, the project will help characterize the gluon
topological component and provide a deep understanding of the QCD non-
perturbative dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.