* 1913991
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Micro Vibration Energy Harvesters for Energy-Autonomous Internet of Things
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Ethem Aktakka, ActiveMEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 224,941.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to address the power
problem, which significantly limits the deployment and functionality of next
generation wireless sensors and internet-of-things (IoT) nodes and inhibits
their impact on energy and efficiency savings in the most needed areas of smart
manufacturing, smart transportation, and building automation. Most high-impact
IoT applications typically require miniaturization and placement of wireless
sensor nodes in hard-to-service locations in vast numbers, where the battery
replacement or electrical wiring is not practical or too costly. This research
and development effort will explore the fundamental and technological limits of
vibration energy harvesters, and development of novel micro vibration energy
harvesters with high power density, multi-axis operation capability, and wider
frequency bandwidth. These low-cost micro vibration energy harvesters aim to
enable energy-autonomous wireless sensor nodes that will open up new markets and
high-impact applications for self-powered IoT nodes, achieve energy savings and
increased efficiency in multiple industries due to enabled continuous data
gathering, reduce the ecological footprint of millions of wasted toxic
batteries, and significantly decrease the maintenance cost of industrial IoT
networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to develop a millimeter-scale vibration energy harvester
that can provide high power density, multi-axis operation capability and
sufficiently wide operation bandwidth, as a maintenance-free and low-cost
renewable power source for next-generation industrial IoT nodes. Existing
vibration energy harvesters have limited practical applications in real life, as
they suffer from large size, high-cost, low power density, high operation
frequency, and extremely narrow frequency bandwidths. Moreover, commercial
harvesters can only operate at a single vibrational axis and cannot harvest
efficiently from complex three-dimensional vibration profiles found in real-life
applications. This SBIR Phase I project will focus on novel device architectures
to achieve a high-power density in a highly compact device volume and to harvest
energy efficiently from low-amplitude vibrations along any spatial directions.
In addition, new device architectures will be investigated to obtain further
improved performance and additional functionalities. Analytical simulations and
finite element analysis will be performed to optimize device performance.
Prototypes will be fabricated via a proprietary advanced micro manufacturing
method to obtain high-quality piezoelectric thin films on silicon wafers.
Fabricated harvester prototypes will be tested at conditions simulating target
industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.