* 1913245
* STTR Phase I:  Bioparticle delivery of dsRNA: A novel pest management solution for control of Western flower thrips
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Dorith Rotenberg, AgroSpheres, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop a targeted biological pesticide for
control of the western flower thrips to reduce the impact of one of the most
economically devastating agricultural pests. Thrips are a global agricultural
pest that carry a family of viruses that can infect more than 1,000 species of
plants including a wide variety of vegetable, fruit, and nut crops, causing an
estimated $1 billion in losses each year around the world. Traditional chemical
methods for control have proven ineffective and the western flower thrips has
acquired resistance to over 30 different synthetic pesticides worldwide. The
same is true for over 500 species of insects and mites, and several billion
dollars worth of crops are lost each year due to damage caused by resistant
pests. Widespread adoption of an alternative to synthetic pesticides will
drastically reduce the indirect economic costs of pesticide use, estimated in
one study at $10B in environmental and societal costs in the United States each
year, and save up to a billion dollars in direct costs by reducing the impact of
destructive pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to
develop a novel biopesticide specifically engineered to target the western
flower thrips that can be applied to host plants through a single spray
application. In Phase I, the goal is to demonstrate proof-of-principle for using
a proprietary bioparticle engineering platform to develop the biopesticide. The
technical hurdles that will be addressed include 1) demonstrating that the
bioparticle can be ingested by thrips, 2) showing that delivery of the
biopesticide to the thrips gut is sufficient to reduce fitness, and 3)
identifying the optimal bioparticle formulation for further testing. The first
technical objective will focus on the engineering and characterization of a
variety of bioparticles that will be tested for efficacy in thrips in Technical
Objective 2. Successful completion of this project will provide a prototype
biopesticide with a demonstrated effect on the fitness of the western flower
thrips. With this prototype, the plan is to proceed to greenhouse and small
field trials to inform further product refinement prior to large scale field
testing. Successful completion of this project will not only enable the
development of a thrips biocide but will provide proof-of-concept for adapting
such bioparticle-based biopesticides to target a range of additional insect
pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.