* 1913260
* WORKSHOP: Local and Alternative Food Systems in Stressed Environments: France, May 2019 &amp; North Carolina, October 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Meredith Welch-Devine, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 15,007.00

This award supports the participation of U.S. scientists, students, and farmers
in two research-planning workshops. The goal of the future research will be to
better understand human environmental decision-making in crises contexts. The
workshops will focus on local food systems. Some researchers have argued that
small, localized systems are inefficient and environmentally harmful. Others
have found that local food systems are noteworthy for their support of social
equity, citizenship, and long-term sustainability. This workshop series is
designed to bring farmers and social scientists together to model how these
issues have played out as farmers responded to previous crises in order to plan
research to predict and improve responsiveness of local food systems to future
crises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will take a comparative approach by
focusing on southern Appalachia, in the U.S., and the southwestern region of
France. Rural landscapes in each region have important cultural value, residents
exhibit strong place-attachment, and in both areas, local food systems have seen
a recent resurgence. The first workshop will take place (May 20-24, 2019) in
Aussurucq, France; the second will take place (October 12-16,2019) in Boone,
North Carolina. The workshop agendas will include site visits with farmers in
these regions as well as meetings between farmers and scientists to model
previous behaviors and identify knowledge gaps. The future research will address
these gaps through life cycle analyses of approaches, economic and policy
analyses, and socio-cultural analyses. Findings from the workshop will be
presented in conferences and used as the basis for a grant proposal to fund the
larger-scale study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.