* 1913969
* SBIR Phase I:  Using Aerial Imagery Analysis to Manage Stress in Coffee Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Gregory Rose, Intelinair, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 11/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is significant. Based on the company's
experience with the willingness of farmers to pay for such services, the
potential commercial market for the envisioned solution for coffee alone would
amount to USD 1 billion, based on the estimated 27 million acres currently in
production around the world. The commercial potential for additional specialty
crops would exceed several times this amount. The company's agronomy team
believes that the proposed solution would result in yield improvements of the
order of 5% to 10% and a reduction in combined fertilizer and water costs in the
range of 3% to 8%. Moreover, the solution would result in higher-quality coffee
beans which would improve the commercial viability of small coffee farms in
emerging economies. This would have the potential of lifting hundreds of
thousands of sub-tropical farmers and their families out of poverty while
sustainably protecting soil and water resources. Precision agriculture
techniques developed in this project will also enable coffee producers to
address the effects of climate change by identifying destructive patterns and
prescribing effective ways to maintain or improve yield and quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to develop novel deep learning algorithms and computer vision
methods for coffee and for specialty crops in general, and thereby identify,
through analysis, signatures of critical coffee tree stress conditions. To date,
image analysis algorithms developed in academia typically focus on lab
environments or controlled research plots. The tasks outlined in this project
focus on real world coffee orchards with more demanding conditions. Challenges
from the imagery point of view include managing the effects of clouds and the
sun angle on the canopy, capturing tree foliage at an angle and identifying
individual trees. Challenges from the deep learning area include identifying
with confidence anomalous areas of stress or increasing stress for varying
coffee strains, soil and topographical conditions within the orchard using
multispectral and thermal imagery. From an agronomy standpoint, the project will
seek to assist and/or correlate the deep learning findings with soil moisture
sensors and other ground truth data. These elements will form the core of a low-
cost commercial remote sensing and alerting system that is expected to be
available to coffee-growing communities in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.