* 1913358
* SBIR Phase I:  OMT FreePlay
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* John Vito d'Antonio-Bertagnolli, OCULOMOTOR TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to develop a novel software solution to treat
convergence insufficiency (CI), a binocular vision disorder that affects 5% of
the general population, as well as 50% of patients with post concussive
syndrome. Typical symptoms of CI include double/blurry vision, headaches,
dizziness, eye stress and strain, and nausea when performing tasks close to the
face, such as reading. In addition, a childhood diagnosis of CI is correlated
with the diagnosis of an attention disorder and difficulty in school. This
project aims to build a software platform that turns any game playable in
supported virtual reality (VR) headsets into a therapeutic experience that will
treat CI. While current therapy protocols are generally effective in treating
CI, patient engagement can be particularly low in pediatric populations
especially within the home setting, due to the repetitive nature of common
therapeutic activities. By allowing pediatric patients to play any VR game of
their choosing, this project will increase engagement in the therapeutic
intervention, and permit patients to complete schoolwork without visual symptoms
sooner than with traditional therapy protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
software designed during this project is unique in both function and
implementation. Functionally, this software effectively breaks the elements of
VR that create visual comfort for binocularly normal players. To do this for any
VR game on a supported headset, this software interacts with core device
parameters, transforming any delivered content into a therapeutic experience.
This project will develop a fully functional prototype software capable of
delivering vision therapy in this novel way. Specific goals of the project
include creating software specifications, prototype development, and multiple
levels of software testing. As well, this project will evaluate the current and
future VR ecosystem to design software that is robust to future updates and is
useable on the primary dominant commercially available VR
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.