* 1913809
* Improving Problem-based Learning through Personalized Online Instruction that Promotes Student Engagement, Motivation, and Self-efficacy
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sarah Ferguson, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,993.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing instructional support tailored to the needs of
individual undergraduate students in introductory engineering courses. In
collaboration with Mercy College (a Hispanic Serving Institution), Rowan
University will examine the efficacy of combining intelligent tutoring with
narrative problem-based simulations to enhance student comprehension of key
concepts in electrical and computer engineering. The long-term objective of the
project is to develop a digital model of student-teacher classroom interactions
that address students' specific difficulties, thereby improving problem-based
learning instructional practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
personalize online problem-based learning through incorporation of intelligent,
online tutoring. In addition, the project plans to develop an artificial
intelligence-based facial recognition system to capture fluctuations in learner
emotions (e.g., confusion; calm; confidence) during the learning process. The
project will conduct research to explore the extent to which personalized,
online problem-based learning enhances students' learning and problem-solving
ability. Results of this research will provide further insights about the
effectiveness of problem-based learning, metacognition, and narrative
simulations in undergraduate education. The theoretical framework that guides
the work incorporates social cognitive learning theory. A comprehensive and
proactive plan for disseminating the results includes seminars, publications,
web and social networking presence, online educator support, and K-12 outreach.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the IUSE program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.