* 1913513
* Maximizing Returns from the CMS Experiment: Analysis of Run 2 Data and Preparation for the High Luminosity LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Daniel Claes, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

This program of research aims to better understand the Universe at the smallest
scales by probing nature's basic symmetries and their relation to the origin of
mass. The 2012 discovery of a Higgs boson serves as both the crowning
achievement of the standard model of particle physics and a hint beyond it - how
can a light Higgs boson possibly survive huge, destabilizing quantum effects
without new, undiscovered physics? Further, dark matter is known to exist from
astronomical observations; however, the particle properties of dark matter
remain shrouded in mystery. The combined activities of the University of
Nebraska at Lincoln (UNL) group address such basic questions puzzling science -
the origin of mass and the particle nature of dark matter - and have the
potential for surprising discoveries that may change the way we understand our
physical world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support for the
UNL group's work on the CMS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at
CERN, a particle physics laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland. The group has a
broad range of physics interests, with ongoing and planned measurements of Higgs
physics, top production and decay, electroweak physics, plus searches for new
phenomena. The group provides leadership to the experiment in software and
computing, and UNL operates a Tier-2 computing center for
CMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the UNL group is contributing
significantly to the upgrades of the CMS experiment for its operation in the
very high-rate collision environments foreseen in the next decade at the LHC.
Central to their efforts is the construction of parts of the Forward Pixel
Detector of the CMS Inner Tracker. This detector system is critical to the
reconstruction of many event types of special interest to the CMS program of
discovery science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UNL group leads the distinctive
Cosmic Ray Observatory Project (CROP) outreach program. High school-based
cosmic-ray research teams around Nebraska study extensive air showers with
student- built and operated detectors, and future expansion will focus on under-
served rural populations. The ongoing CROP initiative has served as a model for
similar high-school cosmic-ray efforts across the U.S., Canada, and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.