* 1913943
* SBIR Phase I:  Development Of A Sensor System For Feedback Guided Manual Ventilation With A Bag Valve Mask.
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Stephen Restaino, PNEUMICO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 248,363.00

Bag-valve masks are simple, squeezable tools for manual ventilation of patients
and are the most common manual method used in both emergencies and routine
surgical procedures. The simplicity and minimal cost of BVMs have contributed to
their widespread use and sales of approximately 13.1 million disposable
resuscitators annually in the U.S. alone. Despite the regular use of BVMs,
providers of any training level regularly deliver ineffective ventilation or
uncontrolled, inadvertent, forced over-inflation. Studies show that, while using
a standard BVM, 88.4% of trained users exceeding the recommended pressure and
73.8% exceeding the recommended volume range2 Improper ventilation for even
short periods can lead to two major complications 1) Lung injury from over-
stretching (called volutrauma); too much air and 2) Lung injury from over-
pressurization (called barotrauma); too much pressure. These conditions can lead
to life-threatening conditions as well as prolonged and expensive hospital stays
with costs approaching $170,000 (CAD) per injury. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
used in emergency situations, execution of proper BVM technique is required to
provide optimal oxygenation during CPR. Devices to monitor the depth and rate of
CPR compressions are widely available and are soon to be required in all
training centers by the AHA. However, no technologies exist to provide similar
feedback for manual ventilation. It is likely that real-time feedback can reduce
or eliminate the rate of dangerous ventilation among caregivers of all levels
and that BVM training with feedback can lead to improved skill retention. Thus,
a novel technique and complementary device have been developed to provide real
time feedback to trained and training personnel and ensure they meet guidelines
from the American Heart Association (AHA) and European Resuscitation Council
(ERC). This project is a comprehensive system development pathway composed of
three aims that will refine our sensor system and initiate studies into the
benefits of real-time feedback during BVM usage. This method utilizes a unique
sensor system that can be coupled to a bag valve mask to measure the air
pressure and volume delivered to a patient. Using these metrics for each squeeze
of the bag, this device can alert users of both excessive pressure and volume in
real time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.