* 1913626
* SBIR Phase I:  Biologic Filler for Regenerating Tissue Following Breast Conserving Surgery
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Theodore Puls, GENIPHYS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,873.00

This SBIR Phase I project will address key hurdles for commercialization of an
injectable breast tissue replacement for use immediately following breast
conserving surgery, otherwise known as lumpectomy. Surgeons using this procedure
today have limited options for predictably restoring normal breast size, shape,
and consistency following tumor removal. Because of this, many women are left
with breast deformities or must undergo multiple surgical procedures. These
issues compromise their psychological well-being and quality of life and
increase healthcare costs. With these challenges in mind, this project will
evaluate the ability of a patented, liquid, fibril-forming collagen to serve as
an injectable, breast tissue replacement. Upon injection, this liquid biopolymer
self-assembles into a physically stable and persistent natural fibrillar
scaffold, meaning it can be used to fill patient-specific tissue voids. Project
results will provide early-stage preclinical evidence of this biopolymer's
effectiveness for filling and regenerating breast tissue in a large animal
lumpectomy model. If successfully translated to the clinic, this therapy would
provide breast cancer surgeons with a much-needed regenerative breast tissue
solution. This in turn, would boost surgeons' confidence when working to achieve
complete tumor removal, improve quality of life for breast cancer survivors, and
decrease overall costs of care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The liquid collagen
polymers evaluated in this proposal preserve several natural features of the
collagen protein as it exists in the body, thus giving rise to three key
advantages. First, this biomaterial has the ability to rapidly transition from
liquid to solid, forming natural collagen-fibril scaffolds just like those in
the body's tissues. Second, it is amenable to customization and advanced
biofabrication with tailorable geometries, fibril architectures, and mechanical
properties. And finally, these scaffolds stably integrate and persist in vivo,
inducing site-appropriate tissue generation without evoking immune or
inflammatory response. This project seeks to overcome technical hurdles
associated with identifying compatible and scalable sterilization and
manufacturing processes for this unique, liquid biomaterial. Additionally,
project activities will seek to specify biopolymer formulations that support
surgeon ease-of-use, provide efficacy for breast tissue replacement, and do not
interfere with standard clinical practices (e.g. radiation and re-excision
procedures). The outcomes of this proposal will provide valuable proof-of-
concept for a viable medical-grade manufacturing process and early preclinical
validation that these collagen polymers can address breast cancer patient-
specific needs. Finally, this project will lay the foundation for this natural
collagen polymer to serve as an enabling tool for next generation personalized
regenerative medicine therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.