* 1913419
* SBIR Phase I: Tool to estimate object visibility to fish in complex aquatic environments.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Michael Mrozik, BassInSight, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2020
* USD 224,977.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop tools that will create vast amounts of water quality data
for the nation's inland, fresh waters. The data allow for direct environmental
monitoring and for validation of other remote sensing GIS techniques to measure
inland water quality. Algorithms will also be developed to use the data to allow
anglers to customize their selection of lures based on the time and location
where they are fishing. The difficulty for the angler is anticipating which
lures are most visible to the fish, because fish see differently than humans.
This project develops software tools and water quality sensors that allow
anglers to customize their fishing strategies for any type of water. The product
will ultimately recommend lures that work well for a given location based on the
properties of the water, the properties of the lures, and the visual
capabilities of fish in that environment.

The proposed project will measure the optical properties of (a) lakes and
rivers. First-generation photometers would be constructed to estimate the sub-
surface transmission and light-levels at three wavelengths and capture relevant
water quality data. The project also proposes new methods to accommodate the
selection of fluorescent pigments on lures. Algorithms will use the data to
estimate the visual contrasts as perceived by certain species of fish and
determine which lures have the highest probability of success for that species -
bass in the first instance. The novelty of this approach is that it relies on
estimating critical lighting parameters at three wavelength bands. Traditional
methods rely on spectrometers that estimate spectra with thousands of data
points and are not feasible for anglers. This project directly tests whether 3
well-spaced data points can accurately estimate lighting environments, visual
signals, and their transmission in diverse water bodies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.