* 1913380
* STTR Phase I:  Will stereoscopic 3D imaging improve brain aneurysm diagnosis?
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* David Douglas, D3D TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2020
* USD 157,500.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to focus on the challenges neuroradiologists and
neurosurgeons experience when visualizing complex brain aneurysms. Brain
aneurysms, which occur in 2-3% of the population, are balloon-like dilations of
a blood vessel supplying the brain which may rupture and result in severe
headaches, paralysis, coma and death. Currently, radiologists viewing Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans use a 'slice-by-slice' approach to diagnose brain
aneurysms and unfortunately with this approach, nearly one in ten brain
aneurysms will be missed. Technologies that enhance perceptual interpretation of
images will increase diagnostic accuracy. This NSF project aims to create a
physiologically accurate 3D cognitive experience for the radiologist with the
goal of increasing diagnostic accuracy of brain aneurysms. The broader
significance is the application to other areas of medicine including heart
imaging, cancer imaging and trauma, which account for the #1, #2 and #3 most
common causes of death in the U.S. The proposed research is rooted in a small US
based company and meets the NSF?s mission to advance the national health,
prosperity, and welfare. The accurate 3D cognitive experience developed for
medicine meets NSF?s mission of progress of science, but has potential
commercial impact in engineering, industry and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project aims to create a
physiologically accurate 3D cognitive experience for the neuroradiologist and
neurosurgeon wherein the user can view exactly the structures of interest
unhindered by other overlying tissues. This project aims to overcome the
significant limitations of current imaging techniques. A typical magnetic
resonance angiography (MRA) exam includes hundreds of cross-sectional slices.
Conventional slice-by-slice viewing is arduous because the viewer has to sift
through a series of image slices to mentally reconstruct the volumetric
information relevant for detecting abnormalities. Volume rendering of a 3D image
on 2D monitors is significantly limited due to overlap of structures in the
foreground causing suboptimal visualization of deeper structures. Furthermore,
volume rendering on 2D monitors does not actually recapitulate the physiologic
eye-brain capture of a 3D image. The goal of this project is to achieve higher
sensitivity, higher specificity and improved morphologic analysis using a
physiologically accurate 3D cognitive experience compared to conventional
viewing methods. Volunteer neuroradiology fellow participants will review MRA
examinations using conventional methods and the physiologically accurate 3D
experience developed in this NSF grant. Key outcomes of this project including
diagnostic accuracy, time-to-detection, aneurysm conspicuity and aneurysm
morphology will be assessed using the two techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.