* 1913010
* Finite Volume Analysis of Relativistic Field Theories Using Lattice Regularization
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Rajamani Narayanan, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2024
* USD 240,287.00

Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD) is a theory that describes one of the fundamental
interactions in nature, namely, strong interactions. The fundamental degrees of
freedom are quarks (particles) and gluons (force mediators). Gauge fields
(gluons) coupled to massless fermions (quarks) have no free parameters and they
have no intrinsic scale. Depending on the nature of the gauge group and the
fermionic content, these theories fall into two categories upon quantization:
One that maintains scale invariance and contains only massless excitations and
one that breaks scale invariance and produces a rich spectrum of massive
excitations. Whether the quantum theory is scale invariant or not, it is always
strongly interacting and a non-perturbative formalism is necessary to study why
some theories are scale invariant and the others are not. It is also necessary
to study the flow from one theory to another and try to understand how a scale
emerges. The PI will extract properties of theories in both classes (scale
invariant and scale breaking) and study the flow of a scale invariant theory to
a theory that breaks scale invariance. This will enable us to understand the
emergence of the fundamental scale in strong
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lattice formalism of gauge fields coupled to
massless fermions is a well tested approach to the extraction of the fundamental
non-perturbative properties of these theories. Theories that break scale
invariance have been studied in great detail using this method. The PI will use
the lattice formalism and study potentially scale invariant theories in a finite
periodic box. The size of the box sets an external scale and the PI will be able
to extract the scale invariant properties of a theory by studying the asymptotic
behavior as a function of the external scale. By fixing the gauge group and
varying the number of fermion flavors by one unit around a critical number of
fermion flavors the PI will start with one theory (larger number of fermion
flavors) and add a mass term for one of the fermion flavors. By varying the mass
parameter from zero to infinity, the PI will be able to flow between two
theories where both of them are scale invariant at the classical level but one
(fewer number of fermion flavors) breaks the scale invariance at the quantum
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.