* 1913261
* Electron Scattering and Neutrino Scattering from Light Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Sabine Jeschonnek, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

The recent discovery of neutrino oscillations -- the change of neutrinos from
one type to another -- has established that neutrinos have mass. This remarkable
result has led to a lot of new questions about neutrinos and their interactions.
The next-generation neutrino experiments seek to understand neutrinos in greater
detail and a precise understanding of neutrino-nucleus reactions is necessary to
plan and interpret these experiments. These reactions are very similar to
electron-nucleus reactions that the PI has investigated successfully in the
past. In this project, the PI will apply the approach developed for electron-
nucleus scattering to the neutrino experiments. Beside their role in answering
questions about the neutrinos themselves, neutrino-nucleus reactions reactions
have the potential to reveal more information about light nuclei, in particular
about the strangeness content of their building blocks, protons and neutrons.
The PI will refine the calculation of electron and neutrino scattering in order
to identify the most promising future experiments. This project will provide
theoretical support to both neutrino and electron scattering experiments
performed in the US. The PI will continue to do outreach in rural northwestern
Ohio and involve interested undergraduate students in this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron scattering from light nuclei provides
insights on the structure of the nuclear ground state. The PI and her
collaborators have developed a high precision description of electron-deuteron
scattering. All elements of the electron scattering reaction mechanism are
necessary to describe neutrino scattering reactions on the same nuclei. There
are many exciting neutrino scattering experiments that are running now or will
run in the near future. In order to correctly interpret the neutrino data, a
precise understanding of the nuclear physics involved is necessary. The current
state of theory in the event generators used by experimental groups is fairly
basic. The PI will adapt the knowledge of the electron scattering reaction
mechanism to calculate the neutrino scattering. She will investigate neutral
current neutrino scattering from the deuteron. The differential cross section
depends on the strangeness content of the nucleons. Using a deuteron target
allows one to access the information contained in the neutron. The PI will
investigate the sensitivity to the three relevant parameters describing the
strangeness content of the nucleon, and will discuss ways to put a theoretical
error bar on these values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.