* 1913257
* RUI:Probing Subatomic Physics via Lepton Interactions
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Maria Niculescu, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2023
* USD 280,000.00

The James Madison University Particle and Nuclear Physics (JMU-PNP) group's
activities are aimed at developing a three dimensional picture of the nucleon in
order to get a glimpse of the interacting quarks within a proton or neutron.
Given the small size of a nucleon, roughly a millionth of a billionth of a
meter, this is not a trivial task. The field requires specialized detectors,
techniques, and software. The JMU-PNP group has an established track record in
these areas. Through immersion in state of the art research in Intermediate
Energy Nuclear Physics the PIs will provide an outstanding educational
experience for undergraduate students at JMU. Working on the hardware, software,
and big data challenges associated with this research constitutes an excellent
teaching opportunity for undergraduate students and promotes science and
education beyond the university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The JMU group is involved
in experiments in Halls A, B, and C at Jefferson National Laboratory (JLAB).
They are participating in planning, data taking and data analysis for
experiments from the 12 GeV era. The foci of this research program will be: 1.)
publishing the results of experiment E12-10-002 (one of the Hall C commissioning
experiments) where the JMU group has taken the lead in the data analysis, 2.)
planning and running of experiment E12-06-117 in Hall B, and 3.) the
commissioning and running of the SuperBigBite spectrometer in Hall A. The JMU-
PNP group will also participate in the Fermilab g-2 experiment, which holds the
promise of uncovering physics beyond the Standard Model.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The members of the JMU-PNP group will continue their
instrumentation R&amp;D work which includes designing and building voltage
dividers and PMT testing for the SuperBigBite spectrometer in Hall A. They will
also participate in developing a Hermetic Compact Photon Source for the
experiments in Halls C&amp;D at JLAB&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.