* 1913607
* WoU-MMA: IceCube Data Analysis in the U.S.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Francis Halzen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2023
* USD 10,598,850.00

This award provides funding for U.S. scientists to perform the scientific
analysis of data taken with the IceCube Neutrino Observatory (ICNO) located at
the U.S. Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station. The ICNO transformed one cubic
kilometer of natural ice (at the depth from 1.4 to 2.4 km) into a giant
Cherenkov emission detector, thus creating the world's largest neutrino detector
above energies of approximately 10 GeV. Since its completion in 2010, the ICNO
has detected neutrinos with energies spanning more than six orders of magnitude,
from 10 GeV to beyond 5 PeV for the first time. (GeV = one billion electron
volts; TeV = one trillion electron volts; and PeV = one quadrillion electron
volts.) In 2017, the ICNO detected a neutrino with an energy of 290 TeV and its
origin was pinpointed (again for the first time) to a blazar at a distance of
about 3.5 million light years. This detection triggered an extensive campaign
involving some twenty space- and ground-based telescopes that launched a new era
in multi-messenger detection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mystique of the South
Pole environment and the compelling science of IceCube are an alluring mix.
Besides its extensive coverage in newspapers and publications popularizing
science, IceCube has a significant presence on social media and the World Wide
Web. In the next three years, focused projects include the continued development
of an online video game, an activity for Zooniverse, and content for their
successful high school MasterClasses. These activities will also contribute to
the training of the next generation of scientists by integrating graduate and
undergraduate education with the IceCube technology development, astrophysical
observations, and scientific analyses of the ICNO data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
U.S. groups have established a solid and successful record of analyzing data
from IceCube. This award will enable a unified analysis program which will
maximize the impact of increasingly interconnected efforts. The synthesis of
information from multiple astrophysical messengers is now providing a powerful
new tool for probing the Universe. The highest energy messengers so far detected
from the Universe are cosmic rays: high energy nuclei that are likely mostly
protons. We do not yet know where or how they are accelerated to these extreme
energies, but with the observation of a distant blazar in coincidence with the
direction and time of a very high energy muon neutrino, neutrinos have now
provided the first breakthrough in the resolution of this puzzle. The results
reveal neutrinos as a key component of future multimessenger studies of the
highest energy radiation reaching us from space. Thus, this award addresses and
advances the science objectives and goals of the NSF's "Windows on the Universe:
The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.