* 1913654
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of Bacteriophage Qbeta and Mutants as Carriers for Next Generation Vaccines
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Herbert Kavunja, IASO THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to develop an anti-cancer vaccine. A successful
vaccine against cancer can potentially revolutionize cancer treatment and
prevention by providing durable protection to patients and preventing relapse,
without the harmful side effects commonly associated with chemo- and radiation-
therapies. One of the major challenges in anti-cancer vaccine development is the
low immunogenicity of cancer antigens, in particular tumor associated
carbohydrate antigens. In order to overcome this, in this project, a new carrier
system based on bacteriophage Qbeta will be developed. A representative
carbohydrate antigen GD2 will be linked with bacteriophage Qbeta, which can
elicit superior titers of antibodies that can kill cancer cells. Successful
commercial development of such vaccines will greatly benefit cancer patients not
only in the US, but also throughout the world. In addition to cancer vaccines,
the bacteriophage Qbeta based carrier is a new platform technology to elicit
powerful antibody responses. Biotechnological companies interested in vaccine
development can adapt Qbeta as the carrier to target infectious diseases and
chronic diseases. Furthermore, the Qbeta platform can provide an excellent
starting point for the generation of monoclonal antibodies, which are among the
top agents developed for therapeutics and diagnostics. Thus, the availability of
a superior carrier can potentially address a wide range of biomedical needs.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to design new bacteriophage Qbeta based
carriers for next generation vaccines. Vaccines have had tremendous impacts on
public health. Traditional vaccines commonly incorporate attenuated or killed
bacteria or viruses as immunogens. With the enhanced requirements on safety, the
field is focusing more on well-defined subunits as epitopes for vaccine design.
As subunits tend to have lower immunogenicity, immunogenic carriers are critical
to deliver the desired antigen to the immune system and to enhance the immune
responses. However, there are only a few carriers available that have been
validated in clinical studies. The limited choices of carriers can significantly
reduce vaccine efficacy due to interferences from anti- carrier antibodies. This
project develops a new class of immunogenic carrier based on bacteriophage Qbeta
capable of eliciting superior levels of IgG antibodies to the target antigen
compared to gold standard carrier proteins. Novel mutants of Qbeta will become
available to elicit high levels of IgG antibodies against the target antigen.
The utility of the new Qbeta carrier will be demonstrated in delivering a tumor
associated carbohydrate antigen, i.e., ganglioside GD2 derivative, to induce
potent anti-cancer IgG antibodies. When successful, the GD2 based vaccine will
be a quantum leap for the field as it will be the first ever carbohydrate based
anticancer vaccine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.