* 1913003
* Eighteenth Exotic Beam Summer School at ORNL June 23-29, 2019
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Christopher Wrede, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* James Thomas
* 05/31/2020
* USD 5,000.00

This award provides support for students to participate in the Eighteenth Summer
School on Exotic Beam (EBSS) Physics at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, June
23 - 29, 2019. The school is designed for graduate students, senior
undergraduate students who are actively involved in research and postdocs
(within 2 years of their degree). The school will consist of morning lectures
and hands-on activities in the afternoons. Students will also have an
opportunity to present their research. The aim of the summer school is to
educate the next generation of scientists who will drive the research at the
Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) when it comes online and other existing
rare isotope facilities. In years to come, substantial progress in low-energy
nuclear physics will have a broad impact on society, ranging from our
understanding of the origin of the elements to the enhancement of national
security.

Previous sessions of these summer schools have had broad participation of under-
represented groups in physics, with approximately 30% of the participants of the
previous four summer schools being female. The organizers of the Eighteenth EBSS
will continue the use of accepted best practices to increase diversity and have
an inclusive summer school

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.