* 1913552
* WoU-MMA: Operations of VERITAS in the Epoch 2019 to 2022
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Wystan Benbow, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Darren Grant
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,350,000.00

Gamma rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe, can be
used to test fundamental physics, and play a key role in multi-messenger
astrophysics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging Telescope Array System
(VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is a ground-based observatory designed
to study high energy gamma rays. VERITAS has unique capabilities, providing high
sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic and extragalactic sources.
This award provides funding to continue VERITAS operations. During this time the
Observatory will implement a program designed to address key science drivers in
Galactic and extragalactic physics, as well as themes in multi-messenger and
time-domain astrophysics. This award also provides resources to initially
operate a novel prototype telescope co-located with VERITAS and will be used to
verify its performance and optimize its final design. This prototype is intended
for use in the next-generation gamma-ray observatory, the Cherenkov Telescope
Array (CTA). This award will also support the VERITAS collaboration efforts to
engage the public in science. These include collaboration with the Whipple
Observatory Visitors Center to promote VERITAS science to the public, other
educators, museum professionals and the wider community. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS is an array of four 12-meter atmospheric-Cherenkov
telescopes. VERITAS seeks both to identify new sources of high energy gamma rays
and to perform in-depth studies of the known sources to better understand their
underlying fundamental processes. The VERITAS Galactic catalog includes
supernova remnants, pulsars, binary systems, the Galactic Center and sources
whose classification is unknown. VERITAS's extragalactic catalog includes active
galactic nuclei, radio galaxies, and starburst galaxies. VERITAS multi-messenger
programs include searches for transient emission from sources associated with
IceCube neutrino events, gamma-ray bursts and gravitational wave signals. Beyond
the source physics, VERITAS studies address questions related to dark matter,
cosmic-ray origin and acceleration, and cosmology, among others. This work
directly addresses the goals of NSF's "Windows on the Universe: The Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.