* 1913640
* SBIR Phase I:  Post-CMOS Ionic Liquid Electrochemical Gas Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Yue Huang, LABSYS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2020
* USD 245,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is the development of accurate, fast, miniaturized and low-cost
gas sensors that are suitable for integration into internet of things (IoT)
devices. Successful commercial implementation of the proposed sensors would
broadly benefit society. IoT devices incorporating those sensors such as
smartphones and wearables can directly help 10 million asthma patients in the US
and billions of air pollutant vulnerable people worldwide. These devices enhance
safety by detecting dangerous conditions such as a gas leak or gas build-up in a
utility, industrial plant or transportation facility. Sharing information across
networks of IoT devices provides more accurate temporal and spatial gas
information, promoting public safety by making the information available to
emergency response and regulatory enforcement personnel. The competitive
advantages of the proposed sensor over other gas sensor technologies can be
transformed into commercial success by filling the market vacancy into
previously inaccessible devices like smartphones. Resulting project activities
would also benefit science, education and local communities by advancing the
research frontier on electrochemistry and nurturing cross-disciplinary
entrepreneurship with IoT applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project brings together state-of-the-art microfabrication methods and the most
recent developments of electrochemical gas sensing technology to reinvent the
traditional electrochemical gas sensor. The Phase I feasibility research focuses
on overcoming the unmet challenges of electrochemical gas sensor miniaturization
and liquid electrolyte handling in microfabrication processes. An innovative
microfabricated structure is proposed using semiconductor-compatible
manufacturing processes. Sensor stability is proposed to be studied in the
context of the electrode-electrolyte interface, a not well understood area. The
proposed microfabricated structures bring a new quantitative perspective to the
electrode-electrolyte interface study and may generate new knowledge on
fundamentals to help improve sensor performance. The proposed research activity
is expected to achieve a carbon monoxide sensor of 2x2x0.5mm form factor that
consumes sub micro amps of current, demonstrated by an IoT sensor network
platform. In Phase II, sensors of more gases, including ozone, nitric oxide,
methane, etc. will be implemented on a complementary metal oxide semiconductor
(CMOS) integrated circuit (IC) containing potentiostats and a data converter
through post-CMOS microfabrication processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.