* 1913957
* Precision Studies in Subatomic Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Dinko Pocanic, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

This award supports a program of experimental research to explore the limits of
our knowledge of certain subatomic particles, and of their interactions at the
smallest length scale. The project investigates three systems: the pi meson, the
muon (a more massive "cousin" of the electron), and the neutron, focusing on the
intrinsic low-energy properties of each of them. Those properties are sensitive
to some of the basic components of the Standard Model, which describes the
number and basic characteristics of the known elementary particles. Determining
these properties thus has the potential to uncover new physics beyond the
Standard Model. The project aims to advance basic science in nuclear and
elementary particle physics, contribute to building the nation's STEM talent by
educating members of the new generation of the STEM workforce, while keeping in
focus its diversity and tapping the broadest available talent pool, and,
finally, to develop new tools in fundamental research with possible broader
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research continues an ongoing
program of study of the electroweak and strong interactions at low energies. The
immediate goals of the project are: (a) assembly and commissioning of the
apparatus for Nab, a program of precise measurements of the neutron beta decay
parameters at the Spallation Neutron Source (SNS); (b) conclusion of the data
analysis for the PEN experiment, a precise measurement of the electronic and
radiative electronic rare decays of the pion (pi-e2 and pi-e2g), completed at
the Paul Scherrer Institute (PSI); and as the work on PEN nears completion,
focus will move to (c) the new precise measurement of the muon gyromagnetic
ratio, the muon g-2 experiment at Fermilab. Nab is a highly rate unpolarized
measurement of the electron-antineutrino correlation parameter "a" with accuracy
of a few parts in 1000, and the first measurement of the neutron decay parameter
"b", the Fierz interference term. Nab aims to resolve the persistent
inconsistencies in the determination of the nucleon axial vector form factor
and, consequently, of the Vud term in the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa quark mixing
matrix, and to provide new limits on possible extensions of the Standard Model,
such as left-right symmetric models, leptoquarks, etc., by exploiting the unique
advantages of neutron decay, one of the most basic and theoretically best
understood processes in nuclear physics. The goal of PEN is to reach the
precision of 5 parts in 10,000 for the branching ratio of the electronic decay
of the pion, which is the most accurate experimental test of lepton universality
(LU) available. At present, precision of the pi-e2 decay measurements lags
behind the SM theoretical predictions by more than an order of magnitude. A
number of physics scenarios outside the SM would lead to LU violation. LU, and
lepton properties in general, carry added significance due to developments in
neutrino physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.