* 1913170
* Nuclear Physics Experiments with the Electro-weak Probe
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paul King, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 514,000.00

The medium-energy nuclear experimental program planned by the Ohio University
group aims to answer the questions: "How does subatomic matter organize itself
inside a proton or neutron" and "Are the fundamental interactions relating to
the structure of proton or neutron fully understood". Both questions are central
to nuclear physics and are discussed in the 2013 report of the National Research
Council on the Assessment of and Outlook for Nuclear Physics. Specifically, the
PI's research focuses on the study of the internal structure of protons and
neutrons. This structure is governed by the strong force, which is one of the
four fundamental forces of Nature. The PIs will study the limits of our
understanding of these four forces by looking for physics beyond the Standard
Model of particle physics. They will work with an electron beam colliding with a
neutron target at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab). The
research will be performed by two graduate students, two undergraduate students,
and the PIs. The broader impacts of the program are multifold, including
training the next generation of scientists, raising the profile of minority
scientists (especially mentoring women in STEM) and engaging the public through
STEM education for High School students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roche is a co-
spokesperson of two JLab experiments dedicated to the study of the internal
structure of the proton within the Generalized Parton Distributions framework.
The group will finish the analysis of the Deeply Virtual Compton Scattering
(DVCS) experiment in Hall A and prepare for data-taking of a second generation
of DVCS experiments in Hall C. King is a leader of the data acquisition and
software work for Parity Violating experiments searching for physics beyond the
Standard Model. King will continue to coordinate the analysis efforts of the
QWEAK collaboration leading to the publication of several papers. Under his
leadership, members of the group will take and analyze data for the PREXII/CREX
experiments that will start data in the summer of
2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.