* 1913881
* SBIR Phase I:  CMOS-Integration of Isolated AC/DC conversion with Integrated Powerline Communication
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2021
* Saroj Rout, Boston Microtechnology LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 11/30/2021
* USD 224,631.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it will
revolutionize AC-DC convertors that are present in nearly all existing and
future residential and commercial electronic devices. Reduced convertor
complexity and increased power efficiency will result in extreme cost savings
for both the manufacturers of these devices as well as the end consumers,
enabling adoption to all corners of society. This dramatically different
integrated convertor will also bring powerline communications into these
electronic devices, a game changer that will enable electronics developers to
add intelligence to their products across numerous markets such as home and
office IoT devices, AC powered medium-wattage (~5W) electronics, power-over-
ethernet, and smart LED lighting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create an alternative integrated
AC-DC converter architecture. Existing converters have numerous bulky,
expensive, and unreliable discrete magnetic components that will be replaced
with this integrated circuit (IC) based solution. The result of this project
will be a reduced footprint, reduced BOM count, efficient converter for medium
wattage (~5W) electronic loads. This project will additionally support low
wattage loads (&lt;1W) with an even smaller footprint and even lower BOM count,
showcasing the scalability of this technology which is not an option with
existing fly-back AC-DC convertor solutions. Validation of the Phase I IC-based
converter performance will provide a foundation for Phase II, and incorporation
into powerline communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.