* 1913005
* RUI: Relativistic Heavy-Ion Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* George Moschelli, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 179,997.00

Relativistic nuclear collision experiments explore interactions of quarks and
gluons, the elementary particles that feel the strong nuclear force. Since the
strong force is much stronger than the electromagnetic force, improving our
understanding could drive the future frontiers of technology. The Relativistic
Heavy-Ion Collider (RHIC) and the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) collide nuclei
together at nearly the speed of light to create a hot and dense soup of quarks
and gluons called quark-gluon plasma (QGP). Determining characteristic
properties of QGP, like its viscosity or the time it takes to reach equilibrium,
is an important way to constrain theories of the strong force. The leading
theoretical calculations assume that the strong force rapidly drives the QGP
toward equilibrium, but if this is not true in the experimental systems there
will be a misinterpretation of the measured characteristic properties. This
project focuses on theoretical methods for modeling the expansion and cooling of
QGP, determining if QGP reaches an equilibrium state, and investigating how the
interplay of expansion and equilibration will effect measurements. This project
has strong emphasis on undergraduate education, and since most physics
undergraduates will find careers outside of science, they will apply this
education in uncountably many roles in society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much
interpretation that the medium produced in nuclear collisions is QGP results
from the agreement of hydrodynamic models with experimental data. As
experimental measurements improve, theories need to include deeper and more
detailed physics. Moreover, hydrodynamic models use equations of state emerging
from Quantum Chromodynamics calculations of locally equilibrated matter. If the
medium is not actually in local equilibrium, then the properties that are
inferred by hydrodynamics are not necessarily those of QGP. This project will
address these issues by developing theoretical methods of hydrodynamics and
kinetic theory to include stochastic effects from local and non-local noise and
particle jets. Objectives include (1) deriving evolution equations for two-
particle correlation observables that highlight the behaviors of partially
equilibrated collision events, (2) investigating the influence of partial
equilibration on small systems and Beam Energy Scan collision events at RHIC,
(3) investigating how jet interactions could produce medium fluctuations and
final state correlations that are distinguishable from those described by
initial state or thermal sources, and (4) investigating new observables that
distinguish the effects of different physical sources of correlations. This work
will establish the first ever active physics research program at Lawrence
Technological University and integrate this research activity into undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.