* 1914505
* Conforma Field Theory and Stringy Geometry
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Ilarion Melnikov, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 132,602.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Ilarion V. Melnikov at
James Madison University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Field Theory is a
powerful mathematical framework that bears on almost every aspect of
contemporary physics. These include the spectacularly successful Standard Model
of Particle Interactions, the quantum phenomena in exotic materials that hold
out great promise for new technologies such as quantum computing or energy
storage and transfer, as well as theories that aim to uncover the fundamental
laws of nature, such as String Theory. There has been tremendous progress in
Quantum Field Theory over the past thirty years, and many questions that seemed
intractable have been given precise and incisive answers. This project will
build on those results by tackling a number of timely questions in Quantum Field
Theory within realms where many of the standard tools are misleading or
inapplicable. The project will also address questions in two-dimensional Quantum
Field Theory, relevant both for the physics of exotic two-dimensional materials
and for the emergent geometry of spacetime in String Theory. As a result,
research in this area advances the national interest by promoting the progress
of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. This project will also have significant
broader impacts. Crucially, it will involve undergraduate researchers, who will
be given a unique opportunity to engage in theoretical physics research and have
early exposure to the mathematical and physical ideas at the forefront of
current explorations. This research will also be interdisciplinary, bringing
together collaborations of physicists and mathematicians, and it will be
presented in public lectures to convey the exciting progress in and enthusiasm
for research in theoretical physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically,
Professor Melnikov's work will explore foundational questions in conformal field
theory and geometry in two-dimensional quantum field theory relevant to string
compactification. In this setting powerful symmetries and constraints from
spacetime geometry will help to give precise quantitative insights into strongly
coupled quantum field theory and string propagation in non-trivial spacetimes.
The project will address three concrete problems: (i) the characterization of
obstructions to marginal deformations of supersymmetric conformal field theories
and their relation to spacetime physics of the heterotic string; (ii) the
identification of marginal deformations of conformal theories with local
operators in asymptotically free gauge theories that reduce to the conformal
theory in the low-energy limit; and (iii) the discovery of new conformal
theories that enlarge the landscape of string vacua. It will bear on long-
standing issues in stringy geometry and the mathematics and physics of (0,2)
mirror symmetry --- a significant generalization of the mirror correspondence.
The concrete lessons learned will also have wider applicability in low-
dimensional quantum field theory at strong coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.