* 1914793
* Collaborative Research: Extending Inquiry-Oriented Linear Algebra
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Christine Andrews-Larson, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2024
* USD 149,947.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving student learning in linear algebra. To accomplish
this goal, the project will create research-based teaching and instructor
support materials for linear algebra. This project is a collaboration between
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Florida State University,
Arizona State University, and Clayton State University. It aligns with national
calls to engage students in learning through inquiry. To this end, it intends to
help students learn mathematics by engaging in mathematical discussions,
developing and testing conjectures, and explaining and justifying their
thinking. The project has four main goals: (i) create four new units that
integrate with and complement existing Inquiry-Oriented Linear Algebra
materials; (ii) create instructional support materials for the four new units;
(iii) contribute new knowledge through empirical research about student
reasoning and effective inquiry-oriented instructional practices in linear
algebra; and (iv) foster inquiry-oriented instructional practices in
undergraduate mathematics. The two broad research questions for the project are:
(i) What mathematical conceptions do students develop through their engagement
with the tasks? (ii) What instructional moves facilitate student learning in
this setting? The project has the potential to advance knowledge about and
capacity for using inquiry-oriented approaches to improve undergraduate
instruction in mathematics, particularly linear algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish its goals, the project will use a Design Research Cycle comprised of
phases of Task Design, Paired Teaching Experiments (Steffe &amp; Thompson,
2000), Classroom Teaching Experiments (Cobb, 2000), Online Working Groups
(Fortune, Keene, &amp; Hall, 2017), and Website Development. The project will
extend the current Inquiry-Oriented Linear Algebra materials to include an
entire introductory linear algebra course, providing a comprehensive set of
supports to help instructors adopt an inquiry-oriented approach to teaching
linear algebra. By focusing on new instructors and settings, the project has the
potential to extend the impact of active learning and inquiry-oriented teaching
to a larger number of students and institutions. Data to address the research
questions will be collected from at least twelve institutions that vary in
geographic location, institution type, size, and student demographics, thus
enriching the diversity of the research population. Resources developed by the
project and its research results will be disseminated through websites,
workshops, and publications in both research and practitioner journals within
mathematics and mathematics education. In addition, the project's consideration
of and adherence to research recommendations regarding equity and access will
promote and advance inquiry-oriented, equitable teaching practices. This work
has the potential to benefit society by improving undergraduate mathematics
instruction and extending the use of inquiry-oriented teaching. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.