* 1914249
* SBIR Phase I:  Swarm 3D Printing and Assembly for Autonomous Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Zachary Hyden, AMBOTS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a swarm 3D printing and assembly
(SPA) platform via the cooperation of multiple 3D printers and assembly robots.
The SPA platform provides a new approach for faster and affordable large-size
printing with multiple materials. It addresses several major barriers (e.g.,
limited printing capability and scalability, relatively high cost) for the
adoption of 3D printing for business or personal use and provides commercial
opportunities in different industries, such as architecture and construction.
The ultimate vision of the project is to develop a model of a generic digital
factory with autonomous mobile robots. This factory model can be replicated in
communities around the world to create a network of smart factories as a digital
manufacturing infrastructure such that on-demand, customized manufacturing
becomes affordable. Similar to how the infrastructure of the electricity grid
and the Internet transformed society, this envisioned digital manufacturing
infrastructure will make it easier and more economical for product designers and
entrepreneurs to bring new products to market without being discouraged by the
complexity and cost of production and supply chain
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project aims to expand current 3D printing capabilities with a swarm 3D
printing and assembly platform (SPA). SPA synergistically integrates 3D printing
techniques with swarm robotics, thus effectively addressing the issues
pertaining to print time, print cost and print quality - the three objectives
that current 3D printing technologies cannot simultaneously achieve. The primary
intellectual merit of this project lies in a new approach to realizing
cooperative 3D printing and manufacturing between multiple independent 3D
printers and robots, which provides a modular and reconfigurable digital
manufacturing platform. In this project, we propose a new hardware platform
based on a novel mobile 3D printer with a Selective Compliance Assembly Robot
Arm (SCARA) and a new software to coordinate multiple mobile 3D printers and
assembly robots. This enables multi-color and multi-material printing, as well
as integration of pre-manufactured components into print jobs. The anticipated
technical outcome is an integrated SPA system that is capable of printing large-
scale objects while assuring print quality comparable to current small-scale
commercial 3D printers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.