* 1914199
* Collaborative Research: HAYSTAC Sub-Quantum
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Karl van Bibber, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2022
* USD 486,240.00

All astrophysical and cosmological data now point convincingly to a large
component of Cold Dark Matter in the Universe, whose presence we only infer
gravitationally. A well-motivated candidate for Dark Matter is a light axion.
Axions have been introduced to explain the smallness of the violation of the
Charge-Parity (CP) symmetry in Quantum ChromoDynamics, the theory describing the
action of the strong force. Dark matter axions may be detected through their
conversion into a narrow Radio Frequency (RF) signal in a microwave-cavity
resonator permeated by a magnetic field. This Yale-Berkeley-Colorado
collaboration came together to design, build and operate an advanced technology
experiment, HAYSTAC, to serve both as an innovation test-bed to develop new
cavity designs and quantum-limited photon detection schemes, and as a pathfinder
to take first data in the 10 - 50 micro-eV mass range, well above all previous
such searches for axions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;R&amp;D on superconducting thin-
films, and sub-quantum-limited photon detection will certainly produce
unanticipated spin-offs, just as the NSF-supported development of the Microstrip
SQUID Amplifier for axions did in the quantum information world. HAYSTAC has
already proven to be a great attractor for young talent, more than half being
women; this award can only be expected to extend this record. In addition, it is
planned to establish a rotating exhibit on dark-sector science at the San
Francisco Exploratorium utilizing prototypes and artifacts from many of the
historic dark sector and cosmic microwave background
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Short of finding the axion, HAYSTAC has been
extraordinarily successful. During the past three-year period, the experiment
has achieved essentially quantum-limited operation (no other experiment has come
within an order of magnitude). In preparation for Phase II, Berkeley has
designed and built a microwave cavity with a high figure of merit for the 6 - 12
GHz range (~ 25 - 50 micro-eV). Colorado has designed, built and characterized a
squeezed-vacuum state receiver, now being commissioned in HAYSTAC - it will be
the first-ever sub-quantum receiver for a dark-matter experiment, and with LIGO
the first squeezed-state receivers for data production in the world of
fundamental physics. Furthermore, the group will produce a first cavity
prototype incorporating planar thin-films of NbTiN, a Type-II superconductor, to
achieve a boost in quality factor Q by an order of magnitude, a gain that would
map directly into mass scan rate. Each of these innovations dramatically
enhances the discovery potential of HAYSTAC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.