* 1914539
* Nanoscale investigations of water-solid interfaces for filtration applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Elisa Riedo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2022
* USD 225,247.00

Proposal Number: 1604504, PI: Riedo, E.&lt;br/&gt;Title: Nanoscale
investigations of water-solid interfaces for filtration applications &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Widely available clean water is one of the greatest current and
future global challenges. Water is essential for life and it is a key-factor in
many technological and biological processes. This research, which focuses on
interfacial/confined water flow, will have a direct impact not only in
separation and water filtration processes but also in understanding lubrication
processes, membrane hydration in fuel cells, and the molecular interaction of
water with cell membranes and in biological pores. This project will produce
fundamental understanding of the nanoscale physics and chemistry of the
interface between aqueous solutions and solid surfaces for the purpose of
developing new desalinization systems based on nanoporous membranes. A critical
knowledge gap in using nanoscale materials, is the understanding of the solid-
liquid interactions at the nanoscale, which differ from those of the bulk phase.
New models of fluid transport at the nanoscale are expected to emerge from this
research. The broader impacts of this project include educational activities,
which will take place at the Advanced Science Research Center (ASRC), which is a
brand new multi-disciplinary center in NYC. Collaborations between the ASRC,
CUNY colleges, and Columbia University are at the core of this center, whose
goal is to support scholarship and student learning at multiple
levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Membranes and porous materials with pore size in
the sub-nanometer scale are important for separation processes, such as water
desalination. The project's long-term goal is to generate novel nanoporous
membranes based on layered materials such as those based on graphene oxide,
graphene, boron nitride, and molybdenum disulfide. The project will combine the
use of advanced scanning probe microscopy methods of model aqueous solutions and
model nanoporous membranes with molecular dynamics computer simulations to
determine how the properties of aqueous solutions, e.g. ion concentration, ion
specificity, presence of co-solvents and other solutes, and the complexity of
the interfacial surface, e.g. degree of confinement, functional groups,
chemistry, heterogeneity, presence of electric fields, influence the structure,
ions arrangement, viscosity, viscoelasticity, slip, electro-kinetics, and flow
of water/ions solutions at solid/liquid interfaces. All this information will
help inform the design of desalination membranes with improved permeability and
improved understanding of the impact of membrane surface chemistry and also of
adjoining solution chemistry and their rheological properties.