* 1914787
* Optimizing concentric ring electrode design for noninvasive electrophysiological measurement
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Oleksandr Makeyev, Dine College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,002.00

The mission of the NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is build
the research and instructional capacity of education institutions serving
Indigenous populations in the United States. The project, administered by Dine
College and titled "Optimizing Concentric Ring Electrode Design for Noninvasive
Electrophysiological Measurement", aligns well with the TCUP mission. The goal
of this research project is to improve the design of concentric ring electrodes
sensors (CRE), which are used in biomedical technology to monitor the health of
living tissues. The research strives to boost the accuracy of the technology in
detecting electrical signals from tissue, which can then be applied to improve
doctors' ability to diagnose their patients' conditions. This project builds on
and expands the primary research direction of the Mathematics for Engineering
Applications laboratory (MEA lab) at Dine College. Through the paid
undergraduate research assistant positions with the MEA lab the project
provides, it also supports the mission of the college to deliver robust learning
opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focus is
important because the ability to estimate the surface Laplacian at each
electrode constitutes the primary biomedical significance of CREs. Further
improvement of the accuracy of Laplacian estimation via optimal CRE designs may
contribute to the advancement of numerous noninvasive electrophysiological
measurement systems that currently use CREs to acquire diagnostic electrical
signals from the brain, intestines, heart or uterus, for example. The goal of
this research project will be achieved by 1) expanding the solutions of the
general inter-ring distances optimization problem for a wide range of
conditions, and 2) incorporating the radius of the central disc and individual
widths of the concentric rings into the CRE design optimization process along
with the currently included parameters such as the number of rings and inter-
ring distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.