* 1914698
* Collaborative Research: Resolving Earth Structure Influence on Ice-Sheet Stability in the Wilkes Subglacial Basin (RESISSt)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2020,12/31/2023
* Samantha Hansen, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 136,657.00

Part I: Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;Earths warming climate has the potential to drive
widespread collapse of glaciers and ice sheets across the planet, driving global
sea-level rise. Understanding both the rate and magnitude of such changes is
essential for predicting future sea-level and how it will impact infrastructure
and property. Collapse of the ice sheets of Antarctica has the potential to
raise global sea-level by up to 60 meters. However, not all regions of
Antarctica are equally suspectable to collapse. One area with potential for
collapse is the Wilkes Subglacial Basin in East Antarctica, a region twice the
size of California's Central Valley. Geologic evidence indicates that the ice-
sheet in this region has retreated significantly in response to past global
warming events. While the geologic record clearly indicates ice-sheets in this
area are vulnerable, the rate and magnitude of any future retreat will be
influenced significantly by geology of the region. In particular, ice-sheets
sitting above warm Earth will collapse more quickly during warming climate.
Constraining the geologic controls on the stability of the ice-sheets of the
Wilkes Subglacial Basin remains challenging since the ice-sheet hides the
geology beneath kilometers of ice. As a step in understanding the potential for
future ice loss in the Wilkes Subglacial Basin this project will conduct
geophysical analysis of existing data to better constrain the geology of the
region. These results will constrain new models designed to understand the
tectonics that control the behavior of the ice-sheets in the region. These new
models will highlight the geological properties that exert the most significant
control on the future of the ice-sheets of the Wilkes Subglacial Basin. Such
insights are critical to guide future efforts aimed at collecting in-situ
observations needed to more fully constrain Antarctica's potential for future
sea-level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;In
polar environments, inward-sloping marine basins are susceptible to an effect
known as the marine ice-sheet instability (MISI): run-away ice stream drainage
caused by warm ocean water eroding the ice shelf from below. The magnitude and
time-scale of the ice-sheet response strongly depend on the physical conditions
along the ice-bed interface, which are, to a first order, controlled by the
tectonic evolution of the basin. Topography, sedimentology, geothermal heat
flux, and mantle viscosity all play critical roles in ice-sheet stability.
However, in most cases, these solid-Earth parameters for regions susceptible to
the MISI are largely unknown. One region with potential susceptibility to MISI
is the Wilkes Subglacial Basin of East Antarctica. The project will provide an
integrated investigation of the Wilkes Subglacial Basin, combining geophysical
analyses with both mantle flow and ice-sheet modeling to understand the
stability of the ice sheet in this region, and the associated potential sea
level rise. The work will be focused on four primary objectives: (1) to develop
an improved tectonic model for the region based on existing seismic observations
as well as existing geophysical and geological data; (2) to use the new tectonic
model and seismic data to estimate the thermal, density, and viscosity structure
of the upper mantle and to develop a heat flow map for the WSB; (3) to simulate
mantle flow and to assess paleotopography based on our density and viscosity
constraints; and (4) to assess ice-sheet behavior by modeling (a) past ice-sheet
stability using our paleotopography estimates and (b) future ice-sheet stability
using our heat flow and mantle viscosity estimates. Ultimately, the project will
generate improved images of the geophysical structure beneath the WSB that will
allow us to assess the geodynamic origin for this region and to assess the
influence of geologic parameters on past, current, and future ice-sheet
behavior. These efforts will then highlight areas and geophysical properties
that should be the focus of future geophysical
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.