* 1914945
* Paramagnetic Defects as a Platform for Quantum Spintronics in Diamond
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Carlos Meriles, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 519,999.00

The ability to control the spin of individual electrons in solids is a valuable
tool for quantum information processing. But there are other degrees of freedom,
such as an electron's energy level or the valence state of individual atoms,
that would be useful to control as well. With the support from the Quantum
Information Science (QIS) program in the Physics Division and the Chemical
Measurements and Imaging (CMI) program in the Chemistry Division, Professor
Meriles will explore how to use a combination of spin and valence state control
to process information. Recent work on optical control of individual color
centers in diamond, such as a nitrogen-vacancy defect, has led to stunning
demonstrations of single electron spin control, millisecond-long spin lifetimes,
entanglement, and quantum logic operations. Despite this progress, however, the
understanding of the physics governing such defects is incomplete, due to the
comparatively poor information on their charge dynamics. To address this lack of
knowledge, this project will explore how to use both charge states and spin
states - and their interplay - as a resource for quantum information science in
the solid state. Coherent control of charge states in solids will also advance
the understanding of fundamental chemical physics factors affecting charge
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tackles important questions
concerning defect ionization and recombination with emphasis on exploring
alternate charge inter-conversion mechanisms (such as, e.g., carrier trapping)
as a means to generating desired charge states that are otherwise difficult to
attain via direct optical excitation. The aim is to pioneer a path for photo-
injecting spin-polarized electrons into the conduction band so as to
experimentally determine for the first time the spin lifetime of free carriers
in bulk diamond. Adding to these fundamental aspects, the project will lay the
groundwork for a range of practical applications including, for example, the
development of more efficient NV spin readout protocols and the first
implementation of ponderomotive traps for carrier manipulation in the solid
state. Beyond quantum information science, this work will positively impact the
broad set of applications where point defects are used as local probes, for
example, through more efficient spin readout schemes or through new forms of
sensing based on the influence of the environment on the defect's charge
dynamics. The knowledge to be gained may also help develop 3D high-density
optical memories using the charge state as the basic bit of information; it may
also pave the route to locally altering the crystal index of refraction so as to
implement optically reconfigurable waveguides and other photonic structures.
Besides the technological and scientific advantages, the proposed research is
expected to have a broad educational outcome because it offers students a unique
inter-disciplinary scientific education and the ability to interact with a wide
network of collaborating labs. These partnerships not only provide a broad
dissemination platform but also allow the PI to advance ongoing outreach
programs designed to provide meaningful research experiences to underprivileged
students through summer activities within CCNY and at host universities. These
plans gain special meaning at City College, a minority serving institution with
a uniquely diverse population of inner-city students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.