* 1914511
* Acquisition of an X-Ray Suite (XRD and WD-XRF) to support Geology and Geological Engineering Research and Education at the University of Mississippi
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Lance Yarbrough, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 132,881.00

The Geology and Geological Engineering (GGE) Department at the University of
Mississippi (UM) conducts a variety of research projects that require knowledge
of the chemical composition of rocks, minerals, soils, and fossils.
Identification of material crystal structure is commonly needed by geoscientists
and engineers and X-ray diffraction (XRD) meets this need. The acquisition of an
XRD instrument on the UM campus will immediately enhance the efficiency of GGE
faculty research. This research will help in reconstructions of the positions of
the continents throughout Earth history, models of past climate changes
experienced by the Gulf of Mexico region, enhancement of well drilling
methodologies, development of technologies for prevention of groundwater
pollution, and increased understanding of evolution of marine life. In addition,
the new instrument will support at least 22 undergraduate and graduate courses
and will benefit more than 200 students in the UM GGE department each year,
while improving the quality of education of students across a wide range of
disciplines. The types of projects enabled with XRD technology will better
prepare UM students with practical job skills to make them more competitive in
the global workforce.

Funds were requested to acquire a Rigaku MiniFlex 6G Benchtop X-ray
diffractometer (XRD) for use in the Geology and Geological Engineering (GGE)
Department at the University of Mississippi (UM). The scope of UM GGE research
requires the rapid and accurate determination of bulk composition of powdered
earth materials enabled by the requested instrument. The new XRD will be an
integral laboratory component for the UM GGE Department in a number of research
and education programs and will immediately benefit 13 faculty members. The
requested XRD has a D/teX Ultra 1D advanced silicon strip detector, available
with a receiving monochromator and an 8-position auto-sampler that will
facilitate high-speed, high-dynamic range, low-noise data collection in 0D and
1D modes to obtain intensity from a few tens to ~100 times greater than a
conventional scintillation counter. The MiniFlex 6G has a compact footprint,
requiring minimal benchtop space and has a user-friendly system designed for
easy operation, minimizing the time required for training and expanding the
potential operators to include undergraduate students. This versatility will
accommodate the high volume of expected bulk samples required for ongoing
mineralogy, sedimentology, paleontology, evaporite geology, and hydrogeology
projects in the UM GGE Department. This project is jointly funded by the
National Science Foundation (NSF) Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and
Facilities (EAR/IF) Program in the Division of Earth Sciences and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.