* 1914104
* STTR Phase I:  Simplification AI for Workforce Upskilling
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Eleni Miltsakaki, Choosito!
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 224,743.00

This STTR Phase I project addresses the challenge of upskilling the workforce by
developing novel personalized content simplification technology. It will build a
novel digital binder tool with an AI empowered content selection and
simplification capability. The magnitude and urgency of the workforce upskilling
problem require an immediate and robust solution. Corporations are desperate to
find and nurture appropriately skilled workers to fill emerging roles. Beyond
big high-tech corporations, the need for retraining is expanding in the trades
and manufacturing space. An estimated 300-600 million people will need to be
retrained between now and 2030. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
breakthrough solution utilizes state-of-the-art deep learning and natural
language processing algorithms to automatically generate training materials
appropriate for the level of familiarity that trainees have with the content and
skills they need to acquire. This is facilitated by three core technologies: a
content simplification solution with the capability of searching and identifying
collections of digital resources by identifying key concepts. The applied
algorithms consider the current background of the learner and include documents
needed to comprehend those key concepts. The second technology addresses the
open problem of text simplification by proposing a hybrid approach of
traditional text simplification techniques like word substitution and a novel
information retrieval approach that identifies concepts critical for the
comprehensibility of advanced documents. The third technology is a personalized
content simplification engine tailored to the needs and capacities of each
trainee who can continue to use the technology for continuous retraining,
upskilling and lifelong learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.