* 1914495
* CAREER: Efficient Experimental Optimization for High-Performance Airborne Wind Energy Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2018,08/31/2021
* Christopher Vermillion, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 121,361.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will pioneer a first-in-
world rapid prototyping system for experimentally optimizing the flight dynamics
and control of airborne wind energy systems. Airborne wind energy systems
replace towers with tethers and a lifting body, reducing deployment time and
fixed infrastructure costs, and enabling turbines to take advantage of strong,
high-altitude winds. Successful realization of these systems is projected to
yield levelized costs of electricity below $0.25 per kW-h, providing cost-
competitive energy solutions to remote communities, islands, military bases, and
deep-water offshore locations. The synthesis of control systems to stabilize
airborne wind energy systems in harsh atmospheric conditions remains a
bottleneck for their widespread acceptance, further exacerbated by high
prototype development costs. This research will reduce control system
prototyping costs by multiple orders of magnitude, using 1/100-scale models that
are 3D printed, tethered, and "flown" in a water channel laboratory test
facility. The water channel provides an ideal mechanism for optimizing the
control system design while replicating key dynamic properties of the full-scale
system. Throughout the project, students will develop an industrial and small-
business perspective through interactions with a leading early-stage airborne
wind energy company. Outreach activities include the development of kite design
modules for a high school engineering summer camp and co-design of an energy-
rich science curriculum for an early college high school for economically
disadvantaged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimization of airborne wind
energy flight performance represents a coupled plant and controller optimization
problem, where experiments are indispensable but expensive at full-scale. This
research addresses the plant/controller coupling and the necessity of
experiments through the a unique framework that combines numerical optimization
with lab-scale experiments on 3D printed models that are tethered and "flown" in
a water channel. This water channel platform, which will be instrumented for
closed-loop control of tethered systems, has been shown to yield provably
similar dynamic performance to full-scale systems. In the proposed plant and
controller optimization process, experimental data will be used to perform
parameter identification and generate corrections to subsequent numerical
optimization iterations. At the completion of each numerical optimization
iteration, optimal design of experiments techniques will be used to determine a
set of configurations to be tested, taking into account the cost of each
reconfiguration. The research will focus on the derivation of convergence and
efficiency results for the proposed algorithms, leveraging tools from system
identification and optimal design of experiments. Furthermore, the optimization
methods originating from this research will be validated on both a stationary
and crosswind airborne wind energy system.