* 1914613
* SaTC: EDU: Creating Cybersecurity Pathways Between Community Colleges and Universities
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Hongyi Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 497,356.00

The ability of higher education institutions to produce cybersecurity
professionals has not kept pace with the demand for cybersecurity graduates.
While some available cybersecurity jobs can be filled with high school graduates
and community college graduates, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
the "typical" degree requirement for these jobs is a bachelor's degree. Given
the ability of community colleges to attract and serve disadvantaged and
minority students, in order to more fully attract these students into the
"typical" cybersecurity job, it is important that pathways between community
colleges and higher education institutions be created. In addition to the
pathways, activities connecting cybersecurity community college students and
university students are needed. Common issues that community college students
face (including cybersecurity students) as they transfer to four year
institutions are credits not transferring, the lack of preparation in
theoretical foundation within the discipline, and isolation at the four-year
university. Intentional programming and coordinated efforts between faculty from
the multiple institutions that students attend can help to address these issues.
Because many cybersecurity community college programs are offered as applied
degrees that do not easily transfer into upper level university programs, an
opportunity exists to connect these community college programs with
interdisciplinary bachelor's degree programs at universities. Addressing this
opportunity, the Hampton Roads Cybersecurity Education, Workforce, and Economic
Development Alliance (HRCyber) connected cybersecurity programs at three
community colleges (Tidewater Community College, Northern Virginia Community
College, and Thomas Nelson Community College) with Old Dominion University by
creating formal academic pathways for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an
effort to evaluate the success of HRCyber and further their efforts to
strengthen and better understand the pathways, in this project, the
investigators will (1) define an interdisciplinary body of knowledge that
establishes pathways between community colleges and universities; (2) evaluate
the effects of interdisciplinary and inter-institutional cybersecurity
programming on student learning by analyzing students' electronic portfolios;
(3) examine whether interdisciplinary and inter-institutional programming
encourages diversity; (4) identify strategies to effectively use peer mentors
for transfer students; (5) identify strategies to strengthen cybersecurity
pathways between educational institutions guided by NSA designations at the
associate's and bachelor's level; (6) evaluate the impact of cybersecurity
competitions in an inter-institutional environment; (7) identify strategies to
enhance partnerships between cybersecurity community college and four-year
programs; and (8) eisseminate the project results to assist other institutions
to implement similar programs and courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) program is providing co-funding for this project
in recognition of its contribution to technician education in community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.