* 1914796
* Adaptive Protocol Synthesis and Error Recovery in Micro-Electrode-Dot-Array (MEDA) Microfluidic Biochips
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Krishnendu Chakrabarty, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 02/28/2023
* USD 494,782.00

Droplet-based ("digital") microfluidic biochips (DMFBs) are revolutionizing
high-throughput DNA sequencing and point-of-care clinical diagnosis. Using
DMFBs, bioassay protocols are scaled down to droplet size and executed through
software-based control of nanoliter droplets on a patterned electrode array.
However, technology transition to industry has been challenging as today's DMFBs
suffer from several key limitations: (1) constraints on droplet size; (2)
difficulty of sensor integration for real-time detection and monitoring; and (3)
reliability/yield concerns. To overcome these limitations, micro-electrode-dot-
array (MEDA) biochips have been recently developed, incorporating real-time
capacitive sensing on every microelectrode to detect the property and location
of a droplet. Such 'sensing maps' open up the exciting opportunity of cyber-
physical MEDA biochips that can dynamically respond to bioassay outcomes,
perform real-time error recovery, and execute "if-then-else" protocols from
biochemistry necessary to support the next generation of cyber-physical systems
(CPS) with tightly integrated lab-on-chip sensing technology. Despite such
tremendous promise, a significant barrier in the exploitation of MEDA for
realistic biochemistry arises from the need to manually control biochemical
protocols on the biochip. This research is thus motivated by the need to enable
the execution of biomolecular assays on programmable and cyber-physical MEDA
biochips. To take full advantage of the dynamic adaptation capabilities of MEDA,
there is a need for a synthesis and run-time optimization framework that can be
agile in its ability to respond to real-time sensor feedback. The proposed
research therefore constitutes a comprehensive effort towards the realization of
MEDA-based CPS, resulting in new applications that would, for instance, enable
breakthroughs in cancer treatment or atmospheric aerosol measurements for
pollution monitoring in smart cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is aimed at
developing an integrated system solution for MEDA that includes advances in both
hardware and software. Specific research products include the following
innovations: (1) Modeling and robust controller design, which will involve
offline model-based protocol synthesis and online learning-based protocol/model
adaptation; (2) Adaptive and elastic synthesis techniques that comprehensively
incorporate all the MEDA-specific droplet operations; (3) Optimization methods
for multiple-reactant synthesis, which will involve on-chip sample preparation
and optimization of the fluidic steps associated with dilution, mixing, and the
generation of concentration gradients; (4) Fault tolerance through error
recovery based on real-time sensing, droplet tracking, and adaptive MEDA-
specific fluidic operations; and (5) MEDA biochip design, fabrication, and
testbed setup, and the demonstration of real-time adaptation under software
control for cell analysis in personalized cancer treatment. These breakthroughs
will advance MEDA from an exploratory platform used to demonstrate droplet
manipulation, to a mature platform that microbiologists and biochemists can use
for implementing realistic protocols. The project also has an extensive
education and outreach component, including curriculum development, expansion of
hands-on research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and
international collaboration. For instance, MEDA-CPS will be used as an important
example to showcase real-time adaptation in new undergraduate and graduate
courses on modeling, design, and analysis of embedded control and cyber-physical
systems. Tutorials at top conferences and benchmark dissemination activities
will benefit the broader research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.