* 1914875
* CCSS: Intrinsically-Linear Loadline-Envelope-Tracking (LET) Radio Transmitter Toward Wideband, Energy-Efficient, and Ultra-Fast Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kenle Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 293,644.00

The wireless communications of 5G and beyond facilitate unprecedented quality of
service such as ultrahigh speed and low latency. However, this evolution is
inevitably accompanied by severe energy inefficiency mainly due to the degraded
efficiency of radio-frequency (RF) power amplifiers (PAs) that are the most
power-consuming module in wireless systems. On the other hand, the existing
efficiency-enhancement technology, e.g., industry-standard envelope tracking, is
expected to become ineffective when accommodating increasingly wide modulation
bandwidth of signals. The overarching goal of this research is to investigate
and demonstrate a new architecture of wideband, highly efficient, and
intrinsically linearized PA and radio transmitter as a key enabler to next-
generation energy-saving and ultra-fast wireless communications. The successful
completion of the proposed research will mark a milestone of breaking the
bandwidth limitation on PA efficiency and linearity, which crucially contributes
to the growth of wireless and semiconductor industries. It is important to
emphasize that the enhancement of PA efficiency will significantly reduce the
energy consumption of entire wireless networks with improved environmental
friendliness. Moreover, the proposed silicon-integration method provides an
ideal solution to the high-cost, non-integrability, and limited-manufacturing-
capacity issues of radio frontend development faced by industry. This is
expected to be critical in expediting the dissemination of emerging technologies
and in expanding the wireless connections from finite number of people to nearly
infinite number of things (i.e., Internet of Everything). Furthermore, this
research will provide foundational support to wireless and semiconductor
industries by training next-generation young professionals and through
collaborations and data sharing. Impacts of this research will be further
broadened and prolonged through educational and inspiring outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next-generation wireless communications will
feature wideband, high speed and low latency, which leads to extreme challenges
for efficiency and linearity of RF PAs and transmitters. This project proposes a
transformative concept called Loadline-Envelope-Tracking (LET) Transmitter
Architecture. By shifting the paradigm of envelope tracking (ET) from the
existing supply-modulation technique to the new loadline-modulation technique,
this new architecture not only holds the promise to fundamentally break the
bandwidth and linearity limitations imposed on existing PA efficiency-
enhancement technologies, but it also inherits the advanced features of the
industry-standard ET system. This research pursues the following key
innovations: 1) The novel radio transmitter architecture based on loadline
envelope tracking enabling wideband efficiency enhancement and intrinsic
linearization of RF PAs, a significant technological leap forward in wireless
communications. 2) An innovative RF-analog-digital co-design methodology to
concurrently achieve optimized efficiency and linearity of PA, eliminating the
necessity of external digital linearization that can be energy inefficient under
wide modulation bandwidths. 3) The first-ever revealing of the speed/bandwidth
limiting factors for loadline modulation and the corresponding circuit and
system design methodology. 4) A silicon-integration method based on high-voltage
Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (HV-CMOS) process to integrate the
entire LET transmitter frontend involving PA, tunable matching network, and
high-speed loadline modulator, leading to the first-ever fully integrated,
massively manufacturable, and low-cost single-chip
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.