* 1914680
* Investigating the Biophysical and Biochemical Influences of Stromal Cells on Anti-Cancer Drug Resistance within Bioengineered Tumor Microenvironment Models
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* JIn Park, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Cancer is currently the second leading cause of death in the United States,
claiming the lives of over half a million Americans annually. Although there has
been a major thrust in cancer therapeutic research, metastatic cancers, i.e.,
cancers that have been formed by cancer cells that have been transmitted from an
original growth at another site, are still deadly, largely due to their
resistance to anti-cancer drugs. Many therapeutic strategies, developed using
gold standard animal models and conventional cell culture methods, often fail
due to not considering the complex cellular and molecular interactions of cancer
cells within the surrounding tumor microenvironment. Despite significant
advancements in the use of bioengineered tumor models to study different facets
of cancer, none of the previous studies have accurately reconstructed the
complex tumor microenvironment, composed of various types of stromal cells
(cells in connective tissue) and the extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins that
are crucial for determining the role of each microenvironmental component on
anti-cancer drug resistance. The objective of this project is to directly
addresses this knowledge gap by taking an innovative step forward to
mechanistically study the role of stromal cells on anti-cancer drug resistance,
utilizing bioengineered tumor microenvironment models that can accommodate key
stromal cells and ECM components. The specific hypothesis of this study is that
physical and chemical signaling cues, originating from tumor-stroma crosstalk,
contribute to the drug resistance by a combinatorial mechanism of inhibiting
drug penetration and activating compensatory drug resistance pathways in cancer
cells. The research program brings a unique synergy between multiple scientific
disciplines of tissue engineering, 3D imaging, and cancer cell biology. Insights
gained will lead to more comprehensive understanding on the role of tumor-stroma
crosstalk in anti-cancer drug resistance. The unique features of the tumor
models will also overcome technical limitations of preexisting methods and thus
allow better understanding of the effectiveness of anti-cancer therapeutics.
With respect to the educational impact, the multidisciplinary nature of this
study will engage and train a new generation of high school, undergraduate and
graduate students in STEM fields and provide a unique opportunity to bring
synergy and collaborations among bioengineers and cancer biologists. The
proposed initiatives also promote dissemination of the generated fundamental
knowledge to the scientific community through online modules and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on mechanistically
studying the role of tumor microenvironment and stromal cells on anti-cancer
drug resistance using 3D bioengineered organotypic tumor microenvironmental
models of breast cancer that are incorporated with key stromal cells, cancer
associated fibroblasts (CAFs)and tumor associated macrophages (TAMs). The
overarching hypothesis of the project is that the physiochemical signaling cues
originating from tumor-stroma crosstalk lead to distinct mechanisms, which
initially promote stromal remodeling and inhibit drug penetration and further
results in emergence of compensatory drug-resistance pathways, which together
lead to chemotherapeutic drug resistance. The research plan is organized under
two objectives. The FIRST OBJECTIVE is to dissect the role of CAFs mediated
stromal desmoplasia (growth of fibrous or connective tissue) on chemotherapeutic
drug resistance. A high-density tumor-stroma model will be developed and
characterized relative to ECM stiffness and remodeling during tumor growth. A
panel of anti-fibrotic drugs will be used to inhibit stromal desmoplasia, and
matrix remodeling and stiffness will be assessed in response to each drug. A 3D
microfluidic platform will be used to test the penetration of chemotherapeutic
drugs alone and in combination with the antfibrotic drugs, and the drug
distribution profile will be correlated with stromal modeling and stiffness. The
experiments are designed to test the hypothesis that the primary mechanism of
failure of chemotherapeutic drugs is due to biophysical barriers and
insufficient drug penetration within the stroma to reach the tumor core. The
SECOND OBJECTIVE is to mechanistically study the synergistic influence of
cellular signaling from stromal CAFs AND TAMs on drug resistance. The
bioengineered 3D microfluidic platform will be used to construct a tumor-stroma
model with a tri-culture of cancer cells, CAFs and TAMs. A panel of
chemotherapeutic drugs that have been used in treating triple negative breast
cancer will be screened to assess cancer cell invasion at the single cell level
as well as tumor viability and growth in response to drug treatment. Then, in
drug targets that have exhibited the lowest efficacy in inhibiting tumor growth
and invasion, RNA sequencing will be utilized to assess alterations in cancer
genomics and to identity compensatory pathways that lead to drug resistance. The
experiments are designed to test the hypothesis that the integrated response
within the stroma embedded with co-culture of CAFS and TAMs, due to cell-cell
signaling crosstalk, is more pronounced than the sum of all the individual cues
on drug resistance. The integrated studies and biological data from the project
will enable the construction of a mechanistic framework on the comprehensive
role of physiochemical signaling cues, in the context of tumor-stroma crosstalk,
on anti-cancer drug resistance. Collectively, the research outcomes will advance
fundamental science pertinent to cancer biology and anti-cancer drug resistance
and will contribute to the broader biopharmaceutical tumor-on-chip
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.