* 1914855
* Collaborative Research: Level II Preparing Undergraduates for Research in STEM-related fields Using Electrophysiology (PURSUE)
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2026
* Catherine Reed, Claremont McKenna College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 01/31/2026
* USD 764,552.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality STEM education
by increasing the number of college students who participate in cognitive
neuroscience research. Based on survey data, few undergraduates are currently
involved in cognitive neuroscience research projects at colleges and
universities. In addition, those undergraduates who are working in these
laboratories are involved at a basic, data-collecting level. With the necessary
knowledge and hands-on experience with data analysis, more undergraduate
researchers could contribute more substantially to cognitive neuroscience
research. This project aims to achieve this goal by building upon a set of open-
access teaching and learning resources that were developed by the principle
investigators with previous NSF support. These resources include stand-alone
modules that can be incorporated into existing courses, as well as an entire
undergraduate course. The project will evaluate and improve these resources to
make them easier to use by different faculty and at different institutions. In
addition, the project will train and support faculty in effective use of the
resources. This training will include support provided through a faculty
learning community. This project has the potential to improve undergraduate STEM
learning by increasing the use of evidence-based teaching resources, to broaden
institutional capacity for STEM learning by supporting improvements to courses,
and to prepare the STEM workforce by engaging students in high-quality research
experiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this project are
to: 1) refine, assess, and revise a set of cognitive electrophysiology training
materials; 2) facilitate course implementation and broaden the cognitive
electrophysiology teaching/research community through course-design workshops,
especially for faculty serving populations that are under-represented in STEM;
and 3) increase dissemination and accessibility of course materials through
development of a website and database of electrophysiology data. Efficacy of
course materials will be assessed via faculty surveys and student learning
outcomes (pretest-posttest design with cohort comparison group). Workshop
success and impact will be evaluated via faculty participant surveys and annual
surveys tracking teaching, mentoring, and research activities. Results will be
disseminated at conferences and in neuroscience and education journals. This
project has the potential to improve the training of thousands of undergraduate
and graduate students. The online accessibility of materials allows faculty from
diverse colleges and universities worldwide, particularly those with limited
resources, to increase training and research opportunities for underrepresented
populations without the need to purchase or maintain electrophysiology
equipment. Additionally, it can increase opportunities for undergraduates to
engage in authentic research experiences that lead to faculty-student co-
authored publications, better training students for graduate school and the STEM
workforce. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.