* 1914284
* STTR Phase I:  A non-woven bamboo-based strand composite process to manufacture low-cost roofing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Alexa Bednarz, ECO-SHELTER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR Phase I project is the
stimulation of a new economy for natural fiber composites, allowing wood
manufacturers and other industries an opportunity to expand into a profitable
and sustainable venture, improving livelihoods. Developing a suitable
replacement to asbestos cement corrugated sheets can drive new industry and work
opportunities for the 125 million people in the world who are exposed to
asbestos in the workplace. Further, a safe and affordable alternative will
reduce millions of families future exposure to the harmful and toxic substance.
Providing a cost-effective, energy-efficient roof will have both an
environmental and health impact at a household level and lead to increases in
energy savings and productivity while also reducing heat-related stress and
illnesses. Demonstrating the potential of natural fiber composites as structural
construction materials will promote a low-energy production process and
sequestration of carbon dioxide through sustainable and renewable grasses and
fibers, which can be scaled in resource-limited settings throughout Asia and
Africa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I
project seeks to develop a commercially viable and scalable process to
manufacture a bamboo-based strand composite for application in low-cost roofing
globally. The intellectual merit of the proposed project resides in undertaking
technical objectives to (i) determine ideal feedstock characteristics to produce
suitable bamboo strands for formation into three-dimensional (3D) panels (ii)
developing proper resin application systems to effectively consolidate and bond
bamboo strands into durable panels and (iii) produce a prototype sandwich panel
and evaluate its structural performance as well as resistance to moisture uptake
and dimensional stability, and thermal conductivity. This new knowledge is
expected to significantly advance the field of natural fiber composites by
addressing several existing technical challenges for long-term construction
applications that can withstand hot and humid climates, including ideal
distribution of particulate geometry and moisture content, biodegradation, and
effective binders for functionality. A prototype of the process to manufacture a
non-woven bamboo-based strand composite for a roofing application will be
designed and built to ensure it can be deployed at scale for industrial
production in resource-limited settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.