* 1914792
* SCH: INT: Distributed Analytics for Enhancing Fertility in Families
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ioannis Paschalidis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,199,750.00

The demands of modern life, education and career choices, as well as the
availability of assisted reproductive technologies, are leading many individuals
and couples to delay childbearing. This has contributed to infertility and sub-
fertility emerging as significant public health problems in the U.S., affecting
about 15% of couples, involving both men and women, and resulting to more than
$5 billion spent annually in infertility services. Such costs are often not
covered by health insurance and, consequently, generate access disparities. This
project will leverage information from self-administered surveys and medical
records to produce highly accurate personalized predictions regarding fertility
potential, pregnancy, the success of an In Vitro Fertilization cycle, and the
presence of specific reproductive health issues affecting fertility. In addition
to predictions, the project will develop methods to generate personalized
recommendations, empowering individuals and their physicians to make the most
appropriate, individualized health care decisions. The work is in line with the
emergence of personalized medicine, aided by data and algorithmic advances. The
project will train engineering and computer science graduate students to
contribute to medical informatics, involve undergraduate and high school
students, impact educational offerings, and, by using data from a safety-net
hospital, help understand socioeconomic disparities in the use of infertility
treatment services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The predictive and prescriptive models
developed in this project will be based on a number of advances in machine
learning and analytics, including: (i) new predictive models that handle both
continuous and discrete outcomes, are robust to outliers, produce highly
accurate personalized predictions, and enable outlier detection; (ii) novel
prescriptive models that optimally select from a menu of choices to make
recommendations that yield health-centered outcomes; and (iii) natural language
processing methods to process clinical reports, culling critical information
that can be used to enhance predictive models. To learn from data, the work will
develop new distributed optimization and federated learning methods that can
train models through interactions among individual data-holding nodes, such as
hospital systems, clouds of smartphone applications, existing prospective
cohorts, and personal health records. This distributed paradigm does not require
data-holding nodes to share raw data, thus enhancing privacy and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.