* 1914679
* String Theory and Quantum Field Theory: From the Planck Scale to the Hubble Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Steven Weinberg, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 900,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Jacques Distler, Willy
Fischler, Can Kilic, Sonia Paban and Steven Weinberg at the University of Texas
at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of Professors Distler, Fischler,
Kilic, Paban, and Weinberg is focused on the discovery and understanding of the
laws that govern the universe at the most fundamental level. As such, this
research utilizes diverse and multi-pronged approaches in achieving this
mission. These include studying the extensions to the Standard Model which
governs the behavior of the elementary particles, and the associated
experimental signatures of such extensions. These also include the study of
early-universe cosmology and present-day astrophysics, and the exploration of
the physics of black holes which may shed light on how a quantum theory of
gravity may be formulated. Finally, these also include studies in relativistic
quantum field theory (which is the mathematical language in which theories of
the elementary particles are expressed) as well as string theory (which aims to
unify all of the different particles and forces in nature). Since the early days
of modern physics, the United States has led the effort in the discovery of
these fundamental laws. Further research in this direction is therefore in the
national interest, and Professors Distler, Fischler, Kilic, Paban, and Weinberg
are committed to making further research contributions in these directions. In
addition, this research will involve graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers and thereby provide scientific training that should serve these
junior scientists well throughout their careers both within and outside of
academia. Finally, these professors make science outreach a priority, and
regularly deliver public lectures, in person as well as over the internet. They
also write books and articles for general audiences in order to increase science
literacy and appreciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many different areas of research
are to be investigated as part of this research project. Professor Distler will
continue his exploration of 4D N=2 superconformal field theories and their
properties, including the relation to 2D Vertex Operator Algebras. He will
extend some of the lessons learned to N=1 SCFTs and he will visit afresh certain
aspects of the theory of orientifolds. Professor Fischler will continue to work
with his students on quantum information in quantum gravity (using gauge-gravity
duality) and the use of the quantum Hall effect in the context of quantum
computation. Professor Fischler and his students are also involved in
discovering possibly new observable effects in jet emissions by black holes
using the gauge-gravity connection. Professor Kilic will continue to work on
dark-matter models that have uncommon experimental signatures or that can
address open questions related to astrophysical observations; he will also study
techniques in collider searches designed to improve sensitivity in the case of
low signal statistics and exotic final states, and he will explore how the
solution to the naturalness puzzle can be experimentally probed. Professor Paban
will continue to work on early-universe physics. She will explore the robustness
of inflation in multifield models and the experimental signatures of models of
multifield inflation compatible with string theory. Finally, Professor Weinberg
will continue his work in astrophysics, and will investigate ideas that may lead
to further research in elementary-particle theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.