* 1914639
* Longitudinal Modelling and Sequential Monitoring of Image Data Streams
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Peihua Qiu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

In imaging applications related to earth and environmental monitoring,
manufacturing industries, medical studies and many others, collected image data
are often in the form of data streams in the sense that new images are acquired
sequentially over time. In such applications, one fundamental task is to monitor
the image sequence to see whether the underlying longitudinal process of the
observed images changes significantly over time. This project aims to develop
novel and effective statistical methods for answering this question. Because of
the wide applications of image sequence monitoring, this project will have
broader impacts on society through its applications in different disciplines and
areas. Open source R packages will be developed and distributed freely for
convenient use by practitioners. A web portal will also be developed for
individual researchers to try the proposed methods. The PI plans to integrate
the research results into educational activities, including the development of
new curriculum modules, the mentoring of Ph.D. students, and outreach to local
high schools students for after-school activities to raise their interests in
data modeling and scientific research, and contribute to the workforce
development in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a flexible longitudinal
modeling approach and an effective sequential monitoring scheme for analyzing
image data streams, and study their statistical properties. The proposed
longitudinal model for describing observed images in a given time interval is
flexible, and its estimation procedure has the edge-preservation property while
removing noise. It can accommodate both geometric misalignments among observed
images and spatio-temporal data correlation in the observed image data. The
proposed image monitoring approach can account for dynamic longitudinal patterns
of the observed image data streams. To this end, image pre-processing, including
image denoising and image registration, will be performed properly before image
monitoring. The proposed methods will consider both cases where the observation
times are equally or unequally spaced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.