* 1914034
* Experimental Studies of the QCD Structure of the Neutron
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Michael Christy, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2022
* USD 281,200.00

One of the most successful theories in all of science is the Standard Model of
particle physics. It describes the fundamental interactions of the sub-atomic
particles that make up the visible universe. Within the Standard Model, the
Strong Force is described by Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD) and this force governs
the interaction between the constituent particles making up the protons and
neutrons (collectively "nucleons") in the nucleus of ordinary matter. While QCD
has been remarkably successful in explaining many aspects of nucleon structure,
many questions still remain. Understanding how the fundamental force between the
constituent particles (quarks and gluons) leads to the structure of the protons
and neutrons is one of the overarching ambitions of modern nuclear physics. Over
the past several decades, one of the most powerful experimental tools for
nucleon structure studies has been the scattering of fast electrons from
nucleons inside atomic nuclei. This project will support an experimental program
of electron scattering to study the fundamental structure of the neutron and
proton in the case when an electron is scattered from a single "valence" quark.
This case is of particular interest as there are some definite mathematical
predictions for the ratio of the up to down quark distributions, and precise
measurements would test our understanding of the QCD theory. In addition, this
research program will address a critical need for training the next generation
of physicists and provide science training to historically underrepresented
groups, including women and African-Americans working directly on the project.
The presence of highly visible, leading edge research on the campus of a
minority institution provides students with exposure to science that might not
otherwise be accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program will be
accomplished via two complementary experiments carried out with the electron
beam at the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility (JLab). The Hampton
group has a leadership role in both experiments, and each experiment will be the
dissertation topic for a Hampton Ph.D. student. The first experiment will
measure the nearly free neutron structure function and the ratio of down to up
quark distributions via the method of spectator proton tagging from a deuterium
target. The Hampton group has responsibility for design, construction, and
operation of the recoil proton detector in addition to contributions to the data
analysis and simulation. The second experiment took data in 2018 in Hall C to
measure the inclusive proton and deuteron F2 structure functions at large
Bjorken-x. The Hampton group participated in the data analysis and simulation
efforts, as well as systematic studies of the new SHMS spectrometer in Hall
C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.