* 1914051
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantitative methods for assessment of infants cranial malformations using 2D photos
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Fereshteh Aalamifar, PediaMetrix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,903.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project includes use of image analysis to provide
decision support to parents, clinicians and caregivers in various pediatric
health conditions. In a recent survey in 2016, 79% of mothers were interested in
trying or learning about telemedicine for non-emergency medical issues and 40%
of those owning smartphones have downloaded at least one health or wellness app.
Given the current growth potential of mHealth and its high acceptance by
parents, a mobile app is perfectly situated to bridge the gap in pediatric care.
In this project image analysis will be used to enable real-time decision
support, customized recommendations, and low cost scaling up of the technology.
The current focus of the project is on characterizing infant head malformations,
more specifically flat head syndrome. Even though flat head syndrome is a common
condition among infants, there is little awareness among parents about this
condition and other health conditions closely related, e.g. torticollis, and
developmental delay. Through early identification and patient-specific
repositioning recommendations, the proposed technology will significantly lower
the number of severe cases that need intensive therapies, and the associated
diagnostic and treatment costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop algorithms and tools
that accurately calculate head shape parameters used in diagnosis and treatment
planning for flat head syndrome. Moderate to severe flat head syndrome affects
20-30% of infants in the first few months after birth. If left untreated, it can
cause physical and psychological discomfort, and developmental delays. A
customized app will acquire photos of the infant's head, assess the shape of the
head, and then recommend infant-specific re-positioning instructions. The app
will follow up with parents on a regular basis to ensure compliance and
therapeutic progress through monitoring. The information will also be sent to
the infant's electronic health records for review by the infant's pediatrician.
The developed algorithms will also differentiate between flat head syndrome and
craniosynostosis, a condition that may cause similar head malformations, but can
lead to more serious and permanent health complications including damage to the
brain. In addition, the longitudinal dataset, collected by parents through the
app, can be used to generate an infant's head growth patterns, and thus monitor
development and enable early identification of the infant's risk of other health
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.