* 1914433
* BEE:  Consequences of phenotypic plasticity for gene-to-ecosystem linkages: Multi-stress experiments across the climatic range of a foundation species
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Thomas Whitham, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 882,313.00

Predicting how ecosystems will respond to environmental change is a major
challenge for environmental scientists. One strategy is to focus on the traits
(characteristics) of organisms that play the most critical roles in their
ecosystems. Along rivers, key tree species such as cottonwoods provide shade,
habitat, and food for a wide range of other species. Many types of insects feed
on the leaves and on the litter that falls in the river. The traits of the
leaves impact the survival of these insects, which then impacts birds and fish
higher up the food chain. Past research shows that leaf traits like leaf size
and chemistry are partly determined by a tree's genes. However, little is known
about what will happen to these traits as the environment changes. Using Fremont
cottonwood trees from across Arizona, this research will assess how trees have
evolved to tolerate environmental stresses in the past, including both changing
temperatures and attacks from insects. This information about a tree's history
of stress will then be used to predict the role it will play under future
environmental stress. The results will aid ongoing river restoration projects
across the Southwest by helping identify the types of trees that should be
planted to support healthy ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic variation
within foundation species is a major source of diversity in functional traits,
which in turn shape community structure and ecosystem processes. However,
individual genotypes may express different trait values when exposed to
environmental change. This phenotypic plasticity can differ among genotypes as
an evolved response to climatic variability or herbivore activity, producing
genotype x environment (G x E) interactions. This research will test the
hypothesis that understanding the evolution of plasticity in locally adapted
genotypes will enhance prediction of the impacts of genetic variation at a broad
landscape scale. First, the research will use three existing common gardens to
investigate how genotypes of a southwestern tree species express different leaf
traits in hot vs. cold conditions. Across all gardens, experimental manipulation
of herbivore damage will be used to investigate interactive effects of abiotic
and biotic stress on multiple leaf traits. Second, the project will test how
variation in traits can be predicted from past variation in the environment at
each genotype's home location. Finally, litter transplant experiments and
surveys will be used to quantify the impacts of changing leaf traits on whole
communities of terrestrial and aquatic insects dependent on these trees.
Investigating feedbacks between the evolutionary causes and ecological
consequences of phenotypic plasticity across a species' range should greatly
improve our ability to predict ecosystem persistence across a rapidly changing
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.