* 1914802
* Collaborative Research: Scaling Support for Non-tenure Track STEM Faculty through Learning Communities and Design Teams
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Kelly Mack, Association of American Colleges and Universities
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,063,996.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources Program (IUSE:EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving the STEM teaching and learning environment for
undergraduate STEM students. It will do so by increasing supports for non-tenure
track faculty members, who teach most of undergraduate STEM courses, including
the critical introductory courses. The project proposes to develop a national,
research-based Institute for supporting non-tenure track faculty, which will be
held annually for four consecutive years. The Institute will recruit small teams
of faculty and administrators from 50 college and university campuses. There,
the teams will learn about supports for non-tenure track faculty and develop a
plan for supporting the work of adjunct faculty on their campuses. Examples of
supports include professional development learning communities, as well as
campus policies and practices that support non-tenure track faculty. Although
many efforts are underway to develop and adopt effective curricula and
pedagogies in STEM courses, none of these important innovations will succeed
without addressing support for the non-tenure track faculty who teach the
majority of these courses. Thus, this project is significant because it
addresses an overlooked challenge in undergraduate STEM that has enormous
potential to improve STEM education broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to developing the Institute for supporting non-tenure track faculty, the project
will engage in research on two areas that will contribute to the goals of better
supporting non-tenure track faculty in STEM: 1. formative research aimed at
evaluation of the Institute; and 2. summative research focused on the
Institute's goals and outcomes. The research will create new knowledge about
models of faculty learning communities, particularly for non-tenure track STEM
faculty. The Institute and the related research will be significant to the
undergraduate STEM reform community by providing information about ways to use
structured topical learning communities to improve teaching among non-tenure
track faculty. The major potential contributions of this project to society
include the impacts on the 50 participating colleges and universities, which
will have improved support for their non-tenure track faculty and, thus, helped
these faculty to improve their instruction. Because of the project, thousands of
faculty will have professional development opportunities to improve STEM
introductory courses, hundreds of thousands of STEM students will experience
better STEM learning environments, and a national model will be developed for
how to best support non-tenure track faculty in improving their teaching and
learning environments. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.