* 1914232
* STTR Phase I:  Developing a novel drug delivery system to enable an oral peptide based drug for kidney stones
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Altayeb Alshaikh, OXALO THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2021
* USD 224,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR project is to develop a
novel drug delivery system composed of peptide-loaded hydrogel nanoparticles for
targeted and sustained therapeutic peptide release to the intestine. The
gastrointestinal system and gut microbiome have emerged as critical drivers of
human health, offering new opportunities to treat diseases such as food
allergies, fungal infections, inflammatory bowel disease, and hyperoxaluria.
However, a new class of drug systems are required to target the local biology of
these diseases. The first indication pursued is hyperoxaluria and associated
recurrent kidney stones and kidney diseases. With over ~27M calcium oxalate
kidney stone (KS) patients in the U.S. (affecting 1 in 5 men and 1 in 11 women)
and even higher global incidence, KS is a healthcare epidemic with no effective
medication. Recent discoveries at the University of Chicago revealed the
opportunity to treat hyperoxaluria through novel peptides that require local
action in the intestine. Thus, a unique peptide-loaded hydrogel nanoparticle
drug delivery system can enable a first-in-class therapeutic for the millions of
patients with hyperoxaluria. More importantly, this drug system opens the door
for additional orally administered, locally delivered, peptide therapeutics for
other difficult gastrointestinal conditions, creating substantial healthcare and
economic gains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR project is developing an
innovative drug delivery system consisting of peptide-loaded hydrogel
nanoparticles (PLHN) as a vehicle to deliver novel peptides to the intestinal
epithelium, ultimately enabling a first-in-class oral pill to prevent and treat
hyperoxaluria and related kidney stones (KS). Once delivered, the nanoparticles
will adhere to the intestinal mucosa and slowly release the peptides,
stimulating intestinal oxalate secretion, thereby lowering plasma and urine
oxalate and hence preventing KS formation. Such delivery will enable peptides to
immediately act on the intestinal epithelium to induce oxalate secretion, before
being degraded by proteolytic enzymes, mimicking the behavior of a gut bacteria,
from which peptides were derived. Research objectives are: 1. Develop PLHN for
sustained and localized delivery of peptides to the intestinal epithelium.
Peptide release kinetics will be quantified to ensure a 4-week release duration.
2. Show that the PLHN, given rectally as enemas and orally by gavage, will
deliver the peptides to the intestinal epithelium in a localized/sustained
manner, and that they will significantly reduce plasma and urine oxalate levels
in hyperoxalemic and hyperoxaluric mice. Showing dosing once every 3 days
similarly reduces urine and plasma oxalate levels compared to twice daily dosing
will demonstrate sustained releasability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.