* 1914835
* Conference on Science at the Sanford Underground Research Facility 2019 May 15-17, 2019 in Lead, South Dakota.
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Xinhua Bai, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Whitmore
* 04/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award will provide partial support for the "Conference on Science at the
Sanford Underground Research Facility 2019." The conference will be held May
15-17, 2019 at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Rapid City,
South Dakota and will have an impact on the broader field including particle and
nuclear physics. It will have a particular focus on early career scientists
(including graduate students). This award will provide participant travel
support for these students to be able to participate in the symposium.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CoSSURF 2019 conference will bring together both
theoreticians and experimentalists across various fields in nuclear and particle
physics, as well as material scientists, geologists, and biologists. It is
expected that there will be a thriving exchange between all participants on the
latest developments in underground science and engineering topics. While
scientists are planning next-generation experiments at SURF and around the
world, face-to-face discussions on the experimental and theoretical status and
expectations will benefit the underground science community in their planning of
future programs at SURF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.