* 1914065
* Collaborative Research: WoU-MMA: Development of an Advanced Data Selection System for the DUNE Far Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Georgia Karagiorgi, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Shank
* 12/31/2023
* USD 449,936.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists
leaves open many questions about the universe, including such fundamental
questions as to why the Higgs mass has the value it has and why there is no
antimatter in the universe. One of the primary areas to search for answers to
these and other open questions about the universe, how it came to be, and why it
is the way it is, is to focus on a study of the properties of neutrinos and to
use what we know and can learn about neutrinos as probes of science Beyond the
Standard Model (BSM). Detailed measurements of the interactions of these unusual
particles are one of the most promising ways to probe for new physics beyond the
Standard Model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrinos can be produced from ground-based
facilities, such as the accelerator complex at Fermilab, and can also come from
astrophysical origin. The interactions of these neutrinos will be recorded and
studied in the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) located at the
Sanford Underground Research Facility located in South Dakota. DUNE, with its
large liquid Argon Time Projection Chambers, will study the oscillations of the
accelerator-based neutrino beam from Fermilab, and additionally is sensitive to
extra-terrestrial neutrinos, including those from supernova explosions, solar
neutrinos, and other sources. The challenge for the experimenters is the vastly
different energies of the neutrinos produced by Fermilab and those from many
interesting astrophysical sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this award,
which includes support from the NSF Windows on the Universe Program, the
Columbia group will initiate the development of trigger and data acquisition
strategies that can provide a guide for DUNE detection of low energy electron
neutrino interactions in Liquid Argon. This includes the use of machine learning
techniques for triggering, an approach which has recently been demonstrated to
be a disruptive technology for event selection and reconstruction in liquid
Argon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this triggering approach is
significant. It has the potential to allow the DUNE experiment to make direct
and significant contributions to the international scientific effort in Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics and time-domain astrophysics, through access to solar and
supernova neutrinos and as well as to searches for proton
decay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.