* 1914608
* Bacterial Photosynthetic Design and Adaptation Probed by Multidimensional Spectroscopies
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Ogilvie, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 631,370.00

In photosynthesis, the primary processes of photosynthetic energy transfer and
charge separation occur with near unit quantum efficiency. Underlying this
stunning efficiency is the energy landscape that provides ultrafast directional
transfer of energy from antennae to reaction centers, and directional electron
transfer within reaction centers. Exposed to high light and reactive oxygen
species, plant and bacterial systems employ intricate adaptations that remodel
their energy landscape to minimize photodamage. Nonlinear spectroscopy has
played an important role in developing our current understanding of
photosynthetic design principles. Two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy (2DES)
has proven to be a powerful tool for revealing electronic structure and
photosynthetic energy transfer pathways. It has also revealed quantum coherent
dynamics, the physical origin of which has been hotly debated. In a number of
photosynthetic systems, these coherent dynamics have been proposed to arise from
electronic-vibrational resonances that may be important for photosynthetic
energy transfer and charge separation. This project aims to improve the spatial
resolution and ability to access dark states of current multidimensional
spectroscopies and employ a combination of 2DES and fluorescence-detected 2DES
(F- 2DES) to study the energy landscape, quantum coherent dynamics, and adaptive
mechanisms in purple bacteria in vivo. Full understanding of photosynthetic
design principles requires moving beyond previous studies that have primarily
focused on purified solutions of individual photosynthetic complexes to examine
how these components work together as their spectroscopic properties, relative
composition and spatial organization is remodeled to adapt to changing
environmental conditions. The project will also provide extensive scientific
training for the graduate and undergraduate students working on the project. The
project will enhance the available spectroscopic tools for probing the dynamics
of local biological environments and studying energy transfer in natural and
artificial systems. The extensive experimental characterization of the purple
bacterial photosynthetic network will drive the development of theoretical
models of the electronic structure and dynamics of multichromophoric systems.
The understanding we gain from using purple bacteria as a model system may guide
the future design of artificial light-harvesting materials. Building on the PI's
previous success in hosting the Conference for Undergraduate Women in Physics
(CUWiP) in 2008 and 2015, the project will aim to host a CUWiP meeting at the
University of Michigan in 2021. The meeting will seek to bring ~150 women from
across the Midwest to learn about career opportunities and research in Physics
and strengthen the network of US women in Physics. The project will also support
outreach to local elementary schools through coaching of Science Olympiad teams
and lab tours to economically disadvantaged students from the Detroit
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will expand the toolset of
multidimensional spectroscopies to provide unprecedented sensitivity, spatial
resolution and access to dark states to enable in vivo studies of photosynthetic
function. Using purple bacteria as a model system this research will address the
physical nature, functional relevance, and true dephasing time of quantum
coherence in purple bacteria, how do purple bacteria remodel their energy-
landscape to adapt to high and low light conditions, and how do purple bacteria
adapt their photoprotection mechanisms in aerobic environments. By uncovering
photosynthetic design principles in the simpler bacterial systems the PI aims to
pave the way for a better understanding of plant photosystems. Such an
understanding is a fundamental pursuit that will enable us to learn from Nature
to meet our own energy needs through the development of artificial light-
harvesting systems and biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics and the Molecular Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.