* 1914354
* SBIR Phase I:  Reagent Development for a Rapid Enzymatic DNA Synthesis Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Daniel Arlow, Ansa Biotechnologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to advance the development of a new method for rapid
and accurate DNA synthesis. The ability to synthesize "gene-length" DNA
molecules (&gt;500 bases) is invaluable for biological and biomedical research
and is a key enabling technology for the rapidly growing field of synthetic
biology. Existing methods for producing DNA sequences rely on organic chemistry
and are generally limited to the direct synthesis of 200 base molecules,
necessitating further assembly into gene-length products. However, the assembly
process used is failure-prone and not compatible with all desired sequences. The
technology being developed in this project will demonstrate the development of a
new DNA synthesis method based on enzymes, which, in contrast to organic
chemistry, promises to enable the direct synthesis of gene-length DNA molecules.
An additional benefit of enzymatic DNA synthesis is that it is performed in
aqueous conditions using nontoxic reagents, whereas chemical DNA synthesis uses
toxic reagents and produces hazardous waste. The enzymatic DNA synthesis method,
once fully developed, will be the core technology supporting a rapid DNA
synthesis service that will accelerate research in life sciences and synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop
optimized "TdT-dNTP conjugate" reagents for a new enzymatic DNA synthesis
method. The exquisite specificity of enzymes promises to enable the direct
synthesis of much longer DNA constructs than is possible with the industry-
standard chemical DNA synthesis method in use today, accelerating workflows in
synthetic biology. A TdT-dNTP conjugate consists of the "template-independent
polymerase" enzyme TdT with a tethered nucleoside triphosphate substrate that
can be incorporated into a DNA molecule by TdT. After adding the tethered
nucleotide to a DNA molecule, the polymerase remains attached to the end of the
DNA molecule via the tether to the added nucleotide, blocking other conjugate
molecules from further extending the DNA molecule, and thus ensuring that the
molecule only gets extended by one nucleotide. The linkage can then be cleaved
to release the polymerase and expose the DNA molecule for subsequent extension.
Previous research has demonstrated that TdT-dNTP conjugates based on a
photocleavable linker can be used for stepwise de novo DNA synthesis. This
project proposes to develop new TdT-dNTP conjugates based on a linker that can
be rapidly and specifically cleaved using a hydrolase enzyme, finally realizing
the promise of a fully-enzymatic DNA synthesis method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.