* 1914937
* New Methods in High-Dimensional Causal Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Debashis Ghosh, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,779.00

With the popularity of deep learning algorithms in the scientific literature as
well as by their use and development by companies such as Google, Microsoft and
Facebook, their deployment in a variety of tasks is rapidly accelerating.
Because of this, better mathematical understanding of deep learning, and more
broadly, machine learning algorithms in decision making processes are needed. A
key innovation that is needed is how to marry machine learning algorithms into
causal modelling procedures, which will help algorithms to develop "reasoning
capabilities" (e.g., understand why an algorithm is making the
decision/prediction that it makes). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The problem that will
be addressed in this project is how to model confounders so as to develop causal
effect estimators that have desirable sampling properties. In addition, it is
important to have well-justified procedures that computationally scale with the
number of observations. In this project, the PI and team will focus their
research in two areas. The first will be to understand the implications of deep
learning algorithms and their performance on foundational assumptions for the
popular potential outcomes model. In recent work, the PI discovered a
fundamental tension between Gaussian process classification algorithms,
covariate overlap and regularity of causal effect estimators. The goal of the
first aim of the research will be to see if a similar phenomenon holds for deep
learning algorithms. In addition, the interpolation properties of Gaussian
process and deep learning-based classification algorithms will be explored. The
second part of the project will deal with developing scalable algorithms for
causal effect estimation. New computationally scalable algorithms for causal
effect estimation will be developed as part of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.