* 1914133
* High Precision Measurements of Beta Decay Using Stored Ultracold Neutrons and Cold Neutron Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Paul Huffman, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2023
* USD 932,928.00

This award supports high precision measurements of neutron beta decay, a process
in which a neutron decays, because of the weak nuclear force (or weak
interaction), into a proton, an electron and an anti-neutrino. The weak nuclear
force is important, in that it powers our sun and helps determine the abundance
of elements in the universe. Neutron decay is also important because it involves
only a single nucleon, making possible very precise predictions from the
"standard model" of particle physics without the complications due to the
presence of other nucleons. With very accurate measurements of neutron decay, we
can perform a kind of particle physics "forensics", looking for discrepancies in
our standard model which can indicate the presence of new forces, but without
using high energy particle beams such as those at the Large Hadron Collider at
CERN. This research is a part of the "precision frontier" for physics, and
defines the cutting edge of our knowledge of the weak nuclear force and possible
new interactions. The PI and his group contribute to a new measurement of the
neutron's lifetime (UCNtau) and an angular correlation measurement (Nab). The
lifetime and angular correlations measurements probe different aspects of the
weak interaction, and if successful, will sharpen our knowledge of critical
components of the weak interaction and contribute to strong limits on extensions
the standard model, at or above those which are being established at CERN. An
important aspect of the project is the training of students and post-docs. This
training comes in part because of the specific nature of the research projects,
which utilize nuclear physics analysis and technology (which also has real-world
applications in energy generation and medical imaging, for example) and in part
from the many opportunities students working in the program have to perform
research at national laboratories and nuclear facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the experiments supported by the award, Nab, will
use an unpolarized beam of cold neutrons at the Spallation Neutron Source from
the Oak Ridge National Laboratory to measure the angular correlation between the
decay electron and the anti-neutrino (called the electron-anti-neutrino
correlation), with the goal of over an order of magnitude improvement in the
precision of this parameter. The other, UCNtau, is situated at the ultracold
neutron (UCN) source at Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), and targets
precision levels below 0.3 seconds during the current funding period. The impact
of these programs being successful are: (1) knowledge of the axial form factor
at the level required to determine the CKM matrix element Vud at the same level
as the current theoretical uncertainty for the electro-weak radiative
corrections, (2) knowledge of the lifetime at a level such that it will limit
tests of our models for the cosmological He-4 abundance for some time, and (3)
limits on tensor couplings at or above the level expected from CERN. Motivation
for these measurements has been amplified over the last year by theoretical
progress on the electroweak radiative corrections and lattice calculations of
the axial coupling constant, with both opening new, higher precision probes for
new physics. For each of these experiments, this group brings its experience in
beta decay measurements to bear on key sources of systematic error by developing
instrumentation and analysis required by the experiments. For Nab, for example,
the group is analyzing the effects of incomplete collection of the energy of
decay electrons and the calibration procedures, a critical component of the
systematic error budget for this experiment. UCNtau is designed to store UCNs in
a magneto-gravitational trap, where the UCNs do not contact with the trap walls.
The top of the trap is open, permitting detectors to be lowered into the trap to
measure UCN populations and determine the lifetime. The group will continue to
develop UCN detectors for this purpose and focus additional effort on
understanding systematic errors due to UCNs with high enough energies to slowly
escape the trap and shift the measured value of the lifetime. These tasks are
essential and ongoing parts of the planned experiments, with completed
measurements and analysis incorporated into publications during the proposal
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.