* 1914754
* CREST-Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: The Effects of Strong Confinement in the Ultrasmall Nanoparticle Regime on the Mechanism and Charge Transfer Rates in CdSe QDs
* EDU,EES
* 02/15/2020,01/31/2022
* Megan Webster, Webster, Megan
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 01/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Interface Design and Engineered
Assembly of Low Dimensional Structures (CREST-IDEALS) at the City College of New
York. The goal of this research is understanding the optoelectronic properties
of ultrasmall CdSe quantum dots (QDs). Quantum Dots are on the nano scale which
results in optical and electronic properties that are different from larger
particles. QDs have the potential to tap into the enormous potential of Solar
Energy. The proposed work intends to investigate ultrasmall quantum dots
synthesized by the researcher with x-ray spectroscopy and transmission electron
microscopy techniques. These techniques will allow the researcher to more fully
understand the ability of ultrasmall quantum dots to transfer charge and
formulate a theoretical model to explain the behavior. This analysis will allow
the incorporation of ultrasmall QDs into solar cell designs.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasmall quantum dots display broad emission despite their
monodispersity. Photoluminescence excitation (PLE) will allow for the
investigation of which excitation wavelengths can cause the emission of a
specified wavelength. Preliminary PLE data indicates that there are states
within the bandgap to which direct absorption is possible. PLE data gathered
from Qds will be compared to time resolved photoluminescence data (TRPL). The
TRPL allows one to detect multiexponential decay systems, indicating that such
systems have multiple lifetimes. Two acceptor species will be investigated with
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM). The acceptor species include a) molecules (ligands) of both e- donating
and e- accepting character and b) carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The molecules will
begin with investigating alkylthiols of varying chain length and benzene
sulfonic monohydrate (BSAM). Qds will be embedded within CNTs as a means of not
only charge transfer enhancement but also QD alignment for connectivity between
QDs as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.