* 1914780
* Creep in Shale Across Space and Time
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ronaldo Borja, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 421,824.00

Shale is a fine-grained sedimentary rock composed of softer materials such as
clay and organics, as well as stiffer minerals such as quartz, feldspar, pyrite,
and carbonates. It is the most common sedimentary rock on Earth, estimated to
represent between 44 and 56 percent of all sedimentary rocks. Unlike crystalline
rocks that tend to fracture under deformation, shales can serve as a seal
because they are more pliable in the sense that they can undergo significant
deformation without breaking. However, they are also known to exhibit
significant time-dependent deformation behavior, or creep, that is observed
across spatial and temporal scales. The tendency of shale to creep is well
correlated with how the softer and stiffer components of this rock share an
imposed load. In addition, the reduction in sample volume during creep suggests
that this phenomenon is accommodated by compaction of the pore spaces between
the solid grains. The latter process can lead to significant ground subsidence
that often compromises the integrity and sustainability of civil
infrastructures. Using laboratory and numerical modeling techniques, this
project will investigate the multiscale creep behavior in shale across space and
time. Laboratory experiments include indentation tests to probe the creep
behavior at the nanometer scale, and triaxial tests on cylindrical specimens of
rock to investigate creep at the millimeter scale. The combined laboratory
experimentation-numerical simulation activities of the project will involve the
participation of undergraduate students through summer research. A promotional
video of the laboratory tests and numerical simulation results will be produced
for recruiting graduate students as well as for
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to capture the
creep processes in shale at multiple scales in both space and time. Scale-
bridging techniques will be developed linking creep processes at the nanometer,
micrometer, and millimeter scales. Shale will be modeled as a mixture of softer
matter (clay, organics) and stiffer matter (quartz, feldspar, pyrite,
carbonates) whose creep behavior is described by Viscoplasticity Theory. A
framework developed from a previous NSF project entitled "Creep in Shale at
Submicron Scale" will be employed to quantify creep of the softer matter from
nano-indentation tests and creep of the shale matrix from micro-indentation
tests. Hold periods during nano- and micro-indentation will be timed to fully
delineate the expected exponential decay of creep indentation. Validation of the
model will be conducted from triaxial creep tests at the millimeter scale.
Indentation creep tests typically last no more than a few minutes, whereas
triaxial creep tests last for several hours and even days. This research will
reconcile this very large discrepancy in the time scales for these two
experiments. Throughout the course of testing, the microstructure of the
material will be imaged using Transmission X-ray Microscopy (TXM), micro-
Computed Tomography (mCT), and conventional Computed Tomography (CT) to
delineate the spatial heterogeneity of shale at different scales. Creep of shale
is one of the most intriguing and challenging phenomena in rock engineering
because of the highly heterogeneous nature of this material. The combined
experimental-numerical investigation will accommodate heterogeneity and will
lead to better understanding and more realistic modeling of creep processes in
shale at multiple scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.