* 1914537
* CAREER: Geometric Methods in Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Jared Speck, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2022
* USD 140,923.00

Many of our most celebrated physical theories are based on wave-like partial
differential equations (PDEs). Important examples include the Einstein equations
of general relativity (which form the basis of modern cosmology), the Euler
equations of fluid mechanics, the equations of elasticity, and the equations of
crystal optics. Despite hundreds of years of mathematical progress, major gaps
remain in our understanding of solutions. For example, although it is expected
that solutions often "become infinite" there are few cases in which
mathematicians have found a proof. Moreover, in other contexts, it is not even
known if the equations have solutions. Thus, we still do not have a definitive
understanding of the physical predictions of many equations of classical
physics. The main obstacle is that the aforementioned equations are extremely
difficult to study except under unrealistic simplifying assumptions. However,
there have been some recent advancements in resolving some of these
difficulties. For example, recent results provide a detailed description of Big
Bang formation in solutions to the Einstein equations and shocks in solutions to
the Euler and related equations. A major goal of this project is to extend these
results to apply to other physically relevant equations and regimes. This work
will provide new insight on the long-time behavior of waves and on the ways in
which various physical theories can break down. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project involves the rigorous study of quasilinear hyperbolic PDEs and
has three main research goals. The first is to provide a detailed description of
singularity formation in various quasilinear wave-like equations of physical
significance, with an emphasis on avoiding symmetry assumptions whenever
possible. Examples include various Einstein-matter equations, the Euler
equations, and the equations of elasticity. This research will expand our
understanding of singularity formation by enlarging the class of equations and
the class of initial conditions that are known to lead to blow-up. The second
research goal is to prove local well-posedness for a class of physically
relevant quasilinear hyperbolic problems with a free boundary along which the
hyperbolicity of the equations degenerates. The third is to develop new tools
for understanding the behavior of solutions to quasilinear hyperbolic PDEs with
multiple characteristics in contexts where knowledge of the precise
characteristics is essential. An ultimate goal is to use these tools to prove
that for such equations, under suitable assumptions on the nonlinearities and
data, shock formation occurs and is stable. This proposal has several
educational components that are intimately connected to the research problems.
Many of the problems have components that can be investigated by advanced
undergraduates, and the PI plans to supervise undergraduate research projects.
There are also components suitable for PhD students. Moreover, the PI is
organizing, with three co-organizers, a pair of summer schools targeted at
advanced undergraduates and beginning graduate students from across the US and
beyond. The PI will also develop curriculum materials that will be made freely
available to the public online.