* 1914378
* SBIR Phase I:  Work Intelligence System Running Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Arsalan Lodhi, WISRAN
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,977.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from improving economic
sustainability for farmers and autonomously identifying business cases for
collaborative farming through sourced-out jobs that can be more effectively done
by other farmers for a number of reasons such as proximity to job sites and
availability of resources. The market currently focuses on the efficiency of
equipment and inputs utilization for precision farming to improve profits. The
proposed project will boost profits further by optimizing end-to-end farm
processes that implicitly drive the efficient usage of equipment, labor, and
fuel. The proposed project can potentially save 213 million gallons of fuel burn
per year across the US (covering 253 million acres), which in turn will reduce
emissions and improve air quality. The fuel savings will result from optimizing
the idle, load, unload and drive times of the equipment. Broadly, farmers today
consider process variability of farming as part of the business due to a lack of
process and financial impact measurement systems, which results in failing to
capture unrealized profits of $100K-$300K on a typical 10,000 acre farm lot.
Healthcare and manufacturing are example industries that have controlled process
variability by using process and performance measurement systems. The proposed
innovation will enhance scientific and technological understanding of
controlling process variability in agriculture by autonomously measuring the
time and cost of end-to-end farm processes and identifying common root causes
and cost drivers. The innovation will provide win-win economic sustainability
for both small and large farmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project identifies hard to track operating
inefficiencies, with a financial impact that results in capturing unrealized
profits for farmers. Today, farmers use averages to track operating spend and
are not able to track the actual spend allocation to services and activities by
field and per acre. Farmers today do not have a full view of actual operating
performance across the on-farm supply chain, which in turn prevents them from
analyzing the financial impact of how they work. Due to process variability,
farmers often ignore operating inefficiency instead of measuring and analyzing
the financial impact of such operating inefficiency and putting in place
contingency plans and operating controls to mitigate operating losses. The
research objective of Phase I is to show farm managers their unrealized profits
due to operating inefficiency, and automatically identify root causes for
farmers to manage cost drivers through better planning and controls to capture
unrealized profits of $100K-$300K for every 10,000 acres. The proposed research
will quantify the benefits of process measurement, provide live tracking of
equipment of any make, model, and age in a single view, provide live visibility
of actual operating spend by activities and services by field and per acre, and
reconcile actuals against target performance metrics. It will also identify root
causes and cost drivers that, when controlled, can boost profits. The
anticipated results will typically improve profits for farmers by 2-5% and
create economic opportunities for small farmers through collaborative
farming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.