* 1914236
* SBIR Phase I:  BlockReduce: Scaling Public Blockchains for Enterprise Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Karl Kreder, Saltare Systems LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to transform the manner in which people and entities
engage in transfer of value. In our current economy, many businesses operate as
middlemen between the producer of a good or service and the consumer of that
good or service. Examples of such businesses can be categorized as financial
services, exchange services, and regulated utilities. These intermediaries
create a large inefficiency on producers, consumers, and the economy as a whole.
Many of these businesses can be replaced partly or in whole by open source
public blockchains. Over time, open-source public blockchains will competitively
evolve to deliver the highest economic value for all market participants at the
lowest cost. Although blockchain technology has enormous promise to positively
impact society, current public blockchains have not been able to scale
sufficiently to meet the needs of most enterprise applications.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop BlockReduce: a scalable,
trustless, public blockchain for enterprise applications. BlockReduce presents a
new blockchain topology to offer 3+ orders of magnitude improvement in
transaction throughput while avoiding the introduction of hierarchical power
structures and centralization. Additionally, BlockReduce is able to provide low-
cost transactions with stable fees, which is key to enabling countless
enterprise applications. By answering the issues of scale, cost, and access to
public blockchains, BlockReduce will be the catalyst for enterprises moving from
proof-of-concept (PoC) blockchain demonstrations to full scale deployments. If
successful, BlockReduce could serve as fundamental infrastructure for digital
value exchanges much like ethernet was technological infrastructure for digital
information exchange.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.