* 1914294
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a genomic targeting drug delivery platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Sean Jeffries, DESIGN THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is a technology that enables the development of novel
therapeutics to treat a range of serious genetic neurodegenerative diseases. The
proposed drug delivery platform would help improve the understanding of the root
cause of certain genetic neurodegenerative diseases. Further, new therapeutics
to treat the root cause of severe neurogenerative disorders would have strong
commercial potential. Currently, patients have limited treatment options and
require significant and costly supportive care. New therapeutics would both
improve the lives of patients and create value for insurance providers by
reducing the need for costly care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to demonstrate proof-of-concept for a genomic targeting drug-
delivery platform. Unstable nucleotide repeats in the genome have been
identified as the root cause of over 20 neurodegenerative conditions. These are
debilitating disorders with high disease burden impacting millions of lives.
Most nucleotide repeat expansion diseases are caused by a toxic gain-of-function
mutation in a single allele. These diseases show dominant inheritance where most
patients have a normal, unaffected copy. Silencing expression of the disease
allele would address the root cause of the disease, completely halt progression
of degenerative symptoms, and likely enable patients to regain lost function.
The proposed effort seeks to develop a proof-of-concept allele-specific gene
modulator that silences the mutant allele in myotonic dystrophy 1 (DMPK). Using
this drug delivery platform, the objective is to synthesize molecules that would
target transcriptional repressors specifically to the diseased DMPK allele.
Using patient cells, the plan is to test for molecules that silence expression
from the repeat containing diseased DMPK allele without impacting the healthy
copy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.