* 1914147
* STTR Phase I:  Building with Carbon: Improving Construction Materials with Nanocarbon Additives from Natural Gas
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Randy Vander Wal, H Quest Vanguard, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the improvements to
the strength, durability, and longevity of concrete infrastructure and
construction materials with novel graphene-rich carbon nanomaterial additives.
Advancement of this technology area (advanced materials/nanomaterials for
infrastructure applications) will directly reduce the costs of construction and
maintenance ($165B/year in public spending) while supporting the nation's core
economic activities ($14T/year in transported goods). The enhanced strength and
longevity of nanocarbon coatings and concrete composites will reduce the amount
of raw material required to meet specifications resulting in a net reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions (concrete production is responsible for 7% of global
GHG emissions). The innovation will enhance scientific understanding of the
effect of graphene-rich additives on the permeability and strength of concrete
and coating composites using both advanced analytical techniques (x-ray
tomography) and industry standard procedures (ASTM testing). It will also
enhance understanding of the processing required (e.g. functionalization and
dispersion) to integrate graphene-rich additives into polyurethane materials and
concrete. Additionally, the project will help refine the plasma-based process
conditions to produce carbon materials optimized for these
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project will demonstrate enhancement of mechanical properties and
impermeability of construction materials' concrete and concrete coatings using
graphene-rich nanocarbon additives derived from microwave plasma conversion of
natural gas. The permeability of concrete is its primary pitfall and is
responsible for the two most common causes of failure: carbonation and chloride
contamination. Sealants can extend concrete's lifespan but are expensive to
apply and often deteriorate rapidly due to environmental effects (UV, chemicals,
mechanical abrasion). Graphene additives can enhance the barrier properties and
mechanical strength of concrete and sealants, but are currently too costly for
construction and infrastructure applications. The objective of this project is
to enhance the barrier and mechanical properties of concrete and sealants using
a novel graphene-based carbon nanomaterial produced using a cost-effective,
scalable, plasma-based process. Carbon nanomaterials will be produced at varied
process conditions and, following post-treatment and functionalization, will be
incorporated into polyurethane formulations and concrete mixtures. Water and
chloride penetration into composites will be examined using advanced x-ray
tomographic 3D imaging. Composites will undergo further testing in accordance
with AASHTO/ASTM-standards. The anticipated results will establish the technical
benefits of using graphene-based nanocarbon additives in concrete and
sealants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.