* 1914581
* A Continuum Deformation Approach to Unmanned Aircraft Traffic Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Hossein Rastgoftar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This project will develop mathematical foundations to safely and efficiently
coordinate the Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) traffic envisioned to routinely
fly above urban centers. Per emerging UAS Traffic Management (UTM) standards, a
dedicated transit airspace layer will assure UAS are separated from manned
aircraft traffic allowing UAS to focus on coordinating with each other. The
project is for a two-layer physics-based approach to route UAS as coordinated
flow through high-density airspace transit channels. At the top "macroscopic"
coordination layer, UAS will be assigned to traffic channels based on their
destinations and physical ability to coordinate flight paths with each other. At
the "microscopic" coordination layer, the existing continuum deformation
cooperative control strategy will be extended to allow large-scale UAS groups to
efficiently follow routes that respect airspace channel geometries backed by
mathematical guarantees of collision avoidance. The project also defines an
interface between macroscopic and microscopic layers to deal with unpredicted
events and UAS failure in a resilient fashion. The theoretical achievements of
the project will be supported by large-scale simulations and flight experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project offers a physics-inspired traffic coordination
approach for Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) traffic management. The available
physics-inspired approaches previously applied to highway traffic flow will be
extended for low-altitude UAS traffic coordination in which no predefined paths
exist. Airspace is considered a finite control volume in which coordinated UAS
treated as a continuum deformation organize traffic flow within airspace
channels prescribed by higher-level macroscopic coordination. Eulerian continuum
mechanics efficiently defines macroscopic coordination as the solution of a
parabolic partial differential equation (PDE) with spatiotemporal parameters. It
is assumed vehicles operating in the planned airspace admit the nominal
coordination, while unplanned airspace envelops no-fly zones and non-cooperative
UAS. At the microscopic level, clustering vehicles is suggested based on vehicle
performance limits. UAS clusters, with each UAS treated as a particle of a
deformable body, use generalized leader-follower continuum deformation
coordination to acquire the desired macroscopic coordination by local
communication. This advances the existing theory by relaxing constraints on
inter-agent communication topology and leaders' locations. The project's
approach offers resilience to vehicle failures and rapid changes in airspace
availability by formal safety analysis. Specifically, an adaptive boundary
control algorithm will be developed to remove a non-cooperative or failed UAS
from safely-coordinated channels in planned airspace. Large-scale simulations
and flight tests will be used to refine models and validate coordination
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.