* 1914412
* Topics in String Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Eric D'Hoker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 943,982.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Eric D'Hoker, Michael
Gutperle, and Per Kraus at the University of California, Los Angeles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory remains the most promising candidate for the
unification of the Standard Model of elementary particles with General
Relativity, the theory of gravitational forces, in a framework consistent with
the laws of Quantum Mechanics. Developments in string theory over the past
decades have spawned progress in many areas of physics and mathematics, thereby
serving the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its
most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical
laws. Professors D'Hoker, Gutperle, and Kraus aim to deepen the understanding of
string theory, quantum gravity, and black-hole physics by exploring new symmetry
principles, new connections with pure mathematics, and by performing
sophisticated calculations at the frontier of string theory. This project will
also have significant broader impacts. String theory continues to attract and
inspire some of the brightest graduate students and postdocs in physics, and
Professors D'Hoker, Gutperle, and Kraus will involve graduate students and
postdocs in their research while actively mentoring them on their path to
becoming professional scientists. Workshops organized with other universities in
Southern California will serve to introduce junior physicists at UCLA to the
broader community of researchers, while interactions with students during visits
to local middle and high schools will promote public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, Professor D'Hoker continues to
advance the subject of superstring perturbation theory, its applications to the
low-energy effective interactions of supergravity, and its implications for the
high-energy behavior of string amplitudes. Professor Gutperle will investigate
five-dimensional super-conformal field theories, as well as domain wall,
surface, and line operators in conformal field theories utilizing the AdS/CFT
correspondence. Professor Kraus will study conformal field theories in various
dimensions, with an emphasis on elucidating structures that have implications
for quantum gravity via the AdS/CFT correspondence. Professors D'Hoker,
Gutperle, and Kraus will also use conformal-bootstrap methods to study the
properties of the conformal field theory which is holographically dual to Type
IIB string theory on AdS3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.