* 1914569
* Understanding the Direct and Ozone-Mediated Impacts of (CO2) and Ozone Depleting Substances (ODS) on the Climate System
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,346.00

The ozone hole and greenhouse gas-induced global warming are distinct
environmental problems. The ozone hole matters because reductions in
stratospheric ozone lead to increases in harmful ultraviolet radiation reaching
the surface. The loss of ozone in the hole is caused by a small set of ozone
depleting substances (ODS, primarily chlorofluorocarbons) used in a specific set
of applications such as spray cans and cooling equipment. Global warming, on the
other hand, is caused by the heat-trapping effect of greenhouse gases emitted
throughout the world economy, principally the carbon dioxide (CO2) emitted in
the burning of fossil fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the clear distinction
between global warming and the ozone hole there are important physical pathways
that link the two. One is that most ODS are also greenhouse gases. ODS
concentrations are minuscule compared to CO2 but they are thousands of times
more effective as absorbers of infrared radiation, thus their heat-trapping
effect is substantial. Another connection is that CO2 increases can change the
amount and distribution of ozone in the stratosphere. Although CO2 warms the
troposphere it cools the stratosphere, a difference caused by their opposite
temperature profiles (cold aloft, warm below in the troposphere and vice versa
in the stratosphere). Cooler stratospheric temperatures can increase ozone
concentrations by reducing the reaction rates for ozone-depleting chemistry. But
a CO2 increase can also cause a speed-up of the stratospheric overturning
circulation, which in turn decreases the lifetime of stratospheric
ozone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work explores the climatic effects of CO2 and
ODS, recognizing that they affect climate both directly and through their impact
on stratospheric ozone. In addition to global temperature the study considers
regional influences on sea surface temperature, sea level pressure, jet stream
wind speed, and other variables. Preliminary work suggests, for example, that
the greenhouse warming due to ODS is greatest in the subtropics of the North and
South Pacific, presumably as a consequence of the uneven geographical
distribution of ODS. A further consideration is that ODS can affect climate
either directly, as a powerful greenhouse gas, or indirectly through the changes
in climate induced by ozone loss. For example, previous work by the PI and
others shows that the ozone hole has affected the winds, temperature, and
precipitation of the Southern Hemisphere. The work also examines changes in
stratospheric ozone due to CO2 increases. The primary research tool of the
project is the Whole Atmosphere Community Climate Model developed at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the societal impacts of ozone depletion and global
warming. Efforts to address these impacts will benefit from a better physical
understanding of the processes involved. The work also fosters international
scientific collaboration given the participation of researchers at the Swiss
Federal Institute of Technology in Zurich. The project also provides support and
training to a graduate student and a postdoctoral research associate, thereby
promoting the future workforce in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.