* 1914526
* Collaborative Research: Lahar dynamics and Monitoring: A multiparametric approach grounded in infrasound
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gregory Waite, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 294,662.00

Lahars, or volcanic mud flows, produce infrasound (low-frequency acoustic
energy) that can be detected from distances of many kilometers. As such, it is
possible to remotely characterize these hazardous mud flows by tracking their
flow positions and energetics through time. This work seeks to develop
infrasound analytical tools to locate where lahars initiate, how far and fast
they move, and estimate their mass flow. Toward these goals the project will
deploy and maintain seismic and infrasonic instruments at Fuego Volcano
(Guatemala), where lahars are common during the rainy season (April through
September). Rain gauges and time lapse cameras will be installed at locations
along the lahar paths to understand how lahars initiate and to validate flow
characteristics through direct observation. Fuego volcano is an ideal candidate
for this study because of its frequent lahars and relatively easy access and
because information learned will be applicable for mitigating risks. Lessons
learned at Fuego may then be applied to dozens of volcanoes in the US and around
the world where lahar activity is common. The project aims to train several
graduate and undergraduate students from the US and result in scientific
publication. Important capacity building in Guatemala will result from the
training of Guatemalan scientists and technology transfer to observatory staff.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve our understanding of the seismo-
acoustic source mechanisms associated with lahars, and to develop methods that
can be used to track such sources and other rapid gravity-driven mass movements.
Through multi-parametric observations this study will contribute to our
fundamental understanding of how lahars are triggered during precipitation
events and where material is incorporated along the lahar flow path. Infra-
acoustic arrays and broadband seismic sensors will be deployed at Fuego Volcano
(Guatemala) with the intent to remotely monitor the most frequent channels that
carry lahars during the rainy season. Signal processing techniques using data
from an integrated network of arrays will be used to track and quantify flow
energetics. Fuego provides an ideal field site where seismo-acoustic data will
be combined with contemporaneous rainfall and geomorphologic (terrain and
channel slope) observations. Computer vision techniques will be used to quantify
timing, mass flow, and velocities of lahars at various positions along channels.
This work merges geomorphology and geophysical approaches to study hazardous
lahar phenomena. Broader impacts include development of applied technology for
hazard mitigation and training of both US-based and Guatemala-based students and
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the PredicMon of
and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.