* 1914419
* I-Corps Teams:  Integration of Non-Equilibrium Gliding Arc Plasma into Hydroponic Produce Growth Systems for Improved Crop Health and Added Nutrients
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Alexander Rabinovich, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a new
standard of plant purity, which can have tremendous positive health consequences
for the millions of worldwide consumers. The cold plasma water purification and
enrichment technology, utilized in our proposed hydroponic system, can extend to
other areas of agriculture as the antimicrobial chemicals produced in plasma
rapidly kill pathogens and are safe for both plants and animals. The potential
benefits stemming from this technology can help vertical farmers to eradicate
food scarcity challenges in urban centers all over the world, powered by the
sun's energy. Given the imminent, significant, and accelerating problems of
agricultural sustainability and water conservation facing humanity, this
technology has the potential to play a significant role in helping to preserve
and sustain life on Earth as we know it. Additionally, the decrease in water
volume needed for irrigation and the increased yield of plants treated with
plasma-treated water also supports applications of plasma treatment in various
farming and reforestation efforts. Finally, an ambitious goal for the company is
to implement this technology in environments where resources other than
electricity are extremely limited, such as long-term space missions.

This I-Corps project will allow the company to better understand the needs of
the company's potential customers and how plasma technology can offer solutions
to the commercial agricultural market while providing technological insight to
members of the hydroponic agriculture industry and opportunities for significant
improvements to their existing agricultural systems and practices. Through these
plasma technology commercialization efforts, the team envisions facilitating
bigger, healthier, and more sustainable crop harvests for the modern farmer,
while also reducing the volume of potentially harmful chemical additives,
environmental damage, and wastefulness associated with current production
methods. Current lab-scale research results are very promising, however,
detailed analysis of the market and interviews with professional hydroponic
farmers, industry experts, vendors, and customers are required to validate full-
scale commercialization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.