* 1914683
* I-Corps: Customer Discovery for Waste Valorization Technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2020
* Abhijeet Borole, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
substantially reduce green house gas (GHG) emissions from landfills, industry,
and transportation, while providing a zero-emission fuel to collectively
contribute towards a more sustainable, closed-loop economy. Fuel cell
technologies are a solution that has the potential to transform transportation
industry with zero tailpipe emissions like electric cars, but with mileage range
similar to gasoline and diesel fuel. Additionally, stationary fuel cells can
provide a zero emission electricity source. Developing a viable system to
convert organic waste into renewable hydrogen in a modular, decentralized
fashion can be a paradigm changer for hydrogen supply and the fuel cell market
while solving additional societal issues surrounding food waste and fossil fuel
emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project proposes to develop a
modular microbial electrolysis stack system capable of continuous high-rate
hydrogen production from food waste. The innovation is based on electron or
electricity producing bacteria, which generate current from organic waste and a
device that Electro-Active has developed to enable high-rate hydrogen production
from that current. It incorporates optimized reactor design and operation to
sustain productivities typically seen only with pure substrates. To demonstrate
proof-of-concept for this technology, target productivities and price point must
be demonstrated in a larger reactor unit over a longer period of time. Sustained
performance requires high-rate biocatalytic conversion of feedstock, and high-
rate proton transport to the cathode. To overcome these challenges, a patented
microbial enrichment process has been created to develop a robust microbial
community capable of converting complex waste into electrons at high rates and
efficiency. Additionally, preliminary data with robust biocatalyst, novel
reactor design and operation provides evidence that the integrated approach can
overcome these limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.