* 1914904
* NSF Student Travel Support for 2019 International Conference on Very Large Databases (VLDB)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Shahram Ghandeharizadeh, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 02/29/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides support for 12-20 students from U.S.-based academic
institutions to attend and participate in the 45th International Conference on
Very Large, held in Los Angeles, California, USA, August 26-30, 2019. VLDB,
started in 1975 and is the premier international database conference, held
annually. Different countries ranging from China to India, Germany, Brazil and
USA have hosted VLDB and the conference provides a forum for researchers and
practitioners to exchange and share results, providing tremendous opportunities
for technological and entrepreneurial innovation. VLDB 2019 has a separate but
equally prestigious research and industry tracks for the papers, more than ten
timely workshops to co-locate with VLDB, and includes a Ph.D. workshop track
that attracts students in their early career phase and allows the open
discussion of their research ideas. The VLDB conference thus contributes
directly to training the next generation of scientists who are both consumers
and developers of technology in database management system design and
implementation. The student support will have direct impact in creating a
highly-qualified workforce who can take on the emerging data science challenges
of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VLDB conference introduced numerous
influential concepts such as "Big Data", "Data Science", and "Cloud" computing.
For almost half a century and after an explosive growth in the computing
industry, VLDB remains the home for the latest cutting-edge research and
industrial innovation in the data arena. The aims of the conference are multi-
fold: (1) provide an international forum for sharing research results related to
the investigation of major challenges in next-generation database research; (2)
stimulate interactive discussions on research in the database area through
panels, posters, tutorials, student scholar roundtables, etc.; (3) to motivate
and engage future generations of researchers via the many conference and
workshop presentations, interactive poster sessions, and panel and breakout
sessions. VLDB highly cited papers are published in The Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment (PVLDB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.