* 1914447
* WoU-MMA: Collaborative Research: A Next-Generation SuperNova Early Warning System for Multimessenger Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Alec Habig, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,994.00

When a massive star reaches the end of its life, the core of the star collapses,
producing a supernova. While visually spectacular, less than 1% of the energy in
the supernova is released as visible light or as kinetic energy in the
surrounding environment. Most of the energy from the supernova is carried away
by neutrinos produced during the collapse of the core. In contrast to photons,
neutrinos interact only very weakly with matter. They can therefore stream out
of the supernova explosion without delay and thus arrive at Earth minutes to
hours before the optical explosion may be visible. Detecting the first neutrinos
from a supernova therefore provides an early alert to trigger further
observations. The SuperNova Early Warning System (SNEWS) is a network of
neutrino detectors around the world designed to provide automated early alerts
for supernovae in our galaxy. While rare, a galactic supernova would provide a
unique opportunity to study the physics of core-collapse supernova, as well as
the properties of neutrinos. Alerts from SNEWS will enable observations of the
earliest phases of the supernova for physicists and astronomers around the
world. The SNEWS project works to engage amateur astronomers by involving them
in this science, as they play an important role in optical observations of
supernova.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a collaborative group from
several institutions to upgrade the existing SNEWS real-time alert system to
include new detectors, and to prepare to better exploit the collective
capabilities of these detectors. The team will model neutrino light curves and
use those models to evaluate the expected signals in all available neutrino
detectors. They will develop optimal methods for prompt determination of the
supernova direction using both neutrino interaction anisotropies, as well as
inter-experiment triangulation algorithms which will be based on relative
observed timing of the neutrino signals. Prompt directional information will
sharply improve the likelihood to detect the early onset of the light curve in
multiple channels. This is crucial not only for the understanding of supernova
explosions, but also for many other areas of physics including astrophysics,
nuclear physics, and particle physics. Finally they will develop pre-supernova
alerts based on the observation of the uptick in neutrino production that
accompanies the final burning stages of a doomed star. This proposal also
supports involvement of the amateur astronomy community in this exciting area of
research, the creation of a topical planetarium show, as well as a smartphone
app for use in education and alert dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.