* 1914140
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Probiotic-Based Feed Additive Formulation for Enteric Methane Mitigation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Elizabeth Sheets, BEZOAR LABORATORIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be to develop an affordable, easy-to-use, novel
feed additive formulation for dairy cows that will result in reduced enteric
methane production while providing financial benefits for producers. Methane is
the second largest contributor to greenhouse gases and the raising of ruminant
animals is a significant source. Methane is not only burdensome to the
environment, it is also wasteful to the dairy industry because its formation in
animal digestive systems creates a 10% loss in potential energy for meat, milk,
leather, or animal labor. As such, there is growing desire from consumers,
advocates, and the dairy industry to produce a more environmentally friendly
product. Preliminary results of incorporating this novel feed additive
formulation point towards an additional $20 of income per head from the increase
in feed efficiency, along with a 50% decrease in enteric methane formation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a novel
probiotic that, when paired with nitrate, will reduce enteric methane emissions
in dairy cows. The research plan will include four successive 28-day periods,
with 21 days for diet adaptation and seven days for data and sample collection,
to assess the effects of a nitrate and P. fortis formulation. The experiment
will consist of a replicated 4 x 4 Latin square design. Eight ruminally-
cannulated, mid-lactation multiparous Holstein cows will be assigned to one of
two Latin squares and fed each of four diets over the four periods. After
completion of this study, a more precise cost-benefit analysis will be performed
with the resulting data, which will include milk yields, nitrogen balance,
metabolic data, and methane outputs. In addition, the plan is to examine the
rumen microbiome via sequencing to better understand the mode of action. In
conjunction with the product manufacturing cost, this data will be used to
determine the feasibility of this product. Cost savings are expected from
producing a more environmentally friendly dairy, a reduction in foodborne
pathogens, a decrease in morbidity/mortality, and an increase in feed
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.