* 1914456
* Improving STEM Competencies via Archaeology Research in the Staunton River Valley
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Brian Bates, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2022
* USD 599,836.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving undergraduate students' STEM knowledge and
competencies. To accomplish this goal, the project will redesign a series of
archaeology and anthropology courses, laboratories, and field research
opportunities. The redesigned introductory course and laboratory for majors and
non-majors will fulfill the STEM requirement for all degree programs at the
University. The project will also expand opportunities for
Archaeology/Anthropology majors, other STEM majors, and non-STEM majors to
participate in undergraduate research. The project team expects that these
changes will improve student interest, persistence, and competencies in STEM,
thus supporting development of a well-prepared STEM workforce and STEM-literate
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to
improve STEM competency among STEM and non-STEM undergraduate students. The
project will redesign Archaeology and Anthropology courses so incorporate
research-based instructional practices. Expected project outcomes include
student knowledge and competencies in STEM, as well as increased interest and
persistence in STEM fields. The project will address three primary research
questions: (1) Can participation in archaeology field research improve STEM
competencies of undergraduate students, including students who are first-
generation college students and/or from low-income or rural backgrounds? (2)
Does a scaffolded approach to archaeological research, including the redesign
and alignment of courses to support undergraduate research, maximize STEM
learning outcomes? (3) What impact does archaeological research have on
undergraduate academic success for all students? The mixed method comparison
study will examine the effectiveness of project activities and test the
hypothesis that student participation in undergraduate research can maximize
STEM learning outcomes. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.