* 1914406
* 2019 Chromosome Dynamics GRC:  Genetic, Molecular and Physical Views of Genomes and Their Organizational Principles
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* John Marko, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2020
* USD 5,000.00

The award will provide support for graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers to attend the 2019 Gordon Research Conference on Chromosome Dynamics
(June 23-28, 2019 in Newry, ME). This leading conference in the field brings
together researchers from diverse disciplines ranging from mathematics and
computing to biology, who are studying chromosome structure/dynamics and
function. Three keynote speakers (two established and one junior scientists)
will showcase breakthroughs and new directions in the field, and a diverse group
of scientists at all career stages will present their work through seminars and
poster sessions. Programmatic activities aimed at broader impact include
discussion sessions on inclusivity in science and on Rules of Life, one of NSF's
10 Big Ideas. There will also be plenty of informal opportunities for resource
sharing and networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New technology development has
accelerated discoveries in chromosome biology in recent years. It has also led
to high levels of specialization that have profound impact, but can also hinder
fuller understanding of how the biophysical properties of packaged DNA influence
the function, maintenance and propagation of the genetic code. This conference
serves as a vital link for investigators by facilitating discussion of latest
discoveries in topics such as chromosome organization and the impact on gene
regulation, DNA replication and repair in the chromosomal context, meiotic
chromosomal organization and segregation, as well as centromeres and chromosome
stability. It will also facilitate training and career development of the next
generation of scientists, including underrepresented minorities, in the field of
chromosome biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.