* 1914035
* STTR Phase I:  Self-Powering Textiles for Electronic Wearables
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Isaiah Oladeji, Capacitech Energy, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,905.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is the integration of energy conversion and energy
storage technologies into a single ribbon called the Solar Supercapacitor
(SolarCap). The innovative aspect of SolarCap technology is that it is a self-
powering ribbon which can be weaved along with cotton fibers to make a fabric.
Batteries are currently being employed for powering wearable electronics used in
remote places during multiple day trips with limited supplies and resources.
However, most batteries are heavy, have a short life span, and are expensive,
and transporting them to hostile locations can be difficult and dangerous. The
SolarCap ribbons will have a considerable commercial impact since it can be used
to charge the wearable electronics devices while woven on the user's backpack,
clothing, etc. The proposed study will answer several key scientific questions
including energy storage capability, stability, charge-recharge cycle life and
durability of the SolarCap ribbons. The core value of the proposed SolarCap is
that it can provide soldiers, firefighters, first responders, and outdoor
personals increased mobility, comfort, flexibility, and peace of mind concerning
device's electrical power while in the field. It can also reduce the physical
load carried by the user. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project eliminates the requirement of
distinct devices for energy harvesting and storage. Using distinct devices for
energy harvesting and storage can be a significant issue for those who are
working at remote outdoor places. This is because, once the battery power of a
device is drained, the outdoor personnel should find a place to charge the
battery. The objective of this proposal is to develop a wearable self-powering
SolarCap ribbon by integrating solar cells and supercapacitors on a ribbon. To
accomplish this goal, a flexible perovskite solar cell (PSC) will be developed
on a conductive ribbon. A hybrid supercapacitor device will be integrated with
the PSC to store the harvested energy. These two devices will be so integrated
that a direct electric charge transfer can take place from solar cell to the
storage device. The proposed SolarCap ribbons are anticipated to deliver more
than 8% solar power conversion efficiency and an energy density of more than
20WhKg -1. The size of the ribbons will be so designed to weave along with
cotton filaments to make a self-powering fabric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.