* 1914709
* Math Practice for Physics: Building Math Fluency in an Introductory Undergraduate Physics Context
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Andrew Heckler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 473,281.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving math fluency in introductory physics courses. The
goal is to use research-based principles, together with methods from cognitive
psychology and education research, to develop, implement, and assess a set of
practice assignments called Math Practice. Math Practice is based on Essential
Skills, an existing online platform used at Ohio State University. The initial
scope of this project is to advance knowledge about how to address students'
difficulties with math skills that are needed for success in introductory
physics courses. This initial work will involve the 15,000 students in
introductory physics courses at the target schools. However, because this
intervention is both low-cost and logistically simple to implement, it could
potentially improve performance and retention of the 500,000 students enrolled
each year in physics classes nationwide. Furthermore, although the Math Practice
application will be designed to help all students, it is likely to especially
help underprepared students succeed and continue in physics courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of this proposed intervention is based on well-
established research-based learning methods, including spaced and interleaved
mastery practice with immediate feedback. This method is expected to automate
and thereby reduce the cognitive load involved in applying basic math procedures
in physics. Reducing cognitive load is important since physics tends to have
complex, perceptually rich notation and contexts. The experimental design will
include control conditions and "A/B testing" to explore optimal practice tasks
and formats, such as comparison of alternative solutions and combinations of
generic and context-rich format practice. The assessments will include validated
math instruments, course performance, and motivational survey scales. These
assessments will be used for iterative improvement of materials, investigation
of areas of student difficulty, and investigation of potentially important
student-level factors of performance and motivation. As a result, the practice
tasks and assignment design will have a strong empirical and theoretical basis.
Further, this project is expected to advance knowledge about student
difficulties with essential math skills and the mechanisms underlying these
difficulties, in an introductory physics context. In addition, it is expected to
advance knowledge of the effectiveness of several specific kinds of empirically
and theoretically promising math practice tasks. Finally, the project is
expected to determine the extent to which student characteristics and
motivations interact with this intervention. Thus, it will potentially provide
information about the mechanisms of the difficulties and additional avenues for
productive interventions. Given that math is essential in all STEM disciplines,
the information learned in this project could potentially extend to all of STEM
education. For example, the difficulties students have with symbolic notation in
introductory physics are also likely to be encountered in other areas of STEM.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.