* 1914287
* SBIR Phase I:  SenixBand - Remote Independent-Living Monitor and Frailty Status Tracker for Older Adults
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Chris Gniady, BIOSENIX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2021
* USD 224,595.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will revolutionize the way older adults who live independently at home
are monitored. According to the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP),
nearly 90% of older adults (age 65 and above) prefer to stay independently at
their homes, coining the term "ageing in place". The proposed monitoring system
monitors older adults in real time for changes in physical activity, falls, and
loss of balance. These parameters can indicate changes in frailness in older
adults which if addressed early can extend their period of independent living.
The system will monitor blood pressure, heart rate, heart rate variability, and
common cardiac conditions that often accompany loss of balance or falls, which
can trigger early and more informed intervention that will allow issues to be
addressed before a more serious injury occurs due to a fall. Current industry
solutions rely on reactively initiating assistance after a fall is detected,
which are usually too late to reverse the age-related deterioration and are
ineffective at extending independent living. Ability of living independently
longer for older adults will translate into significant savings in cost of care
and will also improve their wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will develop an end-to-end monitoring systems for older adults living
independently at home consisting of: 1) Development of a small wearable device
for measurement of Heart Rate, Pulse Oximetry, Blood Pressure, and ECG; 2)
Development of activity monitoring system and classification of activities that
can be used in tracking frailty of a monitored older adult. Changes in frailty
can be observed remotely, allowing for early intervention and potentially the
ability to reverse physical or mental degradation. In addition, the system can
assist in the decision when the older adults need a full-time caregiver to
remain at home, which is difficult and usually preceded by some serious accident
or medical emergency, such as a fall resulting in hospitalization or a serious
illness. Such delayed decision can have serious life-threatening consequences.
The advancements will be made in activity monitoring, non-invasive continuous
blood pressure monitoring to track changes in blood pressure, and integration of
anomaly detection into ECG waveform analysis to provide additional information
when loss of balance or fall occurs. Such real time monitoring will tax the
battery of the wearable device and will be addressed by exploring anomaly-based
energy management to prolong battery life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.