* 1914869
* Collaborating Across Boundaries to Engage Undergraduates in STEM Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Kim Pearson, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2023
* USD 597,844.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying how
interdisciplinary collaborations in the classroom can improve STEM learning for
all undergraduates. The increasingly interdisciplinary and complex issues facing
our society requires diverse, STEM-literate experts from a range of fields who
can work and solve problems in collaboration. Addressing this national need
requires innovative, research-based teaching practices that retain students and
improve STEM learning. This project will expand, improve, and study an
innovative curricular model in which two undergraduate courses from different
disciplines are taught in coordination. The instructors, goals, and outcomes of
each course will be distinct, but the courses will be connected by a science-
focused project that is developed through an active collaboration with a
community partner. By the end of the project, 750 students will have experienced
this model, allowing for a comprehensive evaluation of its effectiveness.
Furthermore, over a dozen faculty members in different disciplines will be
trained in using effective strategies for teaching STEM concepts. This project
will contribute to educational strategies that can produce the STEM-literate
workforce needed to tackle the pressing interdisciplinary problems of our time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws from project-based, collaborative, and
community-engaged learning to design STEM classroom experiences that improve
learning outcomes and retention for all undergraduates. This project will carry
out a non-comparative group, quasi-experimental design to answer five research
questions: (1) Does the model identify best practices that allow faculty members
to harmonize cultures across disciplines and between the classroom and the
community? (2) Is the model an effective method of improving undergraduate STEM
education across different disciplines, and for which disciplines is it most
effective? (3) What combinations of courses are the most effective for improving
STEM learning? (4) Does the model improve STEM learning among historically
underrepresented students? (5) What community engaged learning projects are best
for improving learning outcomes for STEM and non-STEM students? To answer these
questions, this project will support the formation of partnerships between
instructors from three main disciplinary groups: STEM; Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences; and non-STEM disciplines such as the humanities and
performing arts. STEM student learning outcomes will be assessed using multiple
measures, including student self-assessment, faculty assessment, and pre-to-post
performance on a standardized instrument. This project will provide the
foundational information needed for future implementation of the model at other
institutions, so that the impact of the proposed work may expand to STEM
workforce development at a broader scale. This Engaged Student Learning project
is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
undergraduate students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.