* 1914436
* Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Hierarchical Nanometer-Scale Colloidal Assemblies Using Integrated Electrospray and Microfluidics
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yingxi (Elaine) Zhu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2024
* USD 444,920.00

Providing clean water and safe drug delivery are grand societal challenges. The
field of nanotechnology offers ways to address both challenges. However, the
manufacture of nanoparticles and, in particular, sub-10 nm particles needed to
support these revolutionary solutions is plagued by low yield and long
production times. Conventional production of self-assembled nanomaterials is
highly time consuming with poor control of structural uniformity due to
undesired and uncontrolled inter-particle interactions under particle thermal
fluctuation. This grant supports fundamental research to develop a scalable
nanomanufacturing process for high-throughput production of nanocolloidal
assemblies. The new approach that integrates rapid electrospray and microfluidic
processes solves the current bottleneck in slow and low-yield manufacturing of
hierarchically structured nanomaterials. The success of this research impacts
U.S. manufacturing, economy, and security. This project uniquely integrates
multiple disciplines including manufacturing, fluid mechanics, materials
science, and device fabrication. The multidisciplinary approach helps recruit
and train students, including women and underrepresented minorities, as the next
generation of U.S. engineers, thus positively impacting engineering education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many manufacturing approaches have utilized external
fields, such as electrical and optical fields, to overcome colloidal thermal
fluctuations and direct the assembly of colloidal nanoparticles. However,
scalable nanomanufacturing processes to rapidly and precisely assemble
nanocolloids of 10 nm or smaller size, including noble metal and metal oxide
nanoclusters and (bio)polymers, remain few and challenging. This project
develops an integrated electrospray and microfluidic manufacturing process to
rapidly concentrate inorganic nanoclusters and polymers in droplet nanoreactors
and control their hierarchical nanocolloidal assembly by dielectrophoresis.
Ultrafast laser spectroscopy is integrated with the continuous microfluidic
process to enable in-situ characterization of the compositions and assembly
process of building hierarchical nanocolloids in liquid media. Results obtained
from this research advance the fundamental understanding of nanoscale
electrokinetic behavior of complex nanomaterials. Both electrospray and
dielectrophoresis microfluidic modules can be linearly scaled-up to pioneer
high-throughput nanomanufacturing of multi-component and structured
nanocolloidal assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.