* 1914872
* Collaborative Research: Broadening Use of Modern Geodetic Methods in Earth Science Field Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bruce Douglas, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 08/31/2024
* USD 51,127.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality undergraduate
STEM education by improving student access to cutting-edge geodesy methods in
Earth Science field courses. Geodesy is the science of accurately measuring and
understanding the Earth?s geometric shape, orientation in space, and gravity
field, and how these properties change over time. Geodetic technologies can be
applied to societally critical geoscience topics such as hazard assessment and
response, as well as to topics with commercial or governmental value. As a
result, geodetic technologies are driving changes in workforce demands and
increasing the need for including geodetic field methods and related
quantitative skills in undergraduate education. To meet these needs, the project
plans to: train instructors how to incorporate geodetic field methods into their
college courses; develop a loan program to provide educators access to geodetic
equipment; and increase the availability of technical support for
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically aims to broaden
access of undergraduate students to the geodetic technologies of GPS, Structure
from Motion (SfM), and Terrestrial Laser Scanning (TLS). To increase student
engagement and learning in geodetics, the project will create short courses for
instructors. These short courses will help instructors identify societally-
relevant geoscience research questions that will provide relevance and context
for students to learn and apply geodetic technologies. More than 100 instructors
will participate in these short courses, resulting in more than 1500 students
who will learn to use geodetic field methods over the course of the grant. The
project aims to develop sustainable changes in college instruction that could
reach even more students in the future. The project will examine the efficacy
and adoption of teaching materials produced through 1-day and 2.5-day short
courses, as well as more intensive, smaller cohort groups. These data will
contribute to the body of educational research, particularly the impact of
faculty professional development in improving field education. The teaching
materials developed by the project participants will continue to be evaluated by
and disseminated through the website of the Science Education Resource Center
(SERC), which has 5 million visitors per year (serc.carleton.edu/getsi). This
project responds to community needs and has the potential to contribute to the
critical need of a diverse, Earth Science-ready STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in the Engaged
Student Learning track and Development and Implementation tier; it builds on
work of an earlier IUSE-funded Exploration and Design tier project. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.