* 1914040
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimal Clinical Workforce Staffing and Scheduling using an Advanced Predictive Modeling System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Stephanie Gravenor, Medecipher, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2020
* USD 269,988.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims at optimizing emergency department staffing
decisions. Direct patient care staffing costs consume nearly 50% of an average
hospital's operating revenues. As hospitals adapt to a rapidly changing
healthcare market, hospital management often seek to reduce staffing costs to
increase operational viability. These cost-cutting initiatives introduce
significant risk exposure, with studies showing that staffing a unit below the
target level is associated with increased mortality and other adverse patient
events. Inadequate staffing causes staff to feel overworked and leads to
burnout, which costs hospitals over $9 billion annually, in part because of
turnover. Optimizing clinical workforce staffing is especially critical in the
emergency department, which must provide on-demand availability of staff to meet
the needs of rapidly changing patient populations without significant delay.
With nearly half of all medical care in the United States occurring in emergency
departments and visits to the emergency department increasing 44% over the past
decade, it is essential for U.S. public health to optimize emergency department
staffing to ensure quality patient care and clinical outcomes, while also
delivering better financial performance. No comprehensive technology exists for
optimizing emergency department staffing decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will be used to: i)
develop an automated emergency department patient demand predictive engine and
create a software platform that automates the predictive model recalibration
process; ii) develop a staff flexing recommender and decision support engine,
which allows for user input and clinical judgment before a final staffing
decisions is made, iii) integrate the recommender engine with real-time patient
volume feed, and iv) develop human-centered design interface for the decision
support engine that is appropriate for the dynamic clinical setting of the
emergency department. The engine and its user interface will be developed in
collaboration with three beta sites. Upon successful completion of the project,
the engine will be used for cost-benefit analysis of data driven staffing
decision making at the proposed beta sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.