* 1914860
* Theoretical Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Igor Klebanov, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,140,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Igor Klebanov, Simone
Giombi, and Herman Verlinde at Princeton University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among
the deepest problems in fundamental physics is the merger of Einstein's General
Theory of Relativity with quantum mechanics. General Relativity predicted the
existence of the black-hole event horizon, which was recently spectacularly
observed by the Event Horizon Telescope. In some models, it is further possible
to have more exotic objects, so-called wormholes, which provide connections
between different regions of spacetime. The quantum-mechanical behavior of black
holes and wormholes is believed to rely on important concepts, such as quantum
information and entanglement. It turns out that these phenomena appear naturally
when an alternate description of gravitational systems via regular quantum
theory --- the so-called "gauge/gravity duality", is invoked. Professors
Klebanov, Giombi, and Verlinde intend to apply methods based on these concepts
in order to understand these exotic phenomena. The results of this research
could help us understand the cosmological evolution of the universe as a whole,
thereby extending scientific knowledge at a fundamental level. As a result,
research in this area advances the national interest by promoting the progress
of science in one of its most fundamental directions: the discovery and
understanding of new physical laws. This project is also envisioned to have
significant broader impacts. Students and post-docs will be very important for
carrying out this research program, and educating and mentoring them will
constitute one of its key broader impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more
technical level, this research will emphasize investigations of the dualities
relating quantum gauge theory to gravity, string theory, and higher-spin gauge
theory. Proposed applications of the gauge/gravity dualities include quantum
chaos and its manifestations in models with a large number of degrees of
freedom. These include theories of many interacting Majorana fermions, such as
the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev and tensor models. Connections of these models with black
holes and wormholes in low-dimensional models of quantum gravity, such as the
Jackiw-Teitelboim dilaton gravity, will be actively explored. Various models and
applications of quantum field theory will be another topic of active
exploration. In particular, quantum field theories describing second-order and
weakly first-order phase transitions will be explored. The ideas of the
Renormalization Group will be applied to such models, including those where
interactions take place at a spatial boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.