* 1914635
* CREST: Interdisciplinary Center for Research Excellence in Design of Intelligent Technologies for Smartgrids Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2026
* Satishkumar Ranade, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 01/31/2026
* USD 2,998,937.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology program provides
support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving institutions
through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and
research. With National Science Foundation support, New Mexico State University
will build on the accomplishments of their Phase I Center by engaging in
research focused on scalable approaches to the realization of microgrids and
networks of microgrids, that meet criteria of security, reliability, and
resilience. Phase II Center investigators will conduct collaborative research to
explore transformations of existing electricity distribution infrastructures
into interconnected intelligent microgrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase II
Center addresses design, operational, and security challenges of next generation
electric power production and delivery, providing sustainability, reliability,
and resilience against low-probability, high-impact events. The Center
articulates three research strands, and a fourth integration effort. The
Modeling, Operation and Integration strand addresses the lack of standardized
physical design and operation approaches for customer-centric distribution
microgrid architectures and creates designs that balance sustainability,
economy, and reliability. The Security and Resilience Frameworks strand defines
the architectural frameworks necessary to realize security and resilience,
providing constraints on the models and algorithms from the other research
strands. The Data-Driven Decision-Making strand implements the data-information-
knowledge-decision flow to support operation and control of the customer-centric
distribution microgrid, optimizing for resilience and enabling user-centered and
transactive behavior. All research strands converge to investigate interactions
and to validate the software and hardware implementations
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center at New Mexico State University will
strive to become a leader in the creation of sustainable, integrated and
comprehensive learning pathways in customer-centric distribution microgrid and
critical cyberphysical systems. The Phase II Center addresses
underrepresentation by expanding the research and training pipeline and
introducing specialized mentoring and retention mechanisms. New Mexico State
University will also enhance competency by infusing smartgrids expertise in a
range of academic programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.