* 1914579
* WoU-MMA: Multi-Messenger Studies with Very-High-Energy Gamma Rays
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Juan Santander, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 07/31/2023
* USD 307,087.00

Gamma rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System (VERITAS), located in southern Arizona, is a ground-based
observatory designed to study high-energy gamma rays. VERITAS has unique
capabilities, providing high sensitivity pointed observations of both galactic
and extragalactic sources. This award supports scientists at the University of
Alabama to carry out research with VERITAS. The group will use VERITAS
observations to search for gamma-ray counterparts of high-energy neutrinos
detected by the IceCube observatory and of gravitational wave events detected by
the LIGO observatory. The group is involved in training and development
activities for undergraduates working in multi-messenger astrophysics with
particular emphasis on members of historically under-represented groups in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Alabama group will focus on the
following multi-messenger astrophysics studies: a search for very high energy
gamma-ray emission in coincidence with archival and newly-detected high-energy
astrophysical neutrino event candidates from the IceCube observatory; a detailed
study of TXS 0506+056, the first VHE gamma ray source detected in coincidence
with a high energy astrophysical neutrino; a comprehensive study of gamma-ray
observations of bright blazars and other types of extragalactic sources that are
potential neutrino emitters to probe their emission mechanisms; and the search
for very high energy gamma-ray counterparts for gravitational wave events
produced by LIGO. The group at the University of Alabama will continue efforts
related to the next-generation Cherenkov Telescope Array by participating in the
development and commissioning of a prototype air Cherenkov telescope at the
VERITAS site in Arizona. This work directly addresses the goals of NSF's
"Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.