* 1914916
* The Evolution of Evolvability in Microbial Populations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2025
* Michael Desai, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2025
* USD 477,439.00

Models of evolutionary dynamics often treat the evolutionary parameters as
fixed. Yet these parameters can themselves be modified by mutations, which are
then acted on by natural selection, a phenomenon known as the evolution of
evolvability. For example, mutator or antimutator alleles that increase or
decrease mutation rates often spread through microbial populations, and
mutations that open up or close off future adaptive trajectories can alter
"adaptability". Despite extensive work, our understanding of the evolution of
evolvability in microbial populations remains very limited. The basic problem is
that in the large and mostly asexual populations characteristic of many microbes
and viruses, evolution often acts in ways that challenge traditional models,
because there is too much going on at once. Many mutations are often present
simultaneously, and because recombination is limited, selection cannot act on
each separately. Rather, mutations are constantly occurring in a variety of
combinations linked together on physical chromosomes, and selection can only act
on these combinations as a whole. These effects, known as interference
selection, place enormous constraints on microbial evolution, and have made it
difficult to analyze how natural selection acts on mutations that modify
evolutionary parameters. The PI will address this question by using a
combination of mathematical models and experimental evolution in budding yeast
to analyze the evolution of evolvability in microbial populations where these
interference selection effects are widespread. This project will produce
extensive data describing fixed mutations, sequence diversity, and changes in
fitness in sexual and asexual yeast populations, along with a corresponding
library of strains, which will serve as a resource for the community. In the
process, this work will provide broad interdisciplinary training in methods from
evolutionary biology, molecular genetics, population genetics, and applied math
for a postdoc and graduate and undergraduate students in the PI's lab. To help
train the broader community of potential quantitative biologists in these
diverse fields, the PI will develop outreach efforts to disseminate a new
curriculum he has developed for introductory undergraduate biology, which
provides an integrated introduction to biology, physics, chemistry, computer
science, and mathematics. Finally, the PI will develop a new textbook providing
an introduction to evolution and population genetics, aimed at mathematicians
and physical scientists. This textbook will provide a mathematically
sophisticated introduction to the field, without any biological prerequisites,
based on materials the PI developed for an undergraduate course on this subject
and on a summer course organized by the PI. The traveling wave framework
described in this proposal is a key theoretical underpinning of much of this
subject, and will play an important role in the book.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-throughput experimental techniques and advances in
sequencing technology now illustrate the pervasive importance of interference
selection throughout microbial evolution. Motivated by this, much recent work
has analyzed interference in large asexual populations. However, this work is
limited to simple situations where the evolutionary parameters are fixed, and
hence cannot explain the evolution of evolvability. In this project, the PI will
address this question by combining novel theoretical methods inspired by
statistical physics with direct observation of evolution in experimental
populations of budding yeast. The PI will focus on analyzing alleles that modify
mutation rates, adaptability, and robustness. The central goals are to predict
(1) how interference selection affects the evolutionary dynamics and fates of
these modifier alleles and hence the long-term evolution of evolvability in
microbial populations, (2) how the modifiers of evolvability affect the dynamics
of sequence diversity within the population, and (3) how recombination affects
the evolution of evolvability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.