* 1914797
* Instabilities in Particle-laden Stratified Fluids in Hele-Shaw Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Patrick Bunton, William Jewell College
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2020
* USD 179,016.00

The flow of fluids through porous media is an important problem relevant to a
variety of processes such as underground transport of contaminants, certain
filtration processes, and hydraulic fracturing. These flows are sometimes
subject to flow instabilities, which are sudden transitions of the flow to a
qualitatively different type of flow. For example, when a dense fluid overlies a
less dense fluid, "fingers" of fluid develop extending up and down into the two
fluids. This instability, known as the Rayleigh-Taylor instability, can increase
rates fluid mixing and material transport. This project explores instabilities
in layers of fluids that occupy a narrow gap between two vertical glass plates.
The project will investigate cases in which the fluids contain particles and
solutes such as salt. Experiments will be used to image the flow in a layer of
fresh water above a layer of salt water. The effects of instabilities on the
flow will be tracked in the experiment and compared with numerical simulations.
Rates at which the particles settle as well as rates of particle and salt
diffusion through the liquids will be obtained. The results will help reveal the
role of particle sedimentation in triggering instabilities and lead to better
predictions when instabilities are likely to occur. Project outcomes will help
devise strategies for efficient energy production while minimizing environmental
impact. The project will be conducted by undergraduate students at a small
liberal arts college who will benefit from increased opportunities in science
and engineering education. An outreach program will be conducted to acquaint
under-represented and disadvantaged kids in inner-city Kansas City to the
excitement of science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses how sediment settling initiates or modifies flow instabilities for
stratified fluids in the narrow gap of a Hele-Shaw cell. Sediment-laden fresh
water above salt water will be studied along with related configurations. On the
computational side, Darcy's Law coupled with an advection-diffusion equation for
salt and an advection-diffusion equation for particle concentration that
includes a settling velocity will be solved for two-dimensional stratified
fluids in the presence of particle-loading. The flows will be parametrized in
terms of a stability ratio, a gravity parameter that relates gravitational force
to viscous forces, and a dimensionless settling velocity. Results will be
analyzed in terms of relative dimensions of concentration profiles of sediment
and salt. On the experimental side, Schlieren imaging will be used to image
sediment-laden fresh water layered above salt water and related configurations.
Controlled densities of sediment will be introduced using microspheres of known
size and density. Viscosity will be controlled using various concentrations of
aqueous glycerol, which directly effects the gravity parameter. Dimensionless
wavelength, fingertip velocity, and particle concentration profiles will be
measured. Rayleigh-Taylor, double-diffusive, and leaking instabilities are
expected. Combining computation with flow imaging will help expose the role of
sedimentation on these instabilities and help determine the applicability of
Darcy's law in predicting which instabilities occur and when they
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.