* 1914451
* NSF-BSF: Quantum Electron States in van der Waals Platforms
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Herbert Fertig, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2024
* USD 378,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and
the United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support
this collaboration between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher.
The NSF Division of Materials Research (DMR) funds this award, which supports
research and educational activities focused on understanding the physics of
materials composed by stacking together a small number of two-dimensional
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum physics of electronic systems becomes
very rich when they are confined to low dimensions, resulting in systems with
exotic properties. In this project, the research team will investigate systems
composed of single or small number of sheets, layered together into composite
two-dimensional electron platforms. The materials available for building these
systems have become increasingly diverse, offering a great variety of
possibilities. Individual layers may be of the same material, with a prominent
example being a bilayer made from two graphene sheets twisted relative to each
other. This has recently been demonstrated to support remarkable insulating and
superconducting states, with only a small difference in electron density
determining which of these behaviors manifests. In other cases, the system may
comprise layers of completely different materials, adhering to one another only
weakly, so that their basic individual structures remain intact. Combining such
structures can result in systems with electronic properties completely different
than those of their constituents. In this project the team will explore exotic
quantum electron states in these material systems, and the measurable properties
they exhibit, which could find technological
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an NSF-BSF collaboration, this project
will provide valuable training for young physicists, in methods for analyzing
electronic materials, as well as in learning to work and collaborate within an
international setting. Young women science students will benefit from regular
visits to Indiana University by the senior Israeli participant, who will engage
with students in the Women in Science group in the Physics Department, as well
as with undergraduates at IU's STEM Living and Learning Center where she will
become a visiting faculty fellow. The PI will participate in outreach at the
annual IU ScienceFest, for which physics-based interactive activities for school
children will be introduced. The PI will also mentor students in the IU Physics
Department's Bridge Program. Through these activities both participants will
seek to involve students from under-represented groups in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation and the United
States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) jointly support this
collaboration between a US-based researcher and an Israel-based researcher. The
NSF Division of Materials Research (DMR) funds this award, which supports
research and educational activities focused on quantum electron states in van
der Waals platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific systems to be studied
involve combinations of graphene, transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) layers,
layers of black phosphorus (BP), and surfaces of topological insulators. A
graphene-TMD heterostructure, for example, provides a very heterogeneous
platform for electrons and holes, with the former supporting gapless Dirac
electron states and the latter supporting unusual spin-orbit coupling in its
hole states. In these systems, the team will consider the possibility of
interlayer particle-hole pairs --excitons-- forming a condensate with behavior
unexpected in either material individually (e.g., a valley superfluid.) The
highly anisotropic structure of BP offers the possibility of inducing strong
anisotropy in a partnered material such as graphene, and the team will explore
the effects of this on both the single-particle and collective behavior of the
graphene electrons, including the possibility of inducing superconductivity or
charge-density-wave states. Studies of aligned graphene on a TI surface, in
which the microstructure forms a moire pattern with a large unit cell, will
focus on quantum Hall states with spontaneously broken symmetry, where opposing
surfaces of the TI, hosting very different electronic states, are topologically
tied together. The project also involves studies of twisted bilayer graphene,
focusing on observed magnetic field effects in the vicinity of the Mott
insulating/superconducting states, where novel electronic ordering may be
occurring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an NSF-BSF collaboration, this project will
provide valuable training for young physicists, in methods for analyzing
electronic materials, as well as in learning to work and collaborate within an
international setting. Young women science students will benefit from regular
visits to Indiana University by the senior Israeli participant, who will engage
with students in the Women in Science group in the Physics Department, as well
as with undergraduates at IU's STEM Living and Learning Center where she will
become a visiting faculty fellow. The PI will participate in outreach at the
annual IU ScienceFest, for which physics-based interactive activities for school
children will be introduced. The PI will also mentor students in the IU Physics
Department's Bridge Program. Through these activities both participants will
seek to involve students from under-represented groups in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.