* 1914651
* GOALI: Adaptive Fused Filament Fabrication (AFFF)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* David Kazmer, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2024
* USD 518,620.00

Additive manufacturing (AM), often referred to as 3D printing, is a
manufacturing process for producing complex structures that either could not be
otherwise achieved or which could only be achieved with significant waste using
traditional subtractive manufacturing processes. Additive manufacturing is
widespread in its applications and impacts industries such as automotive,
aerospace, medical products, and defense. One common form of AM is fused
filament fabrication (FFF) in which molten material is extruded and patterned
layer-by-layer to form a part. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison
with Industry (GOALI) project investigates new FFF processes using sensors and
modeling to observe, characterize, and control the molten materials as they are
being processed. This will be done in collaboration with industry partner
Stratasys, a world leader in AM technologies, to assist in the machinery and
materials research. The research will broadly impact US competitiveness and
environmental conservation by enabling products to be more rapidly and
consistently produced than is possible today with current AM or alternative
manufacturing processes. The successful implementation of this project will
support American innovation and ingenuity by enabling the 3D printing of new
materials, increasing the manufacturing throughput and quality of 3D printed
products, and providing continuous quality assurance for manufactured products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the fundamental linkages
between polymer rheology and resulting part properties in FFF by testing two
hypotheses: 1) Melt viscosity can be accurately determined based on the upstream
motor torque and speed, and; 2) The extent of polymer diffusion across the
filament's weld can be predicted knowing the melt viscosity. Testing these
hypotheses necessitates an understanding of polymer rheological behavior under
the non-isothermal, non-steady state conditions of the FFF process, as well as
how the rheological behavior affects physical and mechanical properties of a
printed structure. There are three major research tasks in this project: 1. On-
line modeling of the polymer viscosity using the FFF as a capillary rheometer;
2. FFF modeling (including part property predictions) and adaptive, model-based
control of the filament extrusion, welding, and solidification; 3. Validation
using an advanced experimental platform that includes a closed loop stepper
motor as well as an instrumented nozzle. The fundamental impact of this work
lies in the modeling of processing-structure-property relationships using real-
time feedback provided by advanced process instrumentation. The research is thus
expected to provide guidance for processing a wider range of polymers based on
their inherent non-isothermal, shear thinning behavior. Moreover, by considering
the relationship between the viscosity and underlying molecular morphology, this
research will also provide guidance in how to develop new materials for FFF. The
translation of project results to commercially relevant products/systems is
greatly increased through the participation of the GOALI partner Stratasys and
its employees. A more capable and informed workforce in this important area is
ensured through the participation of graduate and undergraduate students in the
research as well as the NSF-funded center for additive manufacturing,
SHAP3D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.