* 1914745
* CREST Center for Sustainable Water Use (CREST-SWU)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2025
* Mahesh Hosur, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2025
* USD 5,099,999.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology program provides
support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving institutions
through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and
research. With National Science Foundation support, Texas A&amp;M University-
Kingsville will establish the "Center for Sustainable Water Use". This Center
will engage in regional multidisciplinary research, education and stakeholder
collaborations to advance the understanding of sustainable water use in South
Texas in the context of complex physical, hydroclimatic, regulatory and social-
economical settings. Center investigators will stimulate the development and
assessment of water availability and quality monitoring networks, models, and
management tools that will promote sustainable water use in South Texas and
similar semi-arid regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Sustainable Water
Use will implement a research, education and outreach program articulated in
three subprojects. The Monitoring and Information Systems subproject will
develop comprehensive inventories of regional water availability, quality and
demand. The Modeling and Dynamic Forecasting subproject will focus on regional
water availability and quality models, delineating metadata needed to develop
and integrate these models. The Decision Support Systems subproject will assess
and disseminate decision-support tools to help regional stakeholders and
policymakers determine the long-term efficacy of alternative water management
strategies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville is a
Hispanic-serving institution located in South Texas, at the center of the three
regional Water Planning Areas. The study area is a representative microcosm for
competing pressures, with limited water resources, irrigation-dependent
agriculture, water-intensive energy production, sensitive coastal marine
habitat, rapid population growth and urbanization, binational competition for
water allocations, and frequent drought. Although regionally focused, Center
activities address a global need for integrated tools and strategies for
assessing long-term water sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.