* 1914235
* SBIR Phase I:  A portable, powered lift to instantly increase independence of all manual wheelchair users
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Dave Preller, LEVATE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,925.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the increased independence, productivity, and quality of life of
people who use wheelchairs. This project addresses important national and
worldwide challenges related to the mobility of people who use wheelchairs (4
million in the US alone), which is continuously jeopardized by many daily
challenges. Through the development of an affordable and ready-to-use
aftermarket accessory capable of increasing the height of manual wheelchairs,
the project is oriented towards a more equal, inclusive, and accessible society.
The proposed technology will dramatically boost the self-confidence of people
who use wheelchairs by enabling face-to-face conversations and improving their
productivity at work. It will increase their independence by allowing them to
reach surfaces and spaces that were previously out of their reach. At the same
time, the new solution will reduce injuries resulting from tips and falls due to
unsafe reaching from their wheelchair. Users will save costs associated with
injuries and expensive home retrofits. Finally, the proposed technology will
represent a huge opportunity for employers because of increased productivity for
their workers with disabilities and dramatically reduced costs adapting the work
environment and providing "reasonable accommodations", as required by law.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to explore the feasibility of
solving height-related problems among all people who use manual wheelchairs with
an electronic and affordable device that can be retrofitted on all standard
ultralight wheelchairs, balancing crucial factors such as weight, height of
lift, and ease of operation. The proposed Phase I activities will generate the
first functioning prototype capable of serving as a proof-of-concept for testing
and future commercialization. Engineering efforts will be first dedicated to the
selection and integration of hardware components and to the development and
deployment of the device control software. A sensor-based control scheme will be
implemented to enable a safe, smooth, and fast lift experience. Once the
hardware is assembled and the firmware is deployed, the new device will be
tested in laboratory settings to ensure that, when it is attached to a standard
wheelchair, it does not alter the wheelchair's stability. This is an essential
prerequisite not only for future FDA approval, but also to make the device ready
for future testing (Phase II) with volunteers and, more generally, to enable its
commercialization as a universal aftermarket
accessory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.