* 1914731
* Explorations in Particle Theory and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Rabindra Mohapatra, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,500,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Kaustubh Agashe, Zackaria
Chacko, Rabindra N. Mohapatra and Raman Sundrum at the University of Maryland,
College Park. Their work will develop new theoretical mechanisms and models at
the juncture of Relativity and Quantum Mechanics, and result in new templates
for experimental exploration in diverse arenas. The experimental frontier ranges
from searches for new particles at the CERN Large Hadron Collider and future
colliders, to Dark Matter detection experiments, to particle physics signatures
in the Cosmic Microwave Background and Large Scale Structure in the universe, to
searches for gravitational waves from early universe phase transitions. This
research seeks to improve our understanding of the fundamental laws of nature,
lying at the root of the natural sciences, and thereby to benefit the national
interest and our scientific civilization. In their research, the principal
investigators will study several of the most promising theoretical frameworks
for going beyond the standard model of particle physics, in which it is
augmented by (a) extra 'warped' dimensions of spacetime, (b) 'mirror sectors'
with similar structure to the standard model and mirror symmetries that relate
them, (c) 'left-right' symmetric structure. They will also study the physics and
cosmology of neutrinos, as well as models of "cosmic inflation", the growth
spurt of the early universe. This project is also envisioned to have significant
broader impacts. The PIs will involve graduate students and postdocs in their
research, and thereby provide critical training for junior physicists beginning
research in this field. They also intend to give public and high school lectures
on their research results and aid in the development of materials for the
scientific media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professors Agashe and
Sundrum will explore the physics of the warped extra-dimensional phase
transition in the early universe, and its gravitational wave and collider
phenomenology, as well as its role in generating the observed matter/antimatter
asymmetry. Professor Sundrum will also develop theories of high-scale cosmic
inflation compatible with the most recent precision cosmological data. The left-
right symmetric scenario will be studied by Professor Mohapatra for its possible
impact on flavor physics, neutrino physics and the matter/antimatter asymmetry.
The physics of neutrinos will be studied by Professor Chacko in scenarios in
which they are associated with compositeness, time-dependent couplings, or
couplings to light Goldstone bosons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.