* 1914078
* SBIR Phase I:  Defining the Multimodal Signature of Stroke
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Sandra Saldana, ALVA HEALTH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project falls within the scope of the grand challenges
in health informatics. There are excellent protocols for the management and
treatment of acute stroke, however, these protocols are only effective once
patients have been admitted into the healthcare system. Health care providers,
however, have limited interaction with their patients, and these interactions
occur in the highly constrained environment of the clinical setting. Physicians
have limited control over patient behavior and limited ability to recognize
stroke symptoms outside the clinical setting. For patients with high stroke
risk, there is currently no system available to monitor stroke symptoms and
initiate a response in real-time. Thus, there is a need to monitor patients
remotely, where the current systems for stroke response fail to provide
coverage. The proposed solution will expand the provision of stroke symptom
monitoring to the daily lives of patients. Tracking patients as they go through
their daily lives will considerably enrich our knowledge of stroke and will
allow extension to monitoring for other neurological and neuropsychiatric
disorders and diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the real-time detection of stroke.
Ischemic stroke affects 700,000 Americans, costs approximately $33 billion
annually, and is the fifth leading cause of death and a leading cause of
disability in the US. IV tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) has been an FDA
approved therapy since 1995, yet only 5-10% of eligible patients receive this
therapy. Arrival time in the emergency room after initial stroke symptoms is
directly associated with better outcomes after tPA and endovascular therapy,
with a time window of 4.5 hours and 24 hours for these treatments, respectively.
Despite massive public health campaigns, identifying symptoms of stroke and
activating emergency response systems remains a major challenge. The goal of
this project is to develop and test a wearable and computational solution to
effectively alert ischemic stroke victims and initiate emergency response in a
timely manner. The solution will consist of a wearable device with multiple
modalities, which are fed to a smartphone and a cloud-based analysis system for
real-time analysis and detection. Once deployed, the device is expected to
dramatically improve stroke emergency response and increase the number of
patients receiving IV tPA and other reperfusion
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.