* 1914631
* Professional Development Workshop for Raising Calculus to the Surface and The Vector Calculus Bridge Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Aaron Wangberg, Winona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 62,954.00

Funded by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) program, this
faculty development workshop aims to increase faculty usage of new learning
materials produced by two innovative projects that emphasize the geometric
aspects of multi-variable and vector calculus. These projects, "Raising Calculus
to the Surface" and "The Vector Calculus Bridge Project" also emphasize a
learner-centered pedagogical approach. This three-day workshop will enable at
least 24 university level mathematics faculty members to learn about the tools
and pedagogy to support student learning of 3-dimensional calculus concepts. In
the workshop, participants will also write materials for use in their
classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geometric approach and small-group
activities developed by the workshop organizers mesh well with the
recommendations of the Mathematical Association of America's Curriculum Guide
and its Instructional Practices Guide. In particular, since the workshop will be
conducted by both mathematicians and physicists, the development of mathematical
thinking and communication skills and the promotion of interdisciplinary
cooperation will be featured. Features built into the "Raising Calculus to the
Surface" materials encourage instructor adoption of these practices, and strong
demand among instructors for the 3-dimensional surface manipulatives has
previously been observed. An evaluation of the workshop will include surveying
the participants and dissemination of the new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.