* 1914810
* Microlearning Mathematics Modules Designed to Facilitate Preservice Elementary Teacher Practices Regarding Equity and Responsive Mathematics Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Cindy Jong, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,875.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing preservice elementary teachers' capacity to
teach mathematics. This project will design eight microlearning modules to help
preservice teachers develop skills in equitable teaching practices and
professional noticing. Professional noticing is the ability of the teacher to
pay attention to student actions and to use this information to adjust teaching
approaches to best help the student learn. Through the modules, the preservice
teachers will use professional noticing to examine children's mathematical
thinking regarding number and algebraic concepts. The project includes a well-
developed research study to examine the impact of the microlearning modules on
development of the preservice teachers' professional noticing and equitable
teaching practices, and how these skills affect the preservice teachers'
knowledge of and attitude toward mathematics. It is anticipated that this
project will directly impact over 600 preservice teachers during the life of the
project, and more as the instructional modules are widely disseminated for use
by all teacher educators. The importance of this work resides in the potential
to promote equitable and responsive instruction in elementary school mathematics
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modules will be implemented at five
universities or colleges with undergraduate populations that are culturally and
socioeconomically diverse and that include groups underrepresented in STEM
fields. In addition, three institutions will provide comparison data.
Collectively, the eight universities (implementation and comparison) draw their
student populations from urban, suburban, and Appalachian rural populations.
Project activities include: 1) the development and implementation of eight
microlearning modules that focus on equitable teaching practices through the
lens of professional noticing; 2) the creation of an assessment to measure the
development of preservice teachers' noticing and equitable teaching practices;
and 3) administration of the new assessment as well as established assessments
for mathematical knowledge (TEDS-M) and attitudes and beliefs toward mathematics
(MECS) pre- and post-instruction in which the microlearning modules are taught.
The project has an extensive evaluation plan that builds upon the research plan
by using open-ended questions of participant satisfaction and engagement with
the microlearning modules from the preservice teachers and the teacher educators
using the modules. The external evaluators intend to use a logic model approach
to ensure implementation of program activities with fidelity, greater learning
opportunities, and effective documentation of outcomes. Research results will be
disseminated via presentations by the research team at education research
conferences and the instructional modules will be available for dissemination
via a web-based platform to ensure easy exchange with teacher educators beyond
the scope of the project. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. This project is a Development and Implementation Level I project in
the Engaged Student Learning Track. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
this program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship program is providing
co-funding for this project in recognition of its alignment with the broader
teacher preparation goals of the Noyce effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.