* 1914843
* Collaborative Research: Exploring How Undergraduate Learning of Multifactorial Genetics Affects Belief in Genetic Determinism
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Brian Donovan, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2024
* USD 679,914.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program, this
project aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM teaching by
examining how to teach genetics to undergraduate students in a more socially
responsible manner. Genes are important for determining the characteristics and
features of living things, including humans. For example, genes are important in
a person's physical appearance, regulating things such as height, eye color, and
skin tone. Genes are also important in characteristics such as susceptibility to
particular diseases. However, such characteristics are not simply caused by a
single gene working alone. Instead, almost all characteristics result from the
effects of many genes working together and with conditions in the person's
environment. Since many elements may influence such characteristics, scientists
describe them as multifactorial traits, or multifactorial genetics. Genetic
determinism is the idea that human actions and traits are caused primarily or
exclusively by genes and are little influenced by anything else. Although the
science of genetics long ago repudiated genetic determinism, belief in it is
socially widespread and educationally problematic due to its relationship with
racial and gender disparities in STEM education. Overestimation of the role that
genes play in shaping complex human traits leads to an underestimation of a
person’s abilities to change because the genetic basis of such abilities is
believed to make them immutable. When undergraduates develop the belief that
personality is unchangeable they can become less willing to confront individuals
who stereotype others because of their race or gender. When individuals from
underrepresented groups take undergraduate courses in STEM fields where they
themselves or those around them believe that academic ability is inherited, it
can decrease their grades in those courses and their motivations to pursue
further education in those fields. Recent research in genetics education
suggests that the genetics curriculum influences student belief in genetic
determinism. Understanding how belief in genetic determinism changes in response
to the content undergraduates learn in their genetics courses could therefore
help educators understand how to design a better genetics education— one that
helps students understand genetic inheritance without increasing gene-
determinist beliefs. This project will develop several undergraduate genetics
education interventions that teach students about a variety of genetics
concepts. These interventions will be tested through experiments in multiple
undergraduate courses to understand how they influence belief in genetic
determinism, beliefs about the malleability of human traits, and motivations to
study STEM and to confront prejudice. By comparing the results of the
experiments with qualitative studies that explore how undergraduates reason with
the intervention materials, this project will develop new knowledge about how
belief in genetic determism develops during genetics education and how the
genetics curriculum can be redesigned to reduce the prevalence of this
belief.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will conduct three large-scale
randomized control trials (RCTs) with undergraduates at multiple institutions to
explore the social-cognitive effects of learning about specific genomics
concepts. These RCTs will be supplemented with cognitive think-aloud interviews
that will explore the domain-specific knowledge and experiences that
undergraduates use to make sense of genomics concepts. The study hopes to
address to what extent multifactorial genetics education affects undergraduate
beliefs in genetic determinism, implicit person theories, and the motivation to
study science. The study also hopes to identify which multifactorial concepts
produce the largest effect on these variables and which factors mediate the
relationship between multifactorial genetics education and belief in genetic
determinism. Additional studies hope to address the significance,
reproducibility, and robustness of the results. The mixed-methods approach
intends to advance understanding of the social-cognitive mechanisms linking the
content of the genetics curriculum to belief in genetic determinsm and the
extent to which genetics education influences undergraduates’ STEM-related
motivations through its impacts on their social cognition. This knowledge may
help college biology faculty understand how their genetics curriculum affects
interest in STEM fields among underrepresented groups. THE NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program supports project to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.