* 1914542
* Molecular Mechanisms in Adhesion Protein Mediated Neuron-Neuron Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Barry Honig, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

How neurons interact with one another to create the complex wiring diagram of a
mature vertebrate brain is a major mystery. One of the many problems that arises
is how neurons are "barcoded"; that is, how they distinguish self from non-self.
This ability is essential since, without it, there would be nothing to prevent
neurons from forming connections (synapses) with themselves, essentially
creating a short circuit within the brain. The fundamental goal of this project
is to understand how neurons are barcoded. Neuron-neuron recognition is mediated
by protein-protein interactions. This project focuses on members of the
Clustered Protocadherins (Pcdh) protein family that establish a unique identity
for individual vertebrate neurons allowing them to distinguish "self" from "non-
self". The research will involve computer simulations, biophysical measurements,
and high-resolution microscopy experiments to experimentally validate and
describe the barcoding mechanism in cells. A particularly important element of
the research is the development of scientists with expertise in both
computational and experimental work. The training of women and minority
scientists is an integral component of the proposed research program. Both
undergraduate and graduate minority students trained to be on a trajectory to
become highly successful research scientists. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of the project is to advance understanding of the molecular basis of
neuron-neuron recognition. Cell-cell interactions are mediated by protein-
protein interactions and the long-range goal of the research is to understand
the underlying mechanisms. Specifically, how do protein-protein interactions
involving cell surface proteins mediate highly specific cell-cell interactions.
Given the complexity of the nervous system, neuron-neuron interactions offer a
unique challenge in this regard. The research focuses on the clustered
Protocadherins (Pcdhs) that establish a unique identity for individual
vertebrate neurons allowing them to distinguish "self" from "non-self". These
are neuronal barcoding proteins. The research involves computational studies to
determine how homophilic specificity is coded on Pcdh-Pcdh interfaces, the
design of mutants to test the hypotheses that are generated, and their testing
experimentally. A second focus of the research is to elucidate the molecular
basis of neuronal barcoding. A novel chain termination mechanism based on the
assembly of crystalline-like "molecular zippers" in cell-cell interfaces has
been proposed and is consistent with all available experimental data. The model
will now be explored with multi-scale simulations, and in vitro and in vivo
experimental studies. Notably, the model introduces new concepts in the
molecular basis of cell-cell recognition. This project is supported by the
Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
in the Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.