* 1914108
* CIF: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC 2019)
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Waheed Bajwa, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2020
* USD 16,001.00

This award provides travel support for up to ten students from US institutions
to participate in 2019 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances
for Wireless Communications (SPAWC), which will take place in Cannes, France,
July 2-5, 2019. SPAWC is one of the flagship annual conferences of the IEEE
Signal Processing Society and will be celebrating its 20th anniversary in 2019.
SPAWC is devoted to dissemination of advances in signal processing for wireless
communications, networking, and information theory. The workshop's Organizing
Committee and Technical Program Committee, which change from year to year,
comprise eminent scientists from around the world working at the intersection of
communications, signal processing and information theory. SPAWC offers a unique
format for dissemination of ideas by mixing keynotes with poster presentations,
making participation more interactive than many other conferences. It is a small
(usually 150-250 participants every year) but very focused conference, which
affords deeper interactions among the participants. Papers submitted to SPAWC
are peer-reviewed and accepted papers are published as a proceedings volume and
digitally archived on IEEE Xplore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student activities
include a best student paper contest, luncheons with keynote speakers, and
mentoring opportunities for underrepresented groups. The students supported on
this travel award will have ample opportunities to network with their peers,
mentors, and eminent researchers in this field, and will provide testimonials on
the outcomes of this activity at the end of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.