* 1914707
* Fate of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) in soils affected by plant and rhizosphere microbial community
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Libo Shan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,999.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) represent a class of over 3,000
synthetic compounds that have been widely used in industry. PFASs are
increasingly detected in humans, drinking water, soils, plants, and wildlife.
These findings have raised significant concern because PFASs are persistent thus
accumulate in the environment. PFAS have been implicated in increased cancer
rates, interference with cholesterol metabolism, and disruption of endocrine
function in humans. A major environmental source of PFASs are aqueous film-
forming foams (AFFFs) released during fire-fighting events and training
exercises. Once AFFFs are released to soils, PFAS can be taken up and
potentially transformed by microorganisms in the soil. While this can lead to
removal of PFAS from soil, much is not known about the fate of PFAS in the
rhizosphere environment (i.e., the soil around plant roots). Primary among these
is the question whether plants, soil microbes, or both are responsible for the
biodegradation. The focus of this project is to answer these questions and
identify which factors control the transformation processes. Better
understanding of the mechanisms controlling the fate of PFAS in soils will
enable the development of cost-effective remediation technologies for PFAS-
contaminated soils. Results from this work will form the basis of an educational
outreach program focused on under-represented groups to increase the diversity
of the Nation's STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is
to identify key factors affecting the fate of per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) in soils for the development of effective strategies to
mitigate risks of PFAS soil contamination. The focus of the proposed study is to
delineate the roles of soil microbes, plants and their root exudates, and the
synergic interactions between plants and soil microbes on the fate of PFAS in
soils. The specific research objectives are to: i) determine the role of soil
microbiota in PFAS biotransformation in AFFF-impacted soils; ii) investigate the
reciprocal impacts of root exudates on the fate of PFAS in soils; and iii)
examine the potential effects of plant/bacterial synergisms in PFAS
biotransformation in soils. The results of the proposed study will advance
fundamental knowledge on the underlying mechanism mediating PFAS
biotransformation by both rhizosphere and non-rhizosphere associated microbes.
This research will provide insight into effective phytoremediation strategies
for mitigating PFAS contamination in soils. An effective treatment strategy that
integrates knowledge of both plants and their associated microbial communities
would be a scientific breakthrough, leading to the reduction of PFAS and their
potential precursors from the environment. The proposed research serves as a
fertile ground for interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate
students at the interface of microbiology, plant science, and environmental
engineering. Broader impacts will result from the engagement and outreach to
under-represented groups, dissemination of research results to the scientific
community, and from presentations at local, national and/or international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.