* 1914873
* SCH: INT: Opioid Overdose Detection and Reversal Using Sensors and Mobile Devices
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jacob Sunshine, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,026,855.00

The project aims to make significant inroads into addressing the national
emergency of opioid overdose in the United States using technology. At high
doses, opioids can cause rapid cessation of breathing, respiratory failure and
death, the physiologic sequence by which people commonly succumb from
unintentional opioid overdose. Unlike many life-threatening medical emergencies,
however, opioid toxicity is readily reversed with rapid identification and
administration of the overdose antidote naloxone. Thus, early detection and
rapid intervention can prevent death from opioid overdose. This project will
design and deploy solutions (i) that can detect opioid overdose by identifying
its respiratory precursors and (ii) that employ an adhesive sensor that can
automatically administer naloxone using an auto-injector when dangerous
respiratory parameters are detected. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop foundational technologies that can aid with opioid overdose detection as
well as reversal using wearable sensors and mobile devices. Specifically, the
proposal, if successful, would make the following technical contributions: 1)
design a novel, low-barrier, harm-reduction intervention solution to track
breathing in a contactless manner using active sonar in order to detect critical
respiratory precursors of opioid overdose, and 2) a new wearable electronic
device that is integrated with an auto-injector to deliver naloxone, the
overdose antidote, after detecting respiratory parameters consistent with an
opioid overdose event. The developed technologies will be tested and deployed
with the target population to evaluate their efficacy. The project aims to make
significant progress towards developing technology that can address the opioid
crisis, using a closed loop system for identification and reversal of opioid
overdose events. The team will work with existing industry collaborators to
enable tech-transfer and transitioning the developed technologies to industry.
The team will also reach out to an aspiring generation of engineering and
medical students via K-12 classroom demonstrations as well as broad media
releases. A new graduate course on mobile health will be developed that brings
together computing and engineering students and students from the health
sciences. Finally, smartphone demos will be showcased at DawgBytes Summer Camps
and the University of Washington's Women's Initiative that encourage a diverse
new generation of students to major in computer science, including women in
middle and high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.