* 1914203
* STTR Phase I:  CLEAR: Reducing Claims Denials in Healthcare Through Blockchain and Machine Learning
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Prabhudev Konana, BRILLIANTMD, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to create transparency around the business logic used
by stakeholders in the healthcare system to make transactional decisions as well
as create alignment around the current status of healthcare transactions that
are part of the work in process. To most people who interact with the healthcare
system, it functions more or less as a "black box" with decisions that sometimes
defy logic and common sense. Our goal is to use Blockchain and Machine Learning
technology to convert this "black box" into a "glass box." The commercial impact
of this project could be an up to 25% reduction in claims processing costs for
healthcare providers by the elimination of redundant work, re-work and errors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase 1 project proposes two innovations: 1)
claims transaction and reason codes managed through a Blockchain so that
Providers and Payers can confidently know the accurate status of a claim, and 2)
sophisticated statistical and deep learning algorithms for predicting the
likelihood of a claim denial with natural language processing of associated
notes and appeals. Our product is a mathematically driven software service that
utilizes and innovates with multiple technologies: Blockchain distributed
ledgers, smart contracts and tokens, and prediction, recommendation,
forecasting, non-linear optimization and natural language processing engines
within a privacy-preserving data management system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.