* 1914957
* I-Corps Teams:  Virtual torque sensing for transportation applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Muralidhar Ghantasala, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 01/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
low cost and reliable torque sensor for use with automotive and related
applications. As the proposed torque sensing method is based on the speed, it
can be used with most of the engine/transmission systems. However, this
technique requires modifications to make it suitable for use with electric
engines. This will enhance its applicability over a larger range of vehicle
applications. Automotive manufacturers also need the comparison of input torque
at the engine and the torque delivered after the differential to the wheels.
This knowledge further helps in reducing possible losses in torque, and
improving the efficiencies. This torque sensing method can meet automobile
industry requirements of improved efficiency, low cost, while also providing
accurate engine torque measurements. The total available market could include
all automotive engines and transmissions in the medium and heavy duty vehicles,
off-high way vehicles and others in the transportation sector. The long-term
goal of this project is to expand the use of this method in other sectors, where
instantaneous torque measurement can help to improve the process
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps Project will help to investigate
the commercialization potential of low cost torque sensors in different
engine/transmission driven applications. Relying on a virtual torque sensing
concept, the proposed method requires minimal additional hardware, which makes
it an economically attractive concept for automotive manufacturers. Currently,
automotive engine and transmission manufacturers use estimates for torque
values. The company found that the current engine ECU torque estimation has an
accuracy of 5-30%. Commercially available torque sensors cost $500 to $10000,
making them non-viable for commercial transportation vehicles. Overall, the goal
of the project is to seamlessly integrate the sensor along with the existing
mechanical and electronic systems. This sensing method is being tested in a
commercially available test facility. An improvement in the accuracy of torque
sensing can result in improved fuel efficiency, better driving comfort and
reduced wear of gears.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.