* 1914751
* CREST Center for Nanotechnology Research and Education at UDC
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Pawan Tyagi, University of the District of Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,848,327.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
provides support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. With National Science Foundation support, the University
of the District of Columbia will establish the Center for Nanotechnology
Research and Education. The vision of this project is to convert the University
of the District of Columbia into a nationally competitive research institution
with a centrally managed laboratory that engages faculty and students in
collaborative research with neighboring organizations such as the National
Institute of Standards and Technology and the Navy Research
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center research goals are to (i) utilize
molecular spintronics-based devices to solve critical computing and sensing
challenges, (ii) engineer the surfaces of metal 3D-printed parts such that they
can be reliably used in industrial applications, and (iii) solve complex thermal
management issues using a multiscale, multi-physics model. The central theme of
the Center's three research subprojects focuses on transport processes at
nanoscale interfaces. Subproject 1 will study the device potential of magnetic
molecular bridges by chemically stitching them between the two ferromagnetic
electrodes of a tunnel junction. Subproject 2 will engineer surfaces of
additively manufactured alloy and metal objects by (i) reducing the surface
roughness, (ii) depositing coatings and (iii) fabricating advanced devices.
Subproject 3 will probe multiphase and multiscale interfacial energy transport
between solid surfaces and neighboring nanostructured fluids. Long-term Center
research will generate knowledge in emerging nanotechnology areas of future
computer technology, advanced manufacturing, and thermal energy
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center educational efforts will focus on
student-active teaching and learning. The University will integrate
nanotechnology research into the curriculum to attract and retain students. The
Center will initiate a graduate level course in Advanced Nanofabrication and
Nanoscale Characterization where students will fabricate and characterize
nanoscale devices and sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.