* 1914594
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Effects of Nonlinear Wave-particle Interaction in the Inner Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Anton Artemev, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 247,333.00

Whistler waves are radio waves produced at very low frequencies by lightning.
They are believed to have an important role in the dynamics of the radiation
belts and broader magnetosphere. This work will involve theoretical and
observational studies of these waves and their interactions with relativistic
particles in the magnetosphere. The results have direct applications in space
weather models, which are a priority set out in the National Space Weather
Action Plan. Additionally, two graduate students will be supported and
collaborations will be strengthened between plasma physicists and space
physicists at multiple institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To quantify nonlinear
wave-particle resonant interactions, three questions will be addressed (i.e.,
objectives) in this project: (1) how often sufficiently intense whistler waves
are detected in the inner magnetosphere, which will provide the occurrence rate
of nonlinear wave-particle interactions; (2) how to describe the impact of
intense whistler waves on electron flux evolution, which will provide a
theoretical tool to evaluate electron distributions in the geospacer system with
nonlinear wave-particle interactions; and (3) what is the effect of nonlinear
wave-particle interactions on wave generation and damping, which will provide a
validated model of the nonlinear wave growth/damping rate in the inner
magnetosphere. Each of the three objectives combines observational (from THEMIS
and Van Allen Probes) and theoretical investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.