* 1914317
* SBIR Phase I:  Field-deployable Chemical Sensors for the Continuous Monitoring of Emissions
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Ehsan Sadeghipour, FULLMOON SENSORS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2020
* USD 224,955.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop field-deployable chemical sensors capable of measuring and
quantifying atmospheric volatile molecules on a wide scale and at low cost. This
project is initially intended for operators in the natural gas business
(producers and utilities), by gearing this network towards detecting gas leaks.
However, the lack of continuous atmospheric monitoring solutions is an issue in
many verticals including but not limited to mining, agriculture, manufacturing,
and others. Creating such a platform will allow for us to develop solutions
beyond natural gas utilities and producers. These solutions will allow us to
create industry standards for continuous monitoring in many fields. This work
will not only lead to important technological innovations, including the first
fully gas-phase electrochemical measurements, but also broadly impact society
economically, environmentally, and through its impact on the health of average
citizens.

The SBIR Phase I proposed project builds upon our voltammetric sensing proof of
concept to increase its technology readiness level from lab-ready to field-
ready. This change will allow these sensors to be used as part of a continuous
emissions monitoring system. There are currently no low cost chemical sensors
that can produce high quality data by identifying and quantifying various
volatile molecules in air. Field-deployment of these sensors will be possible by
integrating temperature and humidity compensation, adding the ability to operate
without hydration, and improving the sensing resolution. Furthermore, the
company will focus on using a higher throughput fabrication process like inkjet
printing, to allow their sensors to be compatible with roll-to-roll
manufacturing processes. The combination of these features will lead to sensors
that can be robustly deployed and operated in different geographies and weather
patterns.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.