* 1914601
* RAPID: Risk Narratives Across Time and Space in Urban-Wildlife Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Elizabeth Shanahan, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 04/30/2021
* USD 103,199.00

Human-wildlife conflict is a coupled dynamic that simultaneously threatens both
ecological and human health. Urban development and agricultural expansion have
resulted in the depletion of resources for many species, thus intensifying
human-wildlife conflicts and increasing concerns of higher risks of disease
infecting humans in proximity to wildlife. When a crisis emerges in an acute
fashion (e.g., focusing event), there is an intensification of risk communicated
in narrative form. This research measures changes in stakeholders risk
narratives, information use, and policy preferences over space and time. To
study the dynamic nature of risk narratives over space and time, this project
examines a sudden human-wildlife conflict in northern Queensland, Australia,
where unprecedented heat events have resulted in mass mortality of spectacled
flying foxes (Pteropus conspicillatus). Inadequate state and local resources to
deal with this record event have led to a crisis, whereby state and local
concerns have flared over bat welfare, potential risks of disease being passed
to humans (e.g., Lyssavirus), and illness from rotting bat corpses and maggot
infestation. This crisis is a focusing event for flying fox management, whereby
groups are mobilizing countervailing efforts: to list the spectacled flying fox
as endangered and to remove flying fox habitat (e.g., large old fig trees) from
urban areas. There is a coupled feature in this bat-human system that has
created a new dynamic: the scale of the bat deaths coupled with a paralysis of
governmental action leaving residents to take immediate action (i.e., round up
and bag carcasses). The result of this new dynamic is an intensification of risk
narratives as stakeholders make meaning of these events for flying foxes in high
density urban communities. Given the immediate emergence of this crisis, this
project seeks to understand urban-wildlife conflict through a temporal and
spatial relationship between risk narratives and focusing events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand temporal and spatial effects on risk
narratives, the research team conducts panel interviews and a panel survey. The
present crisis event serves as T1 for baseline risk narrative data (i) to
understand how stakeholders' risk narratives change (or remain stable) over time
(T2 = 6 months and T3 = 12 months) as new information, policy decisions, and
events emerge, and (ii) to capture the spatial variation of risk narratives as a
function of distance from mass mortality roost sites. A longitudinal study of
panel interviews of residents, wildlife carers, health care workers, and local
council members in Cairns is conducted to analyze changes in narrative construct
and sentiment. Panel interviews provide critical data to enable the researchers
to probe for causal indicators of change in narrative construct and sentiment
(e.g., new information, new exogenous shocks to the system). A longitudinal
study using a panel survey of residents is conducted to analyze changes in
narrative construct, risk perception, preferred solutions for flying fox
management, and affect. These panel survey data measure changes in the response
variables over time as well distance from the mortality
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.