* 1914549
* WoU-MMA: Tracing Cosmic-Ray Origin and Transport Using HAWC and Multi-Wavelength Data
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Petra Huentemeyer, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 606,172.00

Gamma-rays are the highest energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
Observations of astrophysical gamma-rays serve as probes of physical conditions
and processes in the most extreme environments throughout the Universe and can
be used to test fundamental physics. The High Altitude Water Cherenkov (HAWC)
observatory, located on the slopes of the Sierra Negra in Mexico, is a ground-
based facility designed with unique capabilities to observe very high-energy
gamma rays. This award supports scientists at Michigan Technological University
doing research with HAWC. In addition to hardware and service activities to
support HAWC operations, the group will analyze HAWC data to study the origin of
cosmic rays. The group will engage in education and outreach activities,
including a research experience for K-12 science educators. The main goal is to
develop a physics curriculum that teaches high school students the scientific
methods currently used in astrophysics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-
energy gamma rays are produced when cosmic rays interact with their local
environment, interstellar matter and radiation fields. As neutral particles
these gamma-rays can be traced back to their origin and used to provide critical
information on the origin of cosmic rays. The Michigan group will tackle the
question of the birth, acceleration, and transport of cosmic rays by studying
the energy dependent flux and morphology of the gamma-ray emission from a
variety of source classes: Star Forming Regions, Super Nova Remnants, Pulsar
Wind Nebulae, Galactic Diffuse Emission, Molecular Clouds, and Star Burst
Galaxies. The results using data from the HAWC Observatory will complement and
be combined with multi-wavelength and multi-messenger measurements by other
space and ground-based observatories, thus addressing the goals of NSF's
"Windows on the Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics" Big
Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.