* 1914730
* Using an Insulator-Metal Transition to Overcome the Fundamental Limits of Non-Volatile Memory Based on Ferroelectric Field Effect Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Nikhil Shukla, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,131.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The era of Big Data is creating enormous
challenges to computing systems and networks. As the computing infrastructure
evolves to meet these challenges, memory technology plays an increasingly
important role. Over one hundred Zeta Bytes of data is expected to be generated
annually by the year 2025. Future generations of computers will therefore need
high performance memory that is fast, energy efficient, reliable, and compact.
While existing technologies have some of the desired properties, they crucially
lack others. For example, ferroelectric field effect transistors (FETs) based on
hafnium oxide, a recently discovered material, exhibit very promising
properties. They are persistent, retaining information even when turned off,
have nanosecond switching speeds, and a small footprint. However, practical
realization of this technology is impeded by fundamental issues which compromise
reliability and constrain the operation of devices at low voltages. The proposed
research aims at addressing this challenge by integrating a new functional
material into ferroelectric FETs. Vanadium dioxide exhibits an insulator-to-
metal phase transition, allowing it to be switched back and forth between an
insulating and conductive states. This property will used to overcome the
fundamental barriers associated with existing materials and enable a memory
technology that significantly exceeds the performance of the current state-of-
the-art. The project provides a natural platform for participating students to
be involved in cross-disciplinary research at the intersection of electrical
engineering and materials science. Outreach efforts will expose undergraduates
and high school students to modern electronics, and broaden their experience and
understanding of the opportunities in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
aims to overcome the fundamental design trade off involved in writing to, and
reading from doped hafnium oxide ferroelectric field effect transistor-based
non-volatile memory by replacing the conventional silicon channel of the
transistor with an insulator-metal phase transition oxide, VO2. The
ferroelectric state dependent abrupt resistance switching across the phase
transition in VO2 that will be engineered in this device, will help de-convolute
the read and write constraints, and enable the memory cell to be written at low
voltages without adversely affecting the read margin, as well as also improve
the reliability. A fundamental aspect of this research will focus on stabilizing
the ferroelectric phase of doped hafnium oxide on the VO2 under a constrained
thermal budget. Furthermore, through a materials-device co-design approach, the
project will seek to experimentally demonstrate a ferroelectric transistor-based
memory that can operate at a low write voltage and energy, provide large read
distinguishability, and exhibit large endurance and reliability. Physics based
models and simulations that capture the operation of the device as well as
account for its compatibility with array level operation will be developed to
support and guide the experimental effort. The results of the proposed research
stand to have immense implications towards realizing a universal memory to
support and accelerate the data revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.