* 1914457
* I-Corps: Eclectic Applications of Zinc Oxide &amp; Metal Doped ZnO constructs
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2020
* John Blaho, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is primarily a
solution to recent concerns of the effects of nanoparticles on overall health.
Based on scientific claims that nanoparticles are detrimental to an individuals
health, regulatory agencies, companies, and the general public have become more
vigilant in finding non-nano alternatives to materials and products that they
have been using. In addition to providing a non-nano alternative to existing
metal oxides used in many personal care products, this project also allows for
more environmentally friendly manufacturing processes and end products. Cost-
effective synthetic methods will allow for these alternatives to be feasible
replacements to formulators, toxicologists, and other people involved in the
manufacturing decision-making process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
aims to focus on finding the best product market fit for the novel synthetic
methodology of Zinc Oxide. This synthesis relies on milder temperatures with
only water-based precursors that are utilized to yield surfactant-free,
morphologically identical, and non-nano zinc oxide particles. The same
methodology can be use to yield metal-doped zinc oxide constructs with enhanced
properties depending on the metal used. The eclectic nature and environmentally
friendly qualities of the reactants make this one-pot synthesis a perfect
candidate for an ecologically conscious alternative to the state-of-the-art zinc
oxide synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.