* 1914258
* SBIR Phase I:  Paramagnetic Spin-Probes for Corrosion Inhibition
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2020
* John Lovell, MICROSILICON INC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project addresses a mechanism to optimize corrosion inhibition
for projects covering the oil and gas industry and beyond. Corrosion costs US
industries alone an estimated $170 billion a year. The oil and gas industry
takes an above average share of these costs because of its complex and demanding
production techniques, and the environmental threat should components fail.
Today, the standard inhibition mechanism for the oil and gas industry is to
inject a chemical inhibitor, typically a surfactant, that can coat the interior
of the oilfield tubular and avoid corrosion. Because of the high cost of
failure, it is extremely common to over-inject surfactant quantities resulting
in excessive costs and the waste of unwanted chemicals sent to the refinery.
Unfortunately, there has not previously been a good way to tell when too much
surfactant was in fact too much. That is the specific new aspect brought by this
innovation. It proposes a mechanism to detect in real-time that there is
sufficient surfactant by taking advantage of quantum chemical properties of
those surfactants when they are subject to very large magnetic fields and GHz
radio-frequency excitation.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to extract a chemical spectrum from a
specially designed reagent that can be added to a sample of produced fluid,
where that chemical spectrum will change depending on whether there is
sufficient surfactant to cause corrosion inhibition. More specifically it is
going to measure some quantum chemical properties of the reagent called its
hyperfine structure that will change in the presence of surfactant micelles.
Essentially the micelles form a containment barrier around free radical
electrons within that reagent and thereby change the way those electrons can
resonate in the combination of the magnet and RF excitation. Phase 1 of the
project will resolve multiple challenges in this approach, including the choice
of reagent and the development of robust algorithms to convert hyperfine data
into quantification of critical micelle concentration, where the algorithm needs
to be able to tolerate typical impurities found in oilfield fluids. Phase 1 will
also validate a spectroscopic approach that can result in the hyperfine data
being sent to the cloud where AI-based algorithms can reduce the spectral
information to actionable information for the operator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.