* 1914646
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Cognitive Overload versus Enhanced Performance: Is More Information Always Better?
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ryan Taylor, Salisbury University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 08/31/2024
* USD 402,244.00

As anyone who has seen the display of a peacock can attest, communication
signals form some of the most striking features of animal diversity on our
planet. A fundamental question to be answered is, under what conditions do
elaborate communication signals develop? To address this, a series of
experiments will be conducted on two inhabitants of the Central American
rainforest, the tungara frog, and its predator, the frog-eating bat. Male
tungara frogs vocalize in the noisy backdrop of the rainforest as they attempt
to attract a mate. While vocalizing, the frogs also inflate a large sac in their
throat which generates a cascade of water ripples surrounding them. The
experiments will address how and when each of these different signal components
is used by a female frog searching for a mate or a bat searching for a meal. A
common assumption in studies of animal behavior is that, additional information
in an animal's signal always improves the ability of signal recipients to locate
that signaler. In studies on humans, however, it is understood that more
information can lead to cognitive overload and degrade decision performance.
This study will address the conditions under which added information improves or
degrades the efficiency of animal communication signals. The project will also
incorporate training of future scientists, ranging from undergraduate students
to post-doctoral researchers. Further, the knowledge gained from the project
will be disseminated through student training at universities and primary
schools as well as public outreach through museum displays.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental question in animal behavior is, how do animals utilize
available information to inform adaptive behaviors? In behavioral ecology there
is often the implicit assumption that more information is better. In human
psychophysics, however, there is substantial evidence to show that more
information can lead to cognitive overload and disrupt signal detection and
decision-making. Previous results from the investigators have made it clear that
information in the male tungara frog's mating display is not linearly related to
the response of two receivers, the female frog or its predator, the frog-eating
bat. To address the question, "is more information always better," a series of
playback experiments will be conducted under conditions of increasingly complex
multimodal background noise. These experimental noise levels will mimic the
variable noise levels that occur naturally in the environment. The performance
(decision accuracy and latency) of the two receivers (female frog and bat
predator) to playback calls will be assessed, making a critical contribution to
an understanding of how animal decision-making occurs in a complex world. This
will be the first study to explicitly contrast hypotheses that added information
in the environment leads to either enhanced performance or cognitive overload on
the part of the receiver. An added value of this study is that it will yield
information on two very different species, with fundamentally different sensory
systems and cognitive abilities. This will enhance the generality of the
interpretations, providing insights into how different cognitive systems deal
with environmental noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.