* 1914663
* Collaborative Research: Conformal Gradient-Index Lenses for Ultrasonic Wave Amplification and Improved Diagnostics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Didem Ozevin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2023
* USD 367,025.00

Current structural systems are made of homogenous materials such as cast iron,
wrought iron, bare steel, and brittle plastic, which are highly susceptible to
failure and therefore require accelerated inspection and repair. Ultrasonics is
a nondestructive evaluation method based on propagating elastic waves in
structures, which are affected by defects in the structure and can therefore be
used for damage diagnostics. However, in conventional structures, the amplitude
of elastic waves decays with distance due to spreading/scattering, which limits
the detectability of critical defects. In this research, new structural systems
will be designed with an embedded or externally added lens so that ultrasonic
signals can be focused and amplified as they propagate in the structure. In this
way, ultrasonic wave energy can be transmitted and preserved over long
distances. The research will allow detecting defects at their earliest stage and
preventing unexpected failures. The target application will be pipeline systems
due to their high susceptibility to failure. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit the U.S. economy and society. This multi-disciplinary
research encompasses metamaterials, sensors, additive manufacturing, structural
monitoring, and design. The project features a synergistic educational component
that integrates the strengths of two institutions in recruiting students who are
underrepresented in engineering. In particular, female undergraduate and
graduate students at both institutions will be connected via mutual workshops
and the Society of Women Engineers (SWE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will introduce a conformal gradient-index (GRIN) metamaterial lens as part of a
structural system such that elastic waves will be amplified as they propagate
through the non-planar structure. With the GRIN lens, different ultrasonic wave
modes (i.e., longitudinal, flexural, or torsional) will be focused and
transmitted such that higher frequencies (50?200 kHz) will be able to propagate
with the increased sensitivity to structural damage. The GRIN lens will be
designed by varying the refractive index of unit cells, and the existing model
of the GRIN lens for flat surfaces will be modified for conformal surfaces. The
metamaterial lens layer will be created with 3D printing, which will allow more
practical and light weight structures to be easily integrated into the host
structure. Additionally, a novel composite pipe structure, produced with multi-
material additive manufacturing technologies, will be designed with the embedded
metamaterial lens to address the highest risk of major incidents from the
conventional materials used in pipelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.