* 1914175
* SBIR Phase I:  New Wearable for Body Focused Repetitive Behavior Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,11/30/2020
* John Pritchard, HABITAWARE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2020
* USD 269,695.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from providing an accurate real-time
awareness solution for those who suffer from body-focused repetitive behaviors.
Over 4% of Americans suffer from skin picking, hair pulling, and nail biting,
the majority of whom resort to covering up the problem with makeup, gloves,
wigs, and even tattoos due to treatment cost barriers and lack of effective
tools to facilitate behavior change. While behavior therapy, and in particular
habit reversal training, has shown efficacy, this method is traditionally
burdened by unreliable journaling, a lack of access to treatment, and difficulty
for patients to perform in real-time because of a lack of awareness. While real-
time awareness devices do exist, there is room for improvement in detection
accuracy. This project will examine feasibility of a novel sensor system within
a wearable device that can significantly improve detection accuracy of BFRB-
related behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project will develop and validate a novel wearable sensing system used
to detect subtle movements associated with BFRBs that is suitable for large-
scale manufacturing. We believe the proposed wearable system can improve the
efficacy of leading behavior therapy methods. To accomplish these goals, early
studies will focus on three main objectives. First, the team will investigate
the best electrical and spatial configuration of the proposed sensors in a
tightly controlled test setup. Second, the team will integrate the optimal
configuration into a device suitable for testing and validate the integrity of
the sensor output on individuals. Finally, the team will develop a proof-of-
concept BFRB recognition algorithm under ideal, low-noise
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.