* 1914062
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-Thin Silicon Solar Cells for Lightweight Flexible High-Efficiency Photovoltaic Modules
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Anthony Lochtefeld, AmberWave, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to support the societal need for higher adoption of clean
renewable energy. The new kind of high-efficiency, lightweight and thin
photovoltaic modules that will be enabled by this project will be ideal for
integration at the factory with roofing materials for Commercial and Industrial
(C&amp;I) buildings. This will address half of the U.S. C&amp;I rooftop market
(low-slope metal roofs) that is poorly served by existing photovoltaic modules
due to weight limits, wind-loading effects and other factors. In addition, it
will drop total C&amp;I rooftop photovoltaic system cost by up to 40% through
reduction of installation materials and labor, as well as simplification of
system design, permitting, etc. This disruptive innovation can turn C&amp;I
photovoltaic systems--today the smallest of the 3 major U.S. photovoltaic market
segments--into a key driver for US solar growth. This photovoltaic module
product is ideally suited for US manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SBIR
Phase I proposed project will allow the first ever exploration of Silicon
heterojunction solar cells with absorber thickness substantially below 40
microns. Higher thickness silicon heterojunction solar cells have already
achieved world record efficiency of over 26.5%. For the ultra-thin silicon
design targeted by this project, theory predicts an open circuit voltage (Voc)
of at least 780mV, well in excess of current records for any silicon solar cell.
High Voc will reduce photovoltaic system resistive losses as well as minimizing
system performance degradation from high operating temperatures. With respect to
solar wafer technology, this would be a new kerfless approach to realizing
silicon heterojunction solar cells, leading to a new type of robust flexible
thin photovoltaic module, with much higher efficiency, superior reliability, and
lower cost compared to current flexible thin film photovoltaic options. In this
Phase I project we will target Voc of at least 720mV. We will also investigate
optimizing the rear reflector design for silicon heterojunction solar cells, to
maximize light absorption in the thin silicon absorber layer. Finally, we will
identify a detailed path forward to 24% efficiency for this solar cell
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.