* 1914713
* Manufacturing of Ultra-stable Perovskite Nanoparticles for White Light Emitting Diodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Zhitao Kang, Georgia Tech Applied Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2023
* USD 449,993.00

This project aims to continuously manufacture ultra-stable monodispersed
perovskite nanoparticles for applications in white light-emitting diodes (LEDs).
A conventional microfluidic flow reactor, used for continuous production of
nanoparticles, is not a generalizable approach and requires specific
experimental conditions for the growth of specific nanoparticles, and often
results in non-uniformity in the size and shape of the nanoparticles as well as
their undesirable aggregation. This award supports fundamental research for the
development of a robust process that combines two types of reactors, block
copolymer-based nanoreactors and a flow microreactor. This process provides a
unique environment and capability for manipulating the reaction of precursors
within the nanoreactors inside the flow microreactor, which, in turn, yields
multifunctional nanoparticles in a predictable and continuous manner. These
nanoparticles can be exploited either individually or as building-blocks for the
bottom-up assembly of nanostructured materials and devices with desirable
characteristics for use in energy and biomedical applications, thereby
translating fundamental scientific discoveries into useful technologies that
benefit society. Knowledge generated by this project broadly impacts the
development of robust strategies for continuous production of a rich variety of
monodispersed, ultra-stable, multifunctional nanoparticles, not limited to
perovskite nanoparticles, with precisely controlled dimensions and surface
chemistry. This project gives opportunities to graduate, undergraduate and high
school students, including women and underrepresented minorities, to be exposed
to nanocrystal, nanoscience and nanomanufacturing research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, green- and red-emitting cesium lead bromide
and iodide nanoparticles are selected as perovskite nanoparticles in this study
motivated by their intriguing optical properties. These nanoparticles are
continuously crafted by capitalizing on rationally designed star-like block
copolymers as nanoreactors inside a flow microreactor. This process imparts the
scalable nanomanufacturing of perovskite nanoparticles with high uniformity and
superior stabilities via a double protection, that is, direct capping with
inorganic silica shell followed by hydrophobic organic silicone shell. This
research fills the knowledge gap on the thorough understanding of the formation
mechanism of uniform perovskite nanoparticles in a continuous-flow microreactor.
The research team plans to design nanoreactors based on amphiphilic star-like
block copolymers with well-defined molecular weights, manufacture a large amount
of monodisperse ultra-stable perovskite nanoparticles of different compositions,
explore the stabilities of silicone-capped and silica-protected core/shell
nanoparticles, and fabricate high performance white LEDs using the perovskite
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.