* 1914293
* STTR Phase I:  Direct 3D Fabrication Platform for Single-Crystal Silicon and Silicon Carbide
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Stephen Schultz, Nielson Scientific LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2021
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is the development of a 3D fabrication technology that provides the
benefits of 3D printing (i.e., rapid prototyping, the creation of complex 3D
structures, etc.) for high-quality, single-crystal silicon and silicon carbide.
The technique will compete with traditional photolithography-based semiconductor
manufacturing for applications such as MicroElectroMechanical System (MEMS)
sensors such as accelerometers in cell phones and vehicle airbags, silicon
photonics used in optical communications networks and data centers,
microfluidics for drug-discovery and other biomedical applications, and
interposers for 3D integration of integrated circuits. The 3D fabrication
technique is superior to traditional semiconductor fabrication in three ways: 1)
Up to a 100X reduction in prototype manufacturing time, resulting in cost
savings and increasing the speed of R&amp;D cycles; 2) Significantly reducing
CapEx by replacing multiple fabrication tools with one single tool; and 3)
Creating complex 3D structures directly, significantly improving on the limited
extruded 2D geometries available from photolithography-based fabrication.
Additionally, the 3D manufacturing capability can be extended to macro-scale
components and impact industries such as energy conversion and aerospace by
providing complex 3D structures made from single-crystal silicon carbide for
extreme high-temperature operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
combines elements of advanced nonlinear optics with electrochemical etching of
semiconductor materials to enable the 3D manufacturing technique for single-
crystal silicon and silicon carbide. While the fundamental physical mechanism
has been demonstrated in work leading up to this project, there are important
questions remaining about control of the material removal process, the surface
quality of the final structure, and the rate at which material can be removed.
These questions need to be addressed to understand which applications of the 3D
manufacturing technique are commercially viable. The technical objectives and
tasks for this project have been designed to answer these questions through
careful experimentation and, with the data obtained, identify the most promising
applications to pursue. Experiments for both silicon and silicon carbide will be
conducted that explore a range of permutations of input parameters and variables
for the 3D manufacturing process. Results of these experiments will be studied
and characterized to identify optimal etch parameters and the etch results
possible with those etch parameters. At the conclusion of this Phase 1 STTR
project, the capabilities of the 3D fabrication technique will be better
understood and a clear path for commercializing the capability will be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.