* 1914778
* CREST-PRF: Identifying Zones of Biological Activity Using a Spatially Distributed Metabolism Model in an Aridland River
* EDU,EES
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Betsy Summers, Summers, Betsy Marie
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 12/31/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) track within the CREST program supports
beginning CREST Center investigators with significant potential and provides
them with training and research experiences that will broaden perspectives,
facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in positions of
leadership within the scientific community. This CREST-PRF project is aligned
with the research focus of the CREST Center for Water and the Environment (CWE)
at the University of New Mexico. The goal of this research is to measure the
extent of time and space variability in primary production and ecosystem
respiration in an aridland river system. Aridland rivers have characteristic
zones of primary production at the river edges (i.e., bathtub ring) that
provides a substantial food source to consumer organisms. Yet, metabolism of
these systems is likely underestimated when applying common methods for whole-
system metabolism. Addressing space variation into metabolism models will offer
new insight on methods for quantifying gross primary production (GPP) and
ecosystem respiration (ER) and understanding of drivers of metabolism. The
following objectives focus on a 9 km study reach in the middle Rio Grande, New
Mexico: Objective 1 is to identify space and time variability of gross primary
production and ecosystem respiration; Objective 2 is to compare methodology used
to quantify metabolism; and Objective 3 is to explore the influence of changing
discharge on the zone of biological productivity. The knowledge gained is
transferrable to other river systems and can be used as a tool to inform
managers on environmental flows that are most effective at restoring aquatic
habitat, ecosystem function and survival of endangered species.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Dryland rivers, which encompasses aridland rivers, are poorly studied
systems in the field of metabolism; yet, are the most vulnerable systems
regarding changing climate conditions. Spatiotemporal information learned about
metabolic rates in an aridland river network can be integrated into estimates of
regional and global carbon budgets analyzed by the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change. Common methods of whole-system metabolism assume estimates of
GPP and ER are representative of the whole reach. However, stream metabolism is
not homogeneous and varies spatially in aridland rivers. The level of spatial
and temporal complexity analyzed in this research project will advance
fundamental knowledge in controls on carbon processes at multiple scales. This
project integrates multiple sources of longterm, high resolution environmental
data collected by several entities and leverages robust computational resources
to process big data. Taking a holistic approach, this research will contribute
to the basic understanding of the productivity of aridland rivers and the role
in regional carbon budgets. Moreover, this research site is germane to
engineered river systems undergoing reductions and alterations of streamflow and
subsequent degradation of water quality and nutrient pollution downstream.
Modeling methods and results will be transferable to large river
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.