* 1914216
* SBIR Phase I:  Thin Silicon Solar Cells for Aerospace Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Stanislau Herasimenka, Regher Solar LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,807.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable the emerging and rapidly growing markets of solar powered
aerospace devices. The solar array is often the most expensive component of
satellites, drones and airships and reducing their cost 10 times while also
reducing the weight 5 times and making solar cells flexible can disrupt one of
the main barriers for the growing private aerospace economy. The major target
market for thin silicon solar cells is the constellations of thousands of new
satellites at the lower earth orbit for providing Global Satellite Internet and
IoT device communications. Global Internet can make a broader impact on the
human life in three areas: (1) enable worldwide communications, (2) stimulate
economic growth in developing countries by providing Internet connection, (3)
establish more sustainable societies by providing access to education, ensuring
the freedom of speech and providing the instruments for electronic democracy.
Another major target market is drones for surveillance and remote monitoring and
airships for cargo transportation. In the future, thin silicon solar cells can
become the ultimate source of energy for solar powered space transportation,
asteroid mining and colonization of Mars and the Moon. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop two innovations which can enable mass production
of thin Si solar cells for aerospace applications. There are two main roadblocks
for using thin Si solar cells commercially. First, is that efficiency of thin
silicon cells drops by 4-6%. Second, is that 10-micron-thick Si wafers cannot be
manufactured using standard Si solar cell fabrication methods. Regher Solar has
developed two innovations to enable mass production of thin Si cells with
&gt;20% efficiency. The first innovation is processing of 10-micron-thick on
thicker Si wafers to use them for handling. The second innovation is using
silicon heterojunction technology with copper metallization, which achieves the
highest efficiency when the cell is only 10 microns thick. The overall goal of
this SBIR proposal is to develop lower cost, high efficiency, flexible, reliable
and manufacturable solar cells based on thin Si technology for the rapidly
growing market of solar powered aerospace devices. The specific goals of this
Phase I project are: (1) finalize a process flow, (2) achieve &gt;22% AM0
efficiency, &gt;2000 W/kg specific power, &gt;200 W/m2 power density on a
10-micron-thick wafer; (3) conduct a comprehensive reliability testing of thin
Si solar cells; (4) demonstrate flexible blankets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.