* 1914711
* Quintuple P-N Junction Nanowires for Wireless Water Splitting in Particle Suspension Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

The inexpensive generation of hydrogen from water using sunlight
("photocatalytic water splitting") would provide an abundant source of renewable
fuel. High efficiency solar water splitting reactors will require new types of
photocatalytic materials and advanced reactor designs. Silicon is the second
most abundant element in the Earth's crust, is non-toxic, and is the basis for
nearly all modern electronics. This research project will explore a way to use
silicon in photocatalytic water splitting by way of elongated particles
("nanowires") suspended in water. These nanowires will be grown using a chemical
process that enables hundreds of millions of nanowires to be created at once
with a size that is 100-1000 times smaller than a human hair. Although these
particles are small, they have a complex internal structure. When illuminated
with light, the internal structure allows the wires to generate a voltage
similar to the that of AA or AAA batteries. This research project will explore
the fundamental aspects of the growth of silicon nanowires and will examine how
the design of the structures affects the light absorbed and the voltage
generated. The ability of these particles to perform chemical reactions when
suspended in water, using the voltage induced by light, will be tested in a
novel reactor design. This project will also provide research experiences and
training for students from the high school through graduate school level and
will provide multiple opportunities for the public to learn about photocatalytic
water splitting. The results should open the door to new technological
applications of silicon that are made possible by the control of particle size
and composition at a microscopic scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle
suspension reactors, in which photoactive nanoparticles are suspended in water,
are a potentially low-cost design for solar-driven photoelectrochemical water
splitting to produce affordable hydrogen. To realize this device architecture,
the development of a photoactive nanoparticle that both produces enough voltage
and absorbs a broad spectrum of visible to near-infrared light is needed. This
research project will address the synthesis and development of silicon nanowires
that can be encoded with an arbitrary number of p-i-n junctions to produce large
photovoltages in excess of the 1.23 V thermodynamic potential needed for water
splitting. The multijunction silicon nanowires are synthesized by metal-
catalyzed growth using the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) growth mechanism, and p-n or
p-i-n junctions are formed by in situ modulation of dopants as the nanowire
grows. The goal of this research project is to perform fundamental studies on
the growth, processing, and properties of single nanowires to enable the design
of high-performance quintuple p-i-n junction nanowires that can be used for
water splitting. In this structure, each of the five junctions must individually
operate as an efficient solar cell, and in addition, they must each be connected
in series by an efficient tunnel junction. In addition to the synthesis of axial
p-(p-i-n)x-n nanowires, where x ranges from 1 to 15 junctions, the project will
employ a combined experimental and computational evaluation of single-nanowire
photovoltaic performance. Both the electrical performance and light absorption
characteristics will be evaluated, and the results will feed back into the
synthesis and design of structures. Proof-of-concept single-nanowire water
splitting devices and particle suspension reactors will be developed for initial
evaluation of the proof of concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.