* 1914913
* Collaborative Research: Broadening the Fusion of STEM and Business Curricula in Undergraduate Sustainability Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Sarah Fortner, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 369,536.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in STEM literacy by developing
and implementing sustainability curricula that fuse STEM and business
perspectives. The overall project goal is to improve the preparation of students
to address complex societal issues that require application of environmental and
economic concepts. The project involves the collaboration of 24 faculty members
from diverse STEM and business disciplines at Bentley University, Wittenberg
University, and Northern Illinois University. Focusing on two sustainability
challenges, these faculty will collaboratively and iteratively design 24 modular
transdisciplinary case studies. These transdisciplinary case studies, which will
fuse STEM and business perspectives, have the potential to help STEM and non-
STEM majors understand and manage sustainability problems more effectively. The
project's assessment/evaluation experts will measure impacts of the
transdisciplinary case studies on student learning and perspectives, as well as
on faculty collaboration and instructional practices. The project intends that
the transdisciplinary curricular materials it develops will be accessible and
transportable to any institution. Thus, the project has the potential to enhance
sustainability education for a large number of undergraduates and to help to
educate a scientifically literate populace in the business environment where it
may be especially valuable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to transform
faculty perspectives about transdisciplinary teaching and collaborative
curriculum development, create and disseminate deliverables in the form of
tested curricular modules, advance student learning outcomes relevant to
sustainability, and develop greater understanding of structures, processes, and
attitudes that underpin a proposed model for transdisciplinary transformational
change. Building on prior work, the project will establish local learning
communities of faculty from STEM and business departments at each institution to
design and implement case study modules. Each module will contain a common
exercise, several options for course-specific exercises focused on different
disciplinary needs, and an assessment plan. A dissemination portal will be
hosted by the Science Education Resource Center at Carleton College, which will
also have primary responsibility for assessment of student learning outcomes. A
mixed-methods external evaluation aligned with a proposed theory of change will
focus on faculty perspectives and institutional transformation, including social
network data. The project is funded by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), which supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. The project is in the Development and Implementation Tier, and
in the Institutional and Community Transformation Track. Through the
Institutional and Community Transformation track, IUSE: EHR supports efforts to
transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.