* 1914251
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost in-planta nitrate sensor
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Xinran Wang, ENGENIOUSAG, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop technology to address a significant pain
point for farmers associated with reducing nitrogen fertilizer input costs. The
technology is based on in-planta sensor technology that will allow farmers to
more carefully and precisely tailor nitrogen applications to each part of each
field. By monitoring nitrate accumulation within plants, farmers will receive
real time readouts of which fields and which portions of fields are nutrient
constrained and could produce more yield following the application of additional
nitrogen fertilizer. These readouts also will identify those fields that already
have sufficient nitrogen, meaning that further applications would simply reduce
farmer profit and environmental sustainability. Widescale adoption and use of
these sensors will not only improve farmer profitability, but also improve water
quality and ecosystem health via reductions in agricultural losses of reactive
nitrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop an
in-planta sensor for monitoring nitrate concentrations in plants at low cost and
in near real time. Existing stalk nitrogen measurement must be conducted in a
laboratory setting, requiring farmers to collect samples, mail them to a testing
lab, and wait from one to two weeks to receive test results. The cost of the
laboratory testing is high enough that only a fraction of farmers conducts
nitrogen testing. The in-planta nitrate sensor technology will allow farmers to
appropriately sample their fields and provide rapid feedback, allowing farmers
(or their crop advisors) to incorporate the data into real-time decisions. This
project seeks to develop an in-planta sensor through the fusion of silicon-based
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology and novel nanomaterials. The
project will overcome major technical challenges through improving materials,
fabrications, packaging, and validation, including optimizing MEMS fabrication
processes to minimize sensors at low cost, improving packaging robustness for
sensors, and validating sensor prototypes in a greenhouse. The in-planta sensor
will directly detect stalk nitrate concentrations with minimal invasion, while
being robust to interference from other ions present in the plant stem or
stalk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.