* 1914719
* Complex Monge-Ampere Equations and the Calabi Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Xiuxiong Chen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2022
* USD 392,803.00

The problem of the existence of constant scalar curvature metric is the key
problem in complex differential geometry and it has close ties with mathematical
physics. For instance, the work of Calabi-Yau directly provided mathematical
foundation to mirror symmetry. According to A. Einstein, the theory of gravity
can be interpreted as the geometry of space-time. Therefore, the research in
complex geometry is crucially important in physics and cosmology. This project
also has impact in algebraic geometry, physics as well as partial differential
equations. Progress in these problems will be highly interesting to many
different fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The famous Calabi conjecture states that
every Kaehler manifold whose first Chern class has a definite sign will always
have a Kaehler-Einstein metric with appropriate sign on its scalar curvature.
This famous conjecture was proved by Yau in 1976 with vanishing first Chern
class, and independently by Yau and Aubin for the case of negative first Chern
class. For general Fano manifolds, S. T. Yau first suggested that the existence
of Kaehler Einstein metric is related to certain notion of stability of the
underlying polarization. This is proved by PI, S. K. Donaldson and S. Sun in
2012 via a series of three papers. The PI believe that more exciting progress
will follow after these work in this area which will impact not only on the rest
of mathematics but also on physics. The PI shall study a network of problems
centered around the existence of constant scalar curvature metrics and other
related areas. Here constant scalar curvature Kaehler metrics includes the more
famous Kaehler-Einstein metric as a special case. So it is a natural extension
of the original Calabi conjecture. In 2018, the PI and Cheng Jingrui made major
progress on this problem by establishing important a priori estimate for
constant scalar Kaehler metrics. The PI shall push this further towards the
existence of constant scalar curvature Kaehler metrics by studying a network of
problems related algebraic stability to coerciveness of the appropriate
variational energy functional.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.