* 1914372
* STTR Phase I:  Instrument Design for the Optical Detection of Insects in Agricultural Settings
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Kevin Repasky, Integrative Economics, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project includes the development of new tools and methods for detecting and
managing insect populations in the agricultural sector. The benefits of improved
information about insect populations are substantial, including increased farm
revenues through avoided pest damage and improved pollinator activity, and
increased access to export markets by providing information that can be used to
demonstrate compliance with the pesticide residue limits and biosecurity
requirements of trading partners. On the cost side, this monitoring technology
can improve the efficacy and reduce human health impacts of pesticide
application through improved targeting of activities. Growers may further avoid
labor costs of manual trap inspection and field surveys. Finally, decision
support systems built upon this sensing technology can improve the quality of
information used to guide farm investment decisions and can be used by crop
insurers and financial service providers to deliver more cost-effective services
to growers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STTR Phase I proposed project will advance
scientific and technological understanding in several areas, including
development of optical engineering models to detect the presence of small
organisms moving in complex physical environments, advanced signal processing
approaches to discern these organisms from non-target objects, and the
incorporation of user-driven elements into the design and testing process
through collaborations with agricultural producers and crop scientists. Insect
monitoring is slow and labor-intensive and uses methods that have changed little
in decades. By the time problems are observed, it may be too late for effective
management, or the options may be costly. Methods to detect pests and beneficial
insects, such as pollinators, must be updated to deal with these realities. This
project develops a system to measure distribution of flying insects in
challenging agricultural settings such as orchards and vineyards. The instrument
will use a patented Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) approach to locate and
classify insects in three-dimensional space. The objective of the Phase I
project will be to establish the ability of the system to accurately
characterize insect behaviors in production agriculture settings, which will
allow the improvement and development of new ecological models of insect
distributions over space and time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.