* 1914534
* Cryogenic Neutral-Atom Arrays at Frontiers of Quantum Coherence
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Cindy Regal, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

In less than a century, quantum physics has grown from an interesting puzzle, to
a striking reality, to a source of revolutionary computational ideas. A computer
based upon the power of quantum physics will be able to solve certain tasks at
rates unmatched by classical computers, and measurement tasks will benefit from
the ability to harness correlations between quantum particles. However,
physicists and engineers face seemingly impossible tasks in assembling these
devices. Fully isolating thousands of single quantum particles and at the same
time introducing ways for them to interact is very difficult. The fragility of
entanglement means that the disturbance of just one of those particles can be a
catastrophic event. The goal of this project is to devise techniques to advance
isolation and control of neutral atoms in "tweezers" made from focused laser
beams, a potential new platform for realizing many interacting quantum
particles. By operating at temperatures achieved with liquid cryogens, 4 degrees
above absolute zero, the atoms can be held in traps for longer times, and
highly-excited atomic states, known as Rydberg states, can have longer
lifetimes. This work will develop devices that trap atoms held within a
cryogenic environment, and demonstrate associated enhancements in small-scale
quantum protocols. The work will encompass graduate student training and impact
on undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bottom-up assembly of
arrays of single atoms, their individual control, and entangling mechanism such
as Rydberg excitation have enabled new perspectives on scalable and addressable
sets of neutral atoms for quantum computing. However, advances could soon
saturate due to limitations in multiple aspects of quantum coherence. This
project will develop a new cryogenic apparatus based on a closed-cycle
cryocooler that retains single-atom control, and subsequently explore multiple
scientific directions. As initial demonstrations, the researchers will study the
creation of non-classical states of motion of trapped neutral atoms harnessing
long storage times, and benchmark improved Rydberg lifetimes; ultimately
Rydberg-entangled optical atomic clocks will benefit from and combine with the
technology. The advances represented by this work will also impact Rydberg
quantum computing development, and provide insight into quantum state synthesis
and metrologically-useful quantum states. Further, in the quantum leap grand
challenge the import and meaning of quantum sciences must be propagated to a
next generation of quantum-hardware researchers and to the general public, and
the project will incorporate multiple avenues for
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.