* 1914098
* STTR Phase I:  Enzyme design for economical feed additives from sugar
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Christopher Snow, Sasya, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop low-cost, high-performing feed additives
for the swine feed market. Some of the current additives that supplement feed
have detrimental side effects and/or made from raw materials that are considered
toxic. Additives made from these toxic raw materials need to undergo substantial
purification to meet the safety thresholds. This project will develop new
enzymes and processes that enable the synthesis of chemically and structurally
identical additives from renewable feedstocks. The combination of enzyme design
and process optimization will result in an environmentally-friendly process to
produce additives that require minimal purification and result in low production
costs. The goal is to develop novel enzymes that are suited to produce feed
additives that have a proven record of safety and
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project is a proposal to
address the availability of renewably-sourced feed additives by developing a new
enzyme and a process. Currently, many feed additives are produced using organic
chemical synthesis that require energy intensive unit operations. The required
extensive clean-up of these products, combined with the high containment cost,
translates into high operating expenses. This project will focus on developing
new catalytic capabilities for enzymes by improving their selectivity and
specificity. Using the newly engineered enzymes in a process that involves
efficient unit operations, it will be possible for the first time to produce
low-cost feed additives that have a proven history of performance and safe use.
By employing powerful enzyme design tools to create enzyme libraries through
gene synthesis, this project will screen for promising enzyme candidates that
have desired capabilities. The deliverable of the Phase I project will be a
conclusive demonstration of the technical, economic and market feasibility of
the concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.