* 1914750
* CREST-Postdoctoral Research Fellowship: Cross-Ecosystem Interactions and the Transport of Aquatic Contaminants to Terrestrial Food Webs within Mangrove Forests
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Sean Kelly, Kelly, Sean Patrick
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 05/31/2021
* USD 0.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology-Postdoctoral
Research Fellowship (CREST-PRF) supports beginning CREST Center investigators
and provides them with training and research experiences that will broaden
perspectives, facilitate interdisciplinary interactions and establish them in
positions of leadership within the scientific community. The CREST-PRF research
project titled "Cross-Ecosystem Interactions and the Transport of Aquatic
Contaminants to Terrestrial Food Webs within Mangrove Forests" is aligned with
the goals of the CREST-Center for Aquatic Chemistry and Environment at Florida
International University through its study of contamination of mangrove forests
due to urbanization and natural causes. Because of their unique location at the
intersection of freshwater, marine, and terrestrial ecosystems, mangroves serve
as critical habitat for a wide range of aquatic and terrestrial organisms, while
also providing important ecological services. The specific aims of this research
is to characterize how mangrove food webs are affected by urbanization, as well
as to measure the concentrations of contaminant metals moving from aquatic to
terrestrial ecosystems via aquatic insects. The study is supported through the
collaborative efforts of several research institutions and universities from
southern Florida and Puerto Rico. Training of undergraduates and graduate
students in conducting and disseminating research is part of the project's work,
as is outreach to K-12 students and teachers and the general public, to enhance
their understanding of important environmental issues that are relevant to their
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transfer of energy in the form of spatial
subsidies (i.e. prey, detritus or nutrients) between aquatic and terrestrial
food webs is critical for maintaining biodiversity and ecological functions
within mangrove ecosystems. Natural and anthropogenic disturbances have
significant effects on cross-ecosystem interactions by altering physical-
chemical parameters in aquatic ecosystems. This study employs field studies and
chemical analyses to delineate how urbanization affects cross-ecosystem
interactions and the transport of aquatic contaminants to terrestrial food webs
within mangrove forests during wet and dry seasons. Field work includes sampling
urban and non-urban mangrove sites in southern Florida and Puerto Rico to
determine significant changes in the composition of aquatic insect and orb-
weaving spider assemblages, as well as to quantify the dietary contribution of
aquatic insects and their correlation with concentrations of metals in orb-
weaving spiders using stable isotope and trace metal analyses. In addition,
bioassays are used to measure the effects on growth and emergence rates of non-
biting midges (Diptera: Chironomidae) in response to increasing levels of
salinity and metals. The taxa of aquatic insects and spiders that are the focus
of the research have worldwide distributions and therefore findings can be used
as a comparative model for other mangrove ecosystem studies around the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.