* 1914165
* STTR Phase I:  SmartRun Monitor for Gait and Form Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Jae-Won Choi, eSens LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project will scale up and characterize a new pressure sensor
technology that has the potential to create an affordable, accessible shoe
insert that accurately measures, stride-for-stride, an individual's gait
(running or walking form) in real time and in the real world. Gait analysis is
used in a wide variety of settings. However, the use of gait analysis to prevent
injury, improve mobility and improve patients' lives has been hampered because
it is constrained to use within medical facilities. The proposed novel sensor
system has the ability to collect objective data on both pace and gait/foot
strike to give a clear picture of how a person actually moves outside of a
laboratory setting. The device would enable better coaching data to train
athlete form to prevent running injuries which afflict 32 million U.S. distance
runners each year; ongoing monitoring and prediction of gait and balance issues
in Americans over age 65, about 11.5 million of whom fall each year leading to
2.3 million serious injuries; and force data which clinicians can correlate to
the onset of diabetic foot ulcers, which occur in 1.8 million chronic diabetic
patients each year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project seeks to
develop gait monitor that combines a novel, low-cost, robust and conformable
pressure sensing technology that can detect both normal and shear forces with an
accelerometer and electronics to process and analyze this data. Unlike existing
commercial tactile sensors, the technology consists of stretchable electrodes
for signal transmission and ionic liquid-based polymeric composite having
piezoresistivity for shear and normal stress measurements. While the proposed
sensor has been fabricated in small quantities and tested in laboratory
settings, exploration of material formulations and sensor configurations must be
undertaken alongside testing that more closely approximates gait analysis
product requirements. Key goals under the STTR Phase I project are to
investigate the impact of a range of material formulations on normal and shear
force measurements, explore how sensor configurations affect normal and shear
force measurements with a focus on the complexity of signal processing and
sensor sensitivity, and prove the suggested shear sensors are suitable for shoe
insert applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.