* 1914059
* Research with the CMS Detector at the LHC
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kevin Lannon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,134,659.00

Particle physics focuses on understanding the most basic building blocks of
Nature and the rules that bind them. The CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
located near Geneva, Switzerland is the world's most powerful particle
accelerator, able to reach the highest particle energies in a laboratory
setting. The CMS detector at the LHC is a powerful and sophisticated camera,
observing the collisions of protons and recording the byproducts for detailed
study by CMS experimentalists. Through this project, the high energy physics
group at Notre Dame University will maximize the discovery potential of the CMS
experiment through contributions to data analysis, preparations and operations
for the next LHC run as well as early data analysis and final R&amp;D in
preparation for the high luminosity upgrades of the LHC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next three years will be a challenging period as the
CMS experiment presses forward on three separate fronts: analyzing the nearly
150/fb of data collected during the past run, preparing for and then beginning
to analyze twice as much data from the next run, and finalizing the plans and
beginning the construction for the high luminosity LHC upgrades. Notre Dame
activities include contributions across several areas of the CMS detector
including the electromagnetic calorimeter, the hadronic calorimeter, trigger,
computing, and offline software. Their physics analysis plans leverage past
investments in Higgs and top quark physics, while also establishing new
directions for directly and indirectly probing for new physics. The Notre Dame
group will continue to leverage their expertise in calorimetry in several Higgs
analyses and searches for new phenomena, including Higgs decays to two tau
leptons, two photons, or a muon lepton and a tau lepton. Additionally, they will
exploit their contributions to the Phase 1 upgrades of CMS calorimetry for
improved performance during the next LHC run. They will also continue to
coordinate and manage the optical readout and decoding for Endcap and Barrel
Hadron Calorimetry. The group has also taken on leadership roles in high-
luminosity LHC upgrade projects, including the electromagnetic and hadronic
barrel calorimeter upgrades, the endcap calorimeter upgrade, and the addition of
a new timing layer detector for CMS. This project also includes contributions to
the Level 1 Track Trigger upgrade and continuing contributions to High Level
Trigger operations, Offline and Computing, and Data Preservation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The group will engage broadly in Education and Outreach
through QuarkNet and many other public-facing initiatives. Notre Dame is lead
and the managing institution of QuarkNet, which currently consists of 52 Centers
in 25 States and Puerto Rico and has been expanded to include eleven different
experimental programs at seven national and foreign laboratories. Their outreach
efforts include development and implementation of electronic laboratories
(e-Labs) for LHC data and Cosmic Ray Data, Masterclasses based on particle
physics and astrophysics, and participation in programs that support summer
research for undergraduates, high school teachers and high school students.
Through these efforts, they continue to develop and build upon a suite of
outreach materials and demonstration projects that bring particle physics to the
public on a number of levels, from real physics analysis on LHC Higgs data in
the classroom to a particle detector display at the
Smithsonian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.