* 1914574
* I-Corps: Acousto-optical RF Field Sensor for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the safety of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) procedures by sensing the radio
frequency (RF) signals during interventional and diagnostic procedures. During
interventional procedures, especially critical for children who cannot be imaged
using X-rays, this sensor provides the location and orientation of devices, such
as catheters, inside the patient's body to guide the physicians. Since an
acousto-optical sensor is used, this information transfer is achieved with no
adverse effects, such as RF heating. During diagnostic procedures, the sensor
can help quantify the RF field exposure of the patient in real-time, preventing
excessive tissue heating. Furthermore, it may enable imaging of patients with
medical implants who are not currently imaged by MRI due to safety concerns. As
a commercial product, the sensor will potentially decrease the costs for all the
stake-holders within the health industry (hospitals, insurance companies,
governmental institutions, etc.) while decreasing the risk to the patients and
improving health outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on a radio frequency (RF) safe acousto-optical
sensor to locally measure the RF field in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which
in turn provides the signals to track the interventional devices like catheters
and needles during interventional procedures under MRI as well as to measure RF
energy exposure of the patient. The main safety concern with MRI is RF heating
due to metal cables required to carry the signal from an antenna to the outside
system. The solution here is replacing all the metal cables with optical glass
fiber, which eliminates the RF heating. To convert the RF signal into optical
modulation, a compact acousto-optic sensor is used as an intermediate medium
between the antenna and the optical fiber. This is achieved by exciting a
piezoelectric transducer on an optical fiber with the RF signal generated by
miniature MRI coils and antennas which in turn generates acoustic waves in the
optical fiber. Since the signal is generated and transmitted over an optical
fiber to the MRI system without any conductors, this eliminates the RF heating
safety issue. The sensor prototype has been successfully bench tested and proof
of principle for interventional procedures has been demonstrated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.