* 1914546
* CAREER: SusChEM: Electrocatalytic Valorization of Biomass Intermediates via 1st-Row Transition Metal Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Yujie Sun, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 505,971.00

Biomass, obtained from waste agricultural materials or efficiently - grown
plants, has the potential to be a significant, renewable source of clean energy
and chemical feedstocks if appropriate methods of chemical conversion can be
developed. Dr. Yujie Sun of Utah State University is supported by the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division to pursue research into the
investigation of biomass conversion using a novel electrocatalytic process.
Electrocatalysis uses electrons provided by an electric current to drive
chemical reactions in the controlled and efficient process of catalysis, a
chemical pathway that increases the speed and efficiency of the chemical
converstion. Dr. Sun's research elucidates the chemical reaction pathways, or
mechanistic steps, of the electrocatalytic oxidation of biomass molecules and
establishes the relationship between the catalyst composition and its catalytic
activity for 1st-row transition metal-based electrocatalysts. For good
conductivity and efficient catalytic activity, the transition metals are
fabricated as very thin films known as two-dimensional ultrathin "nanosheets".
Broader impacts of the research result from the development of an efficient
biomass conversion process to produce fuels and other chemicals from renewable
biomoass resources. Dr. Sun also creates broader impact opportunities in his
work with students in education and outreach activities. He is actively engaged
in outreach programs focusing on attracting and mentoring students from groups
that are under - represented in the STEM fields, such as Native American
undergraduates and economically disadvantaged high school students, as well as
creating cutting - edge research-based opportunities in experimental courses for
undergraduate students at Utah State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even
though biomass valorization has been recognized as an attractive strategy in
producing nonfossil- based chemical products, the conventional upgrading
approaches often require harsh conditions, toxic regents, and/or expensive
catalysts. With the support of this CAREER award from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Yujie Sun of Utah State University is
developing an alternative electrocatalytic approach for biomass upgrading
utilizing 1st row transition metal-based electrocatalysts. In particular, this
project elucidates the mechanistic steps of the electrocatalytic oxidation of
5-hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF, one of the top biomass-derived platform
chemicals) under ambient conditions and establishes a composition - activity
relationship of 1st-row transition metal oxides (TMOs) for HMF valorization.
Using this information, ultrathin two-dimensional (2D) TMOs of the most
promising compositions are prepared and interrogated to obtain their intrinsic
electrocatalytic activities for HMF oxidation. The ultrathin electocatalyst
thickness is designed to circumvent electric resistivity problems. The
experimental activities are supported with density functional theory (DFT)
calculations, conducted in parallel with the experiments, and are used to aid
the interpretation of measured activity trends and other variables in the
composition-activity relationship. Broader impacts of the research result from
the development of an efficient biomass conversion process to produce fuels and
other chemicals from renewable biomoass resources. Dr. Sun also creates
opportunities for broader impacts in student training and mentorship in his
education and outreach activities. He is actively engaged in outreach programs
that are focused on students from groups under - represented in the STEM fields,
such as Native American undergraduates and economically disadvantaged high
school students, as well as creating cutting - edge research-based opportunities
in experimental courses for undergraduate students in Utah.