* 1914692
* NSF CREST Center for Energy &amp; Environmental Sustainability - Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ziaul Huque, Prairie View A & M University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program
provides support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving
institutions through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate
education and research. With National Science Foundation support, Prairie View
A&amp;M University (PVAMU) will build on the accomplishments of their Phase I
Center by broadening the research scope of the CREST Phase II Center for Energy
and Environmental Sustainability research and further integrating energy-related
education, outreach, and research. Phase II Center research is organized around
three subprojects: bioenergy, wind energy, and environmental
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase II Center research addresses
questions that are important to reducing energy-related carbon dioxide
emissions, increasing the sustainability of fossil fuel energy sources, and
improving the technological efficiency of bioenergy and offshore wind energy.
The bioenergy subproject concerns the production of bioenergy feedstock
irrigated with treated produced water from fracking operations and generation of
hydrocarbon fuels from that feedstock. The Offshore Wind Energy subproject seeks
improvement of the feasibility and reliability of massive offshore energy
generation. The Environmental Sustainability subproject focus is on process
engineering and stochastic methods to enhance the sustainability of fossil fuel
energy sources, and life cycle assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PVAMU is a
Historically Black University with an established record of preparing
underrepresented minority students, particularly African Americans, for STEM
careers, including advanced degrees The Phase II CREST will strengthen that
capability by: (1) positioning PVAMU's renewable energy program as a national
resource addressing global energy issues related to renewable energy and
sustainability; (2) Improving institutional infrastructure; professionally
developing key personnel, and sustainability; (3) expanding collaborations with
the energy industry; and (4) Enhancing the preparedness of students and building
a diverse workforce. Curriculum and engagement components, including a new
energy engineering curriculum at the undergraduate level and an energy
concentration at the Master's level will impact hundreds of PVAMU students. The
Center will provide energy-related research opportunities for 63 undergraduate
and 20 graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.