* 1914522
* CRISP Type 1/Collaborative Research: Sustainable and Resilient Design of Interdependent Water and Energy Systems at the Infrastructure-Human-Resource Nexus
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Bistra Dilkina, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2021
* USD 210,417.00

During the last decade, a transition in the water and energy supply paradigm has
emerged in many places across the nation and the world. Increasing efforts have
been made to integrate decentralized and alternative water and energy systems,
such as rainwater collection, greywater recycling, and solar energy systems,
into the existing centralized networks (i.e. electrical grid, municipal water
supply system). While such integrations could potentially increase the
resilience of our water and energy supplies to natural and man-made security
threats, decentralized systems often lack economies of scale and hence could
present increased environmental and socioeconomic costs depending on
technologies and geographic locations. Without careful planning and design of
such integrations and enough adoption, they could cause unintended consequences
such as over-production, conflicts in resource acquisition, and an overall
greater use of resources. Planning and design involves great complexities at
multiple scales from individual preferences/choices to water energy systems
nexus. This project applies expertise in the areas of computer
science/computational sustainability, economics, infrastructure systems
analysis, and life cycle assessment in a manner that develops new knowledge of
these complexities in an area of critical national need. The work informs
decision makers about possible outcomes and tradeoffs in different decentralized
water and energy adoption scenarios. The project facilitates the planning and
design of decentralized systems, and informs policy development to create more
sustainable (lower environmental impacts) and resilient (able to recover from
disruption) infrastructure systems for urban communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop understanding and knowledge
of complexities behind the integration of centralized and decentralized water
and energy systems under future demographic, climate, and technology scenarios
in pursuit of resilience and sustainability. This research uses survey
instruments to characterize individual preferences (utility functions) related
to (de)centralization of water and energy infrastructure systems; a
crowdsourcing platform for time-effective stakeholder engagement and response
collection; a spatial agent-based model to develop spatially explicit adoption
trajectories and patterns in accordance with utility functions and
characteristics of the major metropolitan case study locations; a system
dynamics model that considers interactions among infrastructure systems,
characterizes measures of resilience and sustainability, and feeds these back to
the agent based model; and a cross-scale spatial optimization model to
understand and characterize the possible best-case outcomes and to inform design
of policies and incentive/disincentive programs. Combined, these methods provide
a robust capacity to consider the ways in which future development of energy and
water resources can be more or less resilient, have fewer or greater
environmental consequences, meet differential demands of human populations, and
result in greater or lesser overall resource use. Boston and Atlanta are the
testbeds for the modeling framework developed through this project.