* 1914538
* RUI:  Developing modular repressors as in vivo biosensors in various organisms
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Joseph Glavy, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 441,684.00

The overall goal of this research is to establish an approach to construct new
biological components that would advance the understanding of novel cellular
behavior for practical applications. At this point in time, scientists are
capable of designing complex genetic networks to generate desirable biological
behavior. However, the implementation of many network designs is hampered by the
lack of modular components to build flexible and rewireable connections between
different parts of genetic networks. In this project, the research team is
establishing a design principle for generating modular chemical sensors within
various organisms. These sensors build new linkages between environmental
signals and gene expression regulation. The design principle is used to develop
biosafety devices in various organisms, enhancing the safety levels of using
these organisms in industrial and clinical settings. Products of this project
will facilitate the creation of genetically modified organisms in many
biotechnology industries. This project also provides opportunities for
undergraduate student training in synthetic biology at the University of Texas
at Tyler. An undergraduate team is established to join an international
synthetic biology competition (iGEM), in which participants will develop
engineered biological entities to solve problems involving genetic engineering.
Outreach activities to promote synthetic biology among K-12 students are also
planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is implementing a range of
scientific approaches, including protein structure analysis, bioinformatics,
computational modeling, and in vivo transcription assay, in identifying DNA-
binding modules and allosteric response modules in different repressor families,
such as LacI and TetR. These modules are mixed and matched to generate resulting
hybrid repressors that possess novel combinations of signal detection and DNA
operator recognition properties. These recognition properties are harnessed to
build new cellular response pathways in genetic circuits for creating novel
cellular behavior. Specifically, the research team is using these hybrid
repressors to establish a biocontainment platform that can be implemented in
various organisms. The engineered organisms are constrained to survive only in a
highly specific condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.