* 1914102
* SBIR Phase I:  Reaching "unreachable" Medicaid Members and Building Bridges to Care
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Aristotle Mannan, bosWell, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project redefines how Medicaid
recipients access health care. Over 75 million low-income Americans receive
health care coverage through Medicaid, but socioeconomic barriers intrinsic to
this population make it difficult to navigate the system. Many face challenges
including housing insecurity, food poverty, substance abuse and lack of support
that further inhibit the ability to obtain basic health care. Without earlier
interventions, the most vulnerable individuals are prone to rely on hospital
emergency departments for care - a vicious cycle that is costly to health care
organizations and patients alike. Increasingly, community-based organizations
(CBOs) such as food pantries, mobile health clinics, resource centers and
shelters have emerged as survival touch points. As non-profits with limited
resources, however, CBOs lack infrastructure for recordkeeping and reporting.
The proposed technology addresses the data management needs of CBOs through a
free and configurable web-based application that builds longitudinal profiles on
the clients served. In turn, this application creates value for health care
organizations by alerting care management teams when respective members visit a
CBO and establishes a channel for earlier as well as preventive forms of
engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed technology extends the
reach of health care organizations into the communities where Medicaid members
reside. This entails equipping CBOs with a free client management application
that improves organizational bandwidth and access to funding through streamlined
data reporting. On the back-end, a matching engine ingests member enrollment
files from health care organizations and queries the CBO database for unique
linkages. When matches are found, care management teams at health care
organizations receive notifications on the status and location of difficult to
reach as well as vulnerable members. Subsequently, they can communicate
bidirectionally with CBO staff that directly serve Medicaid members and have
stronger relationships. CBO staff are provided with guidance on best practices
to engage their clients and effectively serve as extensions of the care team.
With at least 400,000 CBOs across the country, this approach has the potential
to activate a vast network of existing infrastructure and dramatically improve
care coordination for those on Medicaid. During this proposal period, an end-to-
end solution will be implemented that links Medicaid members to their respective
health care organizations and transforms CBOs into technology-enabled gateways
to health care. Furthermore, the feasibility of the proposed technology will be
evaluated for Phase II considerations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.