* 1914638
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Rise and Functioning of Status Hierarchies
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2021
* USD 25,200.00

John Walden (University of Pittsburgh) is investigating the ways in which the
rise of the Late Classic (AD 600-900) Maya polity of Lower Dover, Belize
impacted surrounding local elite families. Scholars have increasingly come to
view Classic Maya rulers as being reliant on ceremony to bring followers
together, due to a lack of overt political power. In contexts where the ruling
classes lack the tangible power to affect the everyday lives of their subjects,
intermediate elites (those between the highest rulers and the commoner masses)
often fulfill important roles as mediators between the ruling family and their
followers. By identifying how the relative wealth and status and ceremonial and
economic bases of power of three autonomous local elite families changed as they
became co-opted by the emergent Lower Dover polity, Walden will show how
incorporation impacted the agency of intermediate elites. Did the local elites
lose wealth and status, and their bases of power upon incorporation into a
polity? If so, this would suggest Maya rulers wielded high degrees of political,
economic and ceremonial power. Conversely, if little change is apparent or the
co-opted intermediate elites witness an increase in their power, then this would
corroborate current perspectives envisaging ruling elites as lacking explicit
political power. The approach is grounded in an anthropological perspective on
the co-option of local political leaders by external powers, and consequentially
offers a comparative window into contemporary foreign policy and incorporation
in the developing world. The results of the study will be made accessible in
Walden's dissertation, and a series of academic publications. All data will be
freely available through the University of Pittsburgh Center for Comparative
Archaeology. The project will form the basis for training local and
international students in archaeological practice and serve to educate local
Belizeans about their past through a series of outreach events, lectures and
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Walden will examine changes at three
intermediate elite centers situated around the political capital of Lower Dover;
Tutu Uitz Na, Floral Park and Barton Ramie, and include data from the commoner
neighborhoods which surrounded each intermediate elite center. Understanding the
wealth and quality of life of client commoners will show whether local elites
favored more exploitative or communally beneficial strategies in their dealings
with their subordinates, and how this changed when the rulers of Lower Dover
established themselves. Comparison of possible variability between the three
intermediate elite families will allow an understanding of the different factors
which structured how much political power intermediate elites retained following
the rise of Lower Dover. For instance, did local elites located geographically
closer to Lower Dover see a more dramatic reduction in their power, or did more
politically powerful local elites possess greater opportunities for negotiating
their role in the new polity? Analysis of residential and ceremonial
architecture and the changing proportions of utilitarian, high value and ritual
items within these structures will show how inequality, patterns of production,
consumption and ritual activity changed as the polity
rose.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.