* 1914242
* Nuclear, Particle, and Weak Interaction Physics of the Big Bang and Stellar Collapse
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* George Fuller, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

The research supported in this project will provide insights into how atomic
nuclei and elementary particles and radiation behave in extreme conditions of
temperature and density. The PI will leverage these insights to provide
important clues about the nature of elementary particles, the mysterious
neutrinos in particular, and about how the elements are synthesized in nature,
e.g., the heaviest elements in the fiery interiors of collapsing stars or
colliding neutron stars, and the lightest in the first seconds in the early
universe. In turn, these considerations can give us insight into new physics.
The calculations to be done in this project will involve honing humanity's
fundamental theory of nature, i.e., Quantum Mechanics, into a tool capable of
modeling the behavior of neutrinos in the extreme environments provided by the
cosmos. Another key product of this Project will be the training of young
nuclear physicists, at both the graduate and undergraduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported in this Project will be directed
toward probing the fundamental physics of neutrinos and nuclei by exploiting the
intersection of exciting new developments in nuclear physics and neutrino
physics on the one hand, with the explosion of new data and insights from the
advent of multi-messenger astronomy and precision cosmology on the other. A key
issue in this enterprise will be studying how neutrinos interact in dense matter
and how these interactions may cause neutrinos to change their flavors (e.g.,
electron type neutrinos changing to tau type and vice versa). This is a fiercely
nonlinear problem because neutrino flavor/spin determines how neutrinos
interact, and how they interact determines how flavors/spin change. To these
ends, the P.I. and his graduate and undergraduate students will work toward: (1)
Understanding and modeling the quantum kinetic equations which govern neutrino
flavor and spin evolution in a general medium; (2) Constructing large-scale
numerical simulations of neutrino flavor/spin evolution in the early universe
and compact object environments and assessing the feedback of this neutrino
flavor physics on the prospects for the synthesis of nuclei in these sites, and
the implications of this physics for multi-messenger observations and dark
sector physics; (3) Understanding nuclear structure, neutrino-nucleus
interactions, nuclear partition functions, and nuclear weak strength
distributions in high temperature environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.