* 1914769
* GOALI: Ternary Metal Diboride Coatings with Enhanced Oxidation Resistance and Durability - Understanding Phase Formation from a Metastable Starting State
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* John Abelson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project addresses the need to expand the
performance of materials that resist wear at elevated temperatures in a wide
range of applications from microelectronics to protective coatings for
manufacturing. Such coatings are critical for ensuring component quality and
reliability by reducing manufacturing flaws, reducing in-service damage and
extending the lifetime of components in the field and in manufacturing processes
- all of which will largely eliminate waste, inefficient operations and resource
intensive redundancies. Improved coatings may also expand the design space,
allowing engineers to make choices that are more sustainable or could improve
performance but are otherwise impossible with existing technologies. Transition
metal diborides have exceptional wear properties and are quite tolerant of high
temperatures; however, the presence of oxygen in these service environments
diminishes those properties. This research is coupling processing science with
state of the art characterization tools to develop new coating chemistries in
the diboride family that evolve to protect themselves in oxidizing environments.
Moreover, the processing route uses chemically safe precursors and operates at
lower temperatures, making it a sustainable alternative to many existing coating
technologies. By engaging an industrial partner, UES Inc., though the GOALI
program, this research is focused on industrially identified gaps in
understanding and technology. Graduate student researchers are also benefiting
from this close partnership, gaining invaluable training and professional skills
by working directly with UES researchers. These graduate students will be well
positioned to join companies across a wide spectrum of industries dependent on
these protective coatings (e.g., automotive, microelectronics, aerospace, power
generation, tooling, etc.) where they are very much in demand. Teaching,
training and participation of underrepresented groups is being fostered through
targeted recruitment of graduate students from the University of Illinois
Support of Under-Represented Groups in Engineering (SURGE) program and
undergraduate researchers from the Illinois Scholars Undergraduate Research
(ISUR) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The overarching
objective of this study is to establish the scientific underpinnings of a new
sustainable kinetic route towards durable, oxidation resistant refractory
diboride thin films of HfAlxBy and HfCrxBy. The initial metastable state is
established through low temperature chemical vapor deposition and the use of
chemically safe (halogen free) precursors. The PIs are committed to sustainable
synthesis routes, specifically the co-PI is a co-founder and lead instructor in
the 'Energy and Sustainability Engineering' graduate certificate and MEng degree
programs at UI (http://EaSE.Illinois.edu). Once fabricated, film properties are
evaluated in both as-deposited and annealed conditions using quantitative
techniques, including transmission electron microscopy, electron energy loss
spectroscopy, and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. The results for film
growth, microstructure and composition are then analyzed in terms of kinetic
models for the component steps in the synthesis process. Additionally, in
exploratory work, incorporation of Cr is examined using the Cr(B3H8)2 precursor
developed by a collaborator. This precursor, which contains no heteroatoms other
than hydrogen, has previously been demonstrated by the co-PI to deposit high
quality CrB2 films, hence, it is expected to work well in combination with
Hf(BH4)4. Film growth, including the pursuit and validation of chemically safe
synthesis routes, analysis and testing actively involve the GOALI partner, UES
Inc., facilitated by regular communication and extended visits of personnel
between sites. Successful protocols are then transferred to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.