* 1914777
* CREST Center for Advanced, Functional Materials: Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 01/31/2020,01/31/2027
* Kimberley Cousins, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 01/31/2027
* USD 4,097,757.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology program provides
support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving institutions
through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and
research. With National Science Foundation support, California State University
San Bernardino will build on the accomplishments with their Phase I Center by
advancing knowledge in functional materials, while providing quality
undergraduate research experiences for historically underrepresented students.
The Phase II Center for Advanced Functional Materials will support the
development of new materials and promote understanding of structure/function
relationships in a range of functional materials. The Phase II Center will
continue partnerships with the University of Nebraska-Lincoln Materials Research
Center, the University of Buffalo Department of Chemistry, and NASA Armstrong
Research Center. New Phase II partners include California State University Santa
Barbara, California State University, Pomona and the National Institute of
Standards and Technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. Government's "Materials
Genome Initiative" highlights the importance of functional materials development
for building the technologies of the future. The Phase II Center exploits both
the structure of the molecular components of the materials, as well as the
formulation of single component and hybrid materials, to better understand the
relationships between structure and function, working towards design of
materials for practical applications. Interdisciplinary teams of researchers
will push the boundaries on what is known about ferroelectric, piezoelectric,
ferromagnetic and multiferroric materials. Based on systematic study of
structure versus function in, for example, single crystal organic/organometallic
crystalline materials, thin films of organic and inorganics, and bulk and thin
film polymers; materials will be modified to enhance the desired function.
Theoretical models will be used to explain observed phenomenon on a molecular
level, and simulated structure design with database searching for known analogs
will guide the selection of additional materials to prepare and
evaluate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase II Center project will contribute to
the production of the next generation of STEM workforce including
underrepresented students by: 1) strengthening proven pre-college and community
college recruiting strategies; 2) retaining students through experienced
mentoring, relevant research, and leveraging strong support programs; and 3)
career success through early internship and research experiences leading to
graduate admissions, advanced degrees and STEM professions. Project enhancements
include implementation of a new Master's Program in Materials
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.