* 1914857
* Furthering the Work of STEM Undergraduate Transformation: Modeling Instructional Change Teams
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Alice Olmstead, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 12/31/2023
* USD 564,618.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing guidance about how to build successful teams for
improving undergraduate STEM courses. Texas State University at San Marcos, in
collaboration with Western Michigan University, proposes to capture the key
elements of how successful instructional change teams develop and function. A
significant body of research is available about how to teach STEM courses well.
However, many past efforts to promote the use of research-based teaching have
focused on individual instructors, limiting the impact of these efforts.
Focusing instead on instructional change teams could generate widespread,
sustained improvements in STEM courses. Although it is well established that
teams can harness the power and expertise of many people working towards a
common goal, not all teams are successful. In addition, few research studies
have examined teams that are working toward instructional change. The
investigators in this project will model how elements of team setup and process
can affect achievement of sustained improvements to undergraduate STEM courses.
The project intends to provide recommendations that could guide administrators
and change leaders in the design and implementation of team-based instructional
change initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model that serves as a starting
point for this research was developed in a prior qualitative study and combines
research from multiple disciplines with evidence from interviews with project
leaders and team members. Building off that prior work, the project will
evaluate the effectiveness of instructional change teams based on: 1) the
sustainability of instructional changes; and 2) the quality of changes at the
instructional, collaboration, and individual change level. These measures will
be examined as a function of the team inputs, including the nature of the task,
who participates, process constraints, external engagement, and access to
resources. The two-phased, mixed-methods study will diagnose what factors lead
to desirable team outcomes. Phase 1 will develop a reliable survey instrument
that quantifies key elements of the team inputs, the nature of the team's
collaboration, and the team outcomes. Phase 2 will involve analyzing survey data
from many teams across different institutions to test the impact of variations
across teams. These results will be used to generate research-based
recommendations about how to strengthen team-based instructional change work.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional
and Community Transformation track, the program will support efforts to
transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.