* 1914446
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Automatically Answering People's Privacy Questions
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Thomas Norton, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,128.00

As novel technologies collect increasingly large and diverse amounts of data
about us, people are unable to keep up and retain control over what happens to
their data. The current legal approach to privacy concentrates on the concept of
"Notice and Choice", namely the expectation that people are provided enough
information about the collection and use of their data and are offered
meaningful choices about these practices (e.g., opt out, opt in). A primary
element of this approach relies on privacy policies to communicate this
information to people. In practice, these policies tend to be long, vague and
ambiguous. Not too surprisingly, few people find the time to read them and those
who do often struggle to understand what they say. This multi-disciplinary
project aims to develop novel technology that will enable people to regain a
sense of control by enabling them to simply ask questions about the privacy
issues that matter to them rather than requiring them to read long, one-size-
fits all privacy policies. In addition to producing new knowledge and
technologies and contributing to improving the state of privacy in the United
States, this project will also create education and research opportunities for
both undergraduate and graduate students at participating universities,
including activities to broaden participation of women and under-represented
minorities in this important area of computer science, and contribute to the
development of technologies with the potential to help the visually impaired
take advantage of information found in the text of privacy policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-disciplinary project builds on recent advances
in natural language processing, machine learning, code analysis and user
modeling to re-invent notice and choice, moving from long and hard-to-understand
notices to interactive privacy dialogues with users. An important part of this
research involves the development of question answering functionality that
enables users to ask questions about those issues that truly matter to them
rather than presenting them with one-size-fits-all privacy notices. Another
involves supplementing disclosures found in privacy policies with additional
sources of information such as background knowledge (e.g. knowledge about common
data practices and relevant laws) and code analysis to disambiguate statements
and provide additional details to users when it matters (e.g., with whom their
data is shared). This research will be guided by user-centered design
methodologies where the design of novel technologies is informed by findings
from human subject studies, and where technologies are deployed and evaluated in
increasingly rich and realistic scenarios. Products of this research will
include prototype privacy Question Answering functionality, as well as
technology to automatically extract information about data collection and use
practices from both the text of privacy policies and from
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.