* 1914562
* Tailoring Optoelectronic Processes in Metal Halide Perovskite via Piezoelectric and Piezo-Phototronic Effects
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Zhong Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Metal halide perovskites represent an emerging class of
materials for next-generation solar cells. The power conversion efficiency of
perovskite solar cells has increased from 4% to 24% over the past ten years.
These advances have come through controlling the crystallization of thin films,
chemical modification, and interface engineering in devices. Although tandem
devices with two different sub-cells could further improve efficiency, their
manufacturing is complicated. This project uses a different strategy. The piezo-
photonic effect couples mechanical stress, light absorption, and electricity.
The project will use this effect to produce perovskite-based solar cells and
photodetectors with markedly improved performance. Knowledge generated by this
project will broadly impact applications of this class of interesting materials
with applications in solar cells, photodetectors, and other electronic devices.
This work will also strength nanoscience research. Summer research opportunities
for high school teachers will provide a medium for transferring nanomaterials
science and technology knowledge to high school classrooms. Underrepresented
female undergraduate students will participate in the research and the
experience of high school students will be
enriched.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to tailor
the optoelectronic processes in the metal halide perovskite-based optoelectronic
devices by capitalizing on the piezoelectric effect and piezo-phototronic
effect. This will enhance the performance of metal halide perovskites, i.e.,
increased photocurrent and photovoltage in solar cells and improved sensitivity
in photodetectors. (1) The crystal morphology and crystal orientation as well as
electrical properties of perovskite thin films upon poling by an external
electric field will be interrogated. (2) The effect of poling-induced changes in
crystal morphology and crystal orientation via the application of an external
electric field on the performance of perovskite solar cells and photodetectors
will be explored. (3) The piezo-phototronic effect on the alternation of energy
band under piezopotential at the perovskite/carrier transport layer interfaces
enabled by the application of external strain will be scrutinized. The
significance of this project lies in judicious exploration of piezoelectric
effect on perovskite crystal morphology and crystal orientation as well as
energy band alternation at perovskite/carrier transport layer interfaces to
render the tailoring of photo-induced exciton dissociation, charge carrier
transport, and charge carrier collection for high-performance piezo-
phototronics-modulated perovskite-based devices. The resulting solar cells and
photodetectors will exhibit greatly improved performance due to the piezo-
phototronic coupling between polarization charges and photogenerated carriers,
thereby transitioning fundamental scientific discoveries into useful
technologies that benefit society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.