* 1914490
* CREST Center for Water and the Environment, Phase II
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2025
* Mark Stone, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 12/31/2025
* USD 4,100,000.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology program supports
the enhancement of research capabilities of minority-serving institutions
through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and
research. With National Science Foundation support, the University of New Mexico
will build on the accomplishments of their Phase I Center for Water and the
Environment by expanding and redirecting water-related research with new
research questions, new partnership institutions, and an emphasis on recruiting
and retaining Native American students. Objectives of the Phase II Center for
Water and the Environment are to (1) conduct innovative research on
technological solutions to problems with water and the environment, (2) increase
the participation of underrepresented groups in science and engineering
professions, and (3) build institutional capacity for water-related research at
the University of New Mexico. The Phase II Center will generate knowledge about
the availability, management, and treatment of water in arid environments. The
Center has three interrelated subprojects that focus on hydrologic processes in
watersheds, water quality and treatment, and coupled water-energy interactions.
The unifying research theme that connects these subprojects is the protection
and restoration of water quality for downstream and rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Watersheds and Wildfires subproject investigates the
temporal and spatial variability in the quantity and quality of water as it
moves through the watershed following a wildfire. The Treatment Technologies
subproject investigates the removal of contaminants such as nutrients and
emerging contaminants from natural waters and wastewaters using biofilms and
membranes as well as how small communities can overcome barriers to reuse. The
Water and Energy subproject investigates the environmental impacts of energy
generation and consumption, including the effects of mining legacy on Native
American communities, the mechanisms by which hydraulic fracturing can
contribute to groundwater contamination, and the complex dynamics between energy
development, natural resource protection, and community
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While retaining attention on Hispanic
Americans, the Center for Water and the Environment will increase Native
American participation in science and engineering professions by partnering with
several Native American-focused organizations to conduct outreach. The Center
will address problems with water and the environment, which are broad societal
concerns that affect public health and economic development, particularly in the
arid southwestern US. Center research will benefit communities across the globe
by developing technologies and strategies for managing water in arid
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.