* 1914636
* Collaborative Research: Uncertainty Quantification, Optimal Designs and Calibration in Computer Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Rui Tuo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 142,517.00

From aerospace designs to material science to biomedical studies, today's
practice in engineering and physical sciences has made increasing use of
computer simulations. How to design the computer simulations, analyze the
computer output data, as well as to enhance the accuracy of the computer models
are fundamental challenges in computer simulations. This project will focus on
the development of a statistical framework for computer experiments, with the
goal of developing both theoretical and methodological tools that cover the
typical computer simulation pipeline from data collection to modeling and
analysis to verification and validation. Specifically, the team plans to
establish a new uncertainty quantification theory and foster novel methodologies
for data mining, interpretation and decision making. The project will provide
accurate, efficient and robust approaches that would make an impact on
contemporary computer simulation practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three major objectives: (i) establish a statistically and computationally
efficient uncertainty quantification framework for Gaussian process regression,
(ii) propose a general experimental design scheme for multi-fidelity computer
experiments, (iii) study the statistical properties and suggest efficient
algorithms for novel calibration methods for computer models. The proposed work
should lead to methodological development of a generic nature in the design,
uncertainty quantification and calibration in computer experiments. The improved
uniform error bounds can potentially lead to the use of fewer experimental runs
for the same precision. Their significance can go beyond computer experiments
such as in spatial statistics, which heavily uses kriging method. The optimal
designs for nonstationary Gaussian Process models can help stimulate further
development of experimental design theory in more complex situations. Standard
approaches in experimental design do not pay much attention to the nonstationary
situations. The proposed algorithm can substantially enhance the value of the
projected kernel calibration (PKC) method. Although PKC is known to be
theoretically superior, there is no known algorithm that can effectively
calculate the PKC estimates. Because calibration is used to bridge the gap
between computer simulations and physical experiments, this work can be
potentially significant. Theoretical and technical advances made in this project
can help facilitate further interactions between statistics, applied mathematics
and probability theory, through journal publications, student exchange visits
and presentations in interdisciplinary conferences,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.