* 1914013
* STTR Phase I:  A Personal Radiation Dosimeter Using Solid State Tissue Equivalent Detector Technology (SSTED)
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Ioannis Kymissis, RADIATION DETECTION SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2020
* USD 224,248.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project includes both societal and economic benefits. Upon successful
completion, the project will introduce a new type of radiation protection
monitor or dosimeter that would be worn by individuals that are potentially
exposed to ionizing radiation (like x-rays). Typically, this includes health
care workers, nuclear energy workers, soldiers, and first responders. This new
dosimeter measures human exposure more accurately because it reacts to radiation
the same way that human tissue responds. This is referred to as tissue
equivalence, and it represents breakthrough technology in radiation monitoring.
The promise of tissue equivalent detection at an affordable price allows for
improved and efficient dose management for radiation workers, safer medical
procedures, broader acceptance of atomic energy sources, novel screening and
efficient monitoring for the military, and better situational awareness for
first responders. Additionally, the new dosimeters, called Solid State Tissue
Equivalent detectors or SSTEDs, are made from completely organic materials using
more modern fabrication techniques. Overall, this reduces the cost per unit of a
typical dosimeter. From an economic standpoint, the introduction of SSTEDs will
create jobs in a new technology sector while decreasing the cost of radiation
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed project will optimize the design
of the current Solid State Tissue Equivalent Detector (SSTED) configuration to
overcome the one remaining significant technical challenge. Organic
semiconductor devices respond well to ionizing radiation. Unfortunately, the
physical bond that joins a device's active region to its biasing electronics
also may respond to radiation. The response of organic semiconductor devices to
ionizing radiation is tissue equivalent because the semiconductor has an
equivalent radiation cross section to that of tissue. The bond is not organic,
and therefore does not respond with a tissue equivalent response. The project
will determine whether design parameters within the organic device itself can be
adjusted to mask the bond response. To accomplish this, devices with varying
active region thicknesses and geometries will be fabricated and entire devices
and their associated supporting electronics and bond regions will be probed with
a narrow radiation beam to characterize the contribution to the response of each
sub-region within the device and supporting structures. This will answer the
question "can a set of design parameters be optimized that will remove bond
response from the radiation measurement?" determining whether a compensating
design scheme that cancels out the bond response must be
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.