* 1914028
* Collaborative Research: Cross-Scale Interactions &amp; the Design of Adaptive Reservoir Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Murugesu Sivapalan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,989.00

This project addresses two key tensions in flood and drought mitigation:
tradeoffs between minimizing flood and drought risk, and tradeoffs in the choice
of where in the system to invest in risk mitigation. This project will study
these tradeoffs through detailed case studies in distinct hydro-climatic and
governance settings: Lake Mendocino, California and Danjiangkou Reservoir in
Hubei Province, China. In both cases, water managers are exploring the use of
streamflow forecasts to improve reservoir operations for flood control and water
supply under changing conditions. This project will collect and analyze data on
hydrology, infrastructure and decision making to study the impacts of
operational changes and identify strategies that facilitate adaptation. A model
will be developed to test how practices to reduce flood and drought impacts
interact across scales (e.g., regional, municipal) and respond to change, in
different environmental and social settings. The project team will work with
decision makers to learn from their experiences and develop tools that fit their
needs. The project will also provide education and training opportunities for
the next-generation workforce in hydrology and water resources systems analysis
through mentored research experiences and new course
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address three key questions: 1)
How will a change in reservoir operations propagate through the partially-
engineered, partially-evolving watershed system? 2) What characteristics of the
hydrological or governance system affect this propagation? 3) What institutional
design choices enable adaptive management? While the case-based models developed
can address the research question in two specific contexts, the project also
aims to derive generalizable knowledge about the features and processes critical
to mitigating flood and drought risk as well as insights into unintended
fragilities. To build theory, the project will also generate a differential
equation-based socio-hydrological model of a generic reservoir and watershed
system. This model will be used to explore the system-level patterns that emerge
in the long-run under a range of conditions, which will enable us to build
theory on the hydrological and institutional factors critical to understanding
the effects of reservoir operating rule changes. In summary, this work will
advance knowledge of adaptive flood and drought management in four ways: 1)
illustrate the tradeoffs between flood and drought mitigation goals in reservoir
operations across scales; 2) identify the processes through which reservoir
operation changes propagate through the system; 3) quantify the benefits and
limitations of controlling streamflow variability; and 4) demonstrate the impact
of institutional design choices in detecting critical changes and facilitating
response. This new knowledge will address the practical challenge of planning
for higher streamflow variability, while mitigating the risk of generating
unintended fragilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.