* 1914655
* Testing a Theoretical Model of Social Influence and High-impact Pedagogical Practices for Sustaining Undergraduate STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ruth Riter, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,922.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE:EHR) this project aims to serve the national
interest by increasing the success of women, including women of color, in STEM
fields. It aims to do so by conducting research that can increase understanding
of how to create environments that develop both STEM expertise and the desire to
persist in STEM fields. To enter and succeed in STEM career pathways, students
must not only master STEM content and skills but must also believe in their
knowledge and competence (STEM self-efficacy). In addition, they must identify
as scientists and mathematicians, while finding value and utility in STEM
professional work. This project seeks to contribute knowledge about what
practices lead to successful outcomes in populations underrepresented in STEM,
including women and women of color in a liberal arts environment. The project
will test whether improved supplemental instruction in a STEM learning center
increases student knowledge of key concepts in introductory courses and improves
STEM self-efficacy. The project will also examine whether coordination of
improved supplemental instruction, mentored research, and peer-to-peer mentoring
improve student persistence and integration into STEM careers. The study will
test the capacity of interventions to diminish or eliminate disparities and
improve outcomes at both the student level and institution level over time, as
well as generate knowledge about the reasons that students decide to leave or
continue in STEM career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will target
supplemental instruction to impact student self-efficacy and persistence in STEM
gateway courses. In collaboration with faculty, the project team will develop
materials to help undergraduate learning assistants facilitate student learning
outside the classroom. The project will further develop and coordinate mentored
research and peer mentoring programs that cultivate STEM identity and community
values. The project hypothesizes that STEM self-efficacy will mediate early-term
student outcomes such as grades and persistence and that STEM identity and
values will mediate later-term outcomes including STEM degree attainment. The
project will investigate whether: (1) focused coordination of co-curricular
programs improve student-level outcomes in content mastery and process skills,
while improving institution-level outcomes in retention and decreasing
disparities; (2) student outcomes are mediated by STEM self-efficacy, identity,
or values; and (3) the reasons students decide to continue in STEM at key
transitions align with STEM self-efficacy, identity, and/or values. The project
will determine whether the key support for student persistence in STEM changes
over time. For example, although content mastery and self-efficacy may
sufficiently support persistence early in college, it may be that identifying as
a STEM professional and relating to the values espoused by the STEM community
become essential for persistence through degree attainment and intention to
pursue a STEM career. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. This project is in the Institutional and Community Transformation
track, through which the IUSE: EHR program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.