* 1914480
* Light Fields and Their Role in Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Anson Hook, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Anson Hook at the
University of Maryland. This project will advance our knowledge of the
fundamental rules of physics underlying nature at the smallest scales. The
standard model of particle physics was completed in 2012 with the discovery of
the Higgs boson but at the same time made manifest a huge fine tuning problem
known as the Electroweak Hierarchy problem. The PI's group will study theories
that solve this problem and will explore their experimental implications. A
common feature of many of the solutions to the Electroweak Hierarchy problem is
the presence of new fundamental particles lighter than any of the other known
particles. The PI will work through how new exciting quantum limited experiments
as well as astrophysical systems can be used to detect these new particles. This
proposal advances the national interest by promoting the progress of fundamental
science by discovering and understanding the smallest building blocks of nature.
The project will also mentor graduate students and postdocs on research methods
as well as helping high school students at local physics
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore and improve upon the
solutions to the Hierarchy problem that have been proposed in recent years. The
PI will show how non-linearly realized discrete symmetries provide exponential
protection of scalar masses and find the guiding rules needed to construct
models that utilize this surprising feature. First he will generalize the
results of abelian discrete symmetries to non-abelian discrete symmetries. Non-
abelian discrete symmetries have accidental symmetries present in some of their
interactions in which the Higgs boson can be embedded, extending the exponential
protection to the Higgs boson. On the cosmological front, he will study
production mechanisms of extremely light vector bosons. By utilizing adiabatic
conversion in the presence of a primordial magnetic field, misaligned axions can
be turned into vector bosons. This technique can be used to obtain vector dark
matter or to reduce the abundance of the axion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.