* 1914584
* Collaborative Research: PaiRED: Partnering Across Insider-views of RED
* ENG,EEC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Susannah Davis, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 02/28/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Engineering programs across the country are working to become more responsive to
the changing needs of today's students. In response to this need, the NSF has
funded 19 five-year Revolutionizing Engineering and Computer Science Departments
(RED) projects from 2015-17, with a call for new proposals published in 2018.
The preliminary results from funded RED projects show many examples of success.
Transformative organizational change is difficult, however, and most project
teams have navigated challenges related to leadership team dynamics. Most of
these challenges are not shared with the broader community, in part, because of
a fear of identifying individuals and of highlighting failures instead of
successes. Yet, understanding the challenges associated with relationships in
leadership teams is critical to making revolutionary change in engineering
education. This project will develop a deeper understanding of team dynamics in
large-scale engineering teams. This new knowledge will ultimately increase the
effectiveness of RED teams and their organizational change initiatives, and will
have implications for other large-scale initiatives such as Engineering Research
Centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research project is focused on
developing a critical understanding of roles, perspectives, and relationships
within RED teams and the potential impact of these concepts on creating and
sustaining organizational change to improve the education of engineers
nationwide. The NSF PFE/IUSE: RED solicitation requires the inclusion of faculty
and administrators who serve in specific roles and from specific backgrounds;
this project develops an understanding of the lived experiences of the
individuals who served in these roles on teams funded from 2015-2017. In
particular, the work will investigate how the experiences of team members shape
attempts at organizational change. The project explores the following research
questions: How do roles, perspectives, relationships, and structures shape how
teams face, frame, and navigate challenges and tensions, as they work towards
revolutionary organizational change in engineering education? How have RED team
roles, perspectives, relationships, and structures evolved over time?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection and analysis include artifact analysis of
proposal documents, project websites, and shared RED documents. Narrative
interviews with members of RED leadership teams, including principal
investigators, social scientists, engineering education researchers, and
disciplinary engineering faculty members will also be conducted. These data will
be analyzed to identify larger patterns across interviews and develop broader
themes. Findings will be disseminated in traditional venues, in workshops, and
through white papers. By looking at the experiences of RED team members within
specific roles across RED sites, key aspects of RED team dynamics (that cannot
be reported on easily in individual teams because of the identifiable nature
these roles) will be uncovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.