* 1914934
* Quantum Field Theory, Quantum Gravity, and the Swampland
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Benjamin Heidenreich, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Benjamin Heidenreich at
the University of Massachusetts Amherst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A long-standing
goal of theoretical physics is to reconcile quantum mechanics and general
relativity (Einstein's theory of gravity), two extremely successful paradigms
used to describe physics at vastly different scales. String theory provides many
mathematically consistent examples of such quantum theories of gravity, but it
is unclear which, if any, correctly describes our universe. Thus it is difficult
to make experimentally testable predictions. Professor Heidenreich's research
concerns the so-called "swampland" program, which attempts to identify features
that are common to all mathematically consistent quantum gravities, potentially
leading to predictions that can be tested in future experiments. Research in
this area serves the national interest by promoting scientific progress on the
vitally important question of the nature of quantum gravity which lies at the
heart of much of theoretical physics. Longer-term benefits potentially include
synergies with experimental physics. This project will also have significant
broader impacts, both on the scientific training of undergraduate and graduate
students at the University of Massachusetts Amherst involved in this research
and through Professor Heidenreich's outreach activities with high-school
students in the Amherst area. In addition, Professor Heidenreich will
communicate ideas on the forefront of quantum-gravity research to a broader
scientific audience through a planned review article.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, Professor Heidenreich will study various swampland criteria in
depth, such as the Weak Gravity Conjecture, the Swampland Distance Conjecture,
and others, in the various forms that they have appeared in the literature.
Heidenreich's research aims to sharpen these criteria as much as possible,
subject them to strenuous theoretical tests, and if possible relate them to
basic principles underlying quantum gravity. The ultimate aim of this research
program is to build a scientific consensus on which features are and are not
universal to all quantum gravities, potentially enabling testable predictions of
quantum gravity to be made in the future. A related, technical focus of
Heidenreich's research is the study of strong coupling and S-duality in gauge
theories and string theory, especially in theories with four or fewer
supercharges. Gauge theory dualities of this kind can lead to additional
insights into the physics of D-branes and fluxes in string theory, and vice
versa, improving our understanding of the landscape of quantum gravities
constructible in string theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.