* 1914499
* Enhancing Durable and Efficient Student Learning in Undergraduate Gateway STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* John Dunlosky, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 11/30/2023
* USD 552,145.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by applying learning research
to help undergraduate students learn and remember foundational scientific
concepts. In STEM disciplines, students must be able to remember and use what
they learned in introductory courses months after those courses have ended. This
durability of knowledge enables students to build a cumulative knowledge base as
they move from introductory classes to more advanced coursework. Accordingly,
instructors in introductory STEM courses face a major problem: how can they help
their students learn key concepts so that they remember and can use this
knowledge in the future? The problem is even more overwhelming when one
considers the amount of information that STEM students are expected to learn. If
students are to learn and remember all the important content, they must use
their study time as efficiently as possible. To help instructors and students
meet these challenges, this Development and Implementation (Level I) proposal
(Engaged Student Learning Track) will evaluate a web-based learning tool. This
tool applies research about how people make long-term memories and will be used
by students in gateway courses in chemistry, biology, and physics. At intervals,
the tool will quiz students about foundational concepts and provide feedback on
their performance. The project expects that, by providing multiple opportunities
to remember, review, and relearn foundational concepts, the tool will improve
the efficiency and durability of students' learning. This review-feedback method
is based on simple, but powerful learning tasks. As a result, it could be used
for a broad range of content across many STEM courses. Thus, this project has
the potential to enhance student success in many STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this project are to
experimentally evaluate: 1) the efficacy of using a Retrieval-Monitoring-
Feedback (RMF) method to improve student achievement on high-stakes exams in
gateway STEM courses; 2) the degree to which the RMF method enhances performance
on distal outcomes; and 3) the degree to which a refresher session using the RMF
method enhances course exam performance in advanced courses in the subsequent
semester. Fundamental concepts in biology, chemistry, and physics will be
identified, and the web-based tool will prompt students to study the course
concepts twice a week. During each study session, the web-based tool will prompt
students to retrieve the targeted concepts and will provide feedback that allows
students to accurately score their responses and to relearn the correct answers.
Students will continue being quizzed until they can correctly retrieve the
meaning of each concept, and then they will repeat this procedure to review or
relearn the same concepts in subsequent sessions. Based on laboratory studies of
learning, it is known that such successive relearning can produce durable
learning of science concepts. Thus, a major benefit of the project to society is
that it will evaluate its efficacy for boosting students' achievement outside of
the laboratory, specifically in the real-world context of undergraduate science
courses in biology, chemistry, and physics. This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources,
which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of
STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.