* 1914599
* Determining the Cross-Scale Coupling whereby Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) Solar Eruptions Produce Energetic Electrons and X-Rays
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Paul Bellan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Constantly-evolving, plasma-filled magnetic arches that are thousands of times
bigger than the Earth cover much of the surface of the Sun. These arches
sometimes suddenly erupt and eject into space a mix of plasma, magnetic field,
energetic electrons/ions, X-rays, as well as copious waves. The detritus of this
eruption can wreak havoc on Earth's magnetic field creating aurora, damaging
spacecraft, disrupting radio communications, and in extreme circumstances,
knocking out electric power grids. The large-scale evolution of the pressure,
flow, magnetic fields and electric currents in these arches is described quite
well by a set of equations called magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). However, MHD
cannot explain why these eruptions occur nor why they generate energetic
particles and X-rays because MHD does not describe the very fine-scale physics
responsible for these critical phenomena. Laboratory plasmas governed by the
same MHD physics as solar plasmas will be arranged to similarly evolve and erupt
but in a reproducible way. The transition from large-scale MHD behavior to fine-
scale non-MHD behavior producing X-rays and waves will be investigated by
observing thousands of controlled eruptions using advanced diagnostics. The
research project will be done by the PI assisted by a graduate student and
undergraduates working as summer interns or part-time academic-year researchers.
The knowledge gained from this research will advance the national health,
prosperity, and secure the national defense because energetic solar particles
and X-rays can damage spacecraft and harm astronauts while the disruption of
Earth's magnetic field can damage electric power grids and adversely affect
communications systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year research project
will investigate the cross-scale coupling between MHD eruptive phenomena and
fine-scale non-MHD phenomena that produce X-rays, energetic particles, and
waves. The research will determine the mechanism by which the X-rays and
whistler waves are generated. Preliminary evidence suggests this happens when
the Rayleigh-Taylor ripples choke the jet cross-section to be of the order of
the ion skin depth at which point MHD fails and a kinetic instability ensues.
This kinetic instability is presumed to greatly enhance the local resistivity
and thus interrupt the electric current. This current interruption is presumed
to cause a large inductive voltage spike that accelerates a small fraction of
the electrons to extremely high energy. Brehmsstrahlung from the collision of
these fast electrons is then presumed to produce the observed X-ray burst. This
working hypothesis will be tested by scanning parameters to check the
presumption that the inductive voltage spike is associated with choking the
current cross-section. The scaling of this mechanism to the solar corona will be
investigated. While scaling of the MHD evolution is straightforward, scaling of
the fine-scale non-MHD phenomena requires explaining how MHD couples to the ion
depth scale in the corona. This is challenging because in the solar corona the
MHD and ion skin depth scales differ by at least 100,000. The hypothesis is that
coupling results from the MHD structures having a fractal character like the
twisted strands of a rope being composed of still smaller twisted strands.
Plasma-filled magnetic flux tubes would be like the rope strands and the finest
scale strands would be of the order of the ion-skin depth. Bundles of flux ropes
(strands) will be produced in the experiment and tested to see if individual
strands become Rayleigh-Taylor unstable when the entire bundle is laterally
accelerated. Coupling between the MHD scale (jet, kinks, Rayleigh-Taylor) and
the non-MHD scale (energetic particles, X-rays, whistler waves) will be
determined and used to model how solar eruptions generate energetic particles,
X-rays, and waves. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.