* 1914134
* SBIR Phase I:  XplorStem(TM): A smartphone/tablet application that enables hands-on biotech laboratory education for all students regardless of socioeconomic status
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Vicki Meadows, Zenobia Therapeutics
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is focused on developing a mobile biotech laboratory
for high schools. Education in biotech is limited from a practical point of view
to schools with the funds to purchase expensive equipment and to train their
teachers to use it. Kits including equipment and accompanying instructional
materials are available in large biotech markets but require teacher training,
purchase of materials and check-out and return of equipment. In this,
instruction is limited to a few high schools in key biotech hubs. Our goal is to
give every student in the country equal access to biotech training by building a
laboratory in their pocket through the proposed product. Through use of mobile
devices, a $100 tablet can replace thousands of dollars in laboratory equipment.
Everything the student needs to complete their studies will be included in the
app or through in-app purchases. Teacher training would be minimal because back-
end validation of all reagent kits and accompanying gear is completed to make
its use seamless and universally applicable. All accompanying information
required for the teacher is provided including in-App assessment tools of
student performance. The app may be downloaded by anyone in the country and
gear/reagents rapidly shipped directly to the teacher?s classroom. Teachers in
rural communities will have the same access as teachers in the wealthiest school
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on developing a web-
based app with a back-end database that teaches hands-on biotech laboratory
skills and concepts via discovery-based learning. The app includes an
exploration lab module that simulates high-end scientific equipment, including a
spectrophotometer and microscope that use the smart-phone camera. A second
module takes students through various laboratory skills including
micropipetting, use of microscope, and spectrophotometer. Students learn
background and are led through practice and research activities resulting in a
report. A third module uses guided discovery-based learning approaches to take
students through the scientific method to a real-world research problem and
adheres to all three dimensions of Next Generation Science Standards. Unit
includes a study of milk digestion by the pancreas that features isolation of
pancreatic proteases, drug discovery/natural product screening and quality
control testing of commercially available enzyme supplements. In these
explorations, students are not given answers. They must formulate hypothesis and
do guided background research and ultimately perform hands-on experiments
resulting in a final report. Student progress is captured in a back-end database
and monitored by their instructor. Hardware such as micropipettes and
attachments for phone/tablet will be designed and prepared through 3D
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.