* 1914454
* SBIR Phase I:  Passive Cooling Materials for Transparent Applications in Refrigerated Trucking and Solar
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Romy Fain, HEAT INVERSE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to overcome the barrier to transparent
passive radiative cooling materials that are applicable to commercial
environments. The project develops a transparent passive cooling thin-film
applicable to situations that lose efficiency when heated, and where both
mechanical and thermal stress are involved, for example, over advertisements on
refrigerated trucks, or on the front face of solar panels. It will provide the
simultaneous qualities of transparency in visible wavelengths, durability to
withstand the elements, flexibility for ease of application, high cooling power
to address customers' pain points, and manufacturability in a roll to roll
format to minimize costs. The technology has the potential to provide a 25-80%
increase in fuel efficiency via application of the thin-film to the outside of
refrigerated truck trailers. The benefits to customers include: fuel cost
savings, reduced emissions, allowing regulatory requirements to be met,
decreased maintenance and replacement costs compared to refrigeration units and
in-truck insulation in truck, as well as temperature maintenance in maximum
heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project seeks to develop a thin-film product that could revolutionize cooling
technologies across a number of industries. The demand for temperature-sensitive
goods is expected to continue to grow significantly. To address the need for
refrigeration with reduced fuel costs and emissions, the project is developing
selective photonic emitters in thermal wavelength windows such that instead of
heat being effectively enclosed in an insulating thermos (the atmosphere), they
are exposed to a vast cold sink of space. The result is a revolutionary method
of entirely passive heat management. This approach will be optimized in a thin-
film photonics material that provides significant cooling to refrigerated truck
trailers, saving refrigeration fuel costs. Phase I research objectives will
establish proof of feasibility and include producing and testing promising
material combinations at wafer-scale, testing to ensure that the material's
qualities transfer to a commercially relevant size, and performing a small-scale
test with potential customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.