* 1914340
* SBIR Phase I:  Mobile Health Platform for Malignant Hypertension Prediction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Nirav Shah, Sentinel Healthcare Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 06/30/2020
* USD 249,646.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from the development of a scalable
and predictive software platform with a remote monitoring service that analyzes
patient blood pressure data and delivers clinical recommendations, enabling
healthcare providers to triage patients before their hypertension devolves into
heart attack and stroke, and shortening the interval to achieve blood pressure
control from the standard of care (18 to 24 months) to as little as 10 weeks.
This model is beneficial on a societal level because the hypertension epidemic
affects 1 in 3 adults in the United States, creating financial and quality of
life burdens on more than 100 million people and costs the healthcare system
$131 billion annually. On a business and financial level, the model's prevention
of adverse healthcare events will result in major cost savings for healthcare
providers, insurers, and public health authorities. High blood pressure affects
40% of adults over 25 globally, and is a major factor in cardiovascular disease,
the number one worldwide cause of death, which occurs primarily in developing
countries. Preventing and predicting high blood pressure will transform how
chronic diseases are treated around the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop an
algorithmic model to predict malignant hypertension physiology. Pharmacology-
based blood pressure prediction has been demonstrated in small studies of
continuous 24-hour blood pressure monitoring but has not been translated to
point-of-care mobile management in the outpatient setting. Developing a model of
pharmacology-based blood pressure prediction using blood pressure variability,
rate of progression, and deviation from pharmacologic baseline that portends
heart attack and stroke is critical to point-of-care mobile management for
hypertension. Moreover, predictive analytics based on contextual data related to
patient physiology has not yet been developed. This Phase 1 project applies
existing algorithmic modeling to hypertension management by collecting unique
data from hypertensive patients including daily physiological data collected
from wearable blood pressure devices, pharmacology data derived from tracking
medication adherence and time of medication consumption, contextual data
including diet, exercise and sleep, and patients' clinical records, to develop a
predictive model that alerts clinicians when patients' blood pressure is
trending towards a negative health event. This predictive model will incur
minimal cost and structural changes to existing healthcare infrastructure while
reducing hospitalizations, generating massive cost savings for providers, and
significantly improving patient outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.