* 1914813
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Classroom Discourse in Active Learning Environments for Large Enrollment Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Gregory Rushton, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 609,435.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by investigating factors that create effective classroom
environments for large undergraduate chemistry courses. To accomplish this goal,
the project will gather data from large enrollment courses at the University of
Iowa, the University of Arizona, Middle Tennessee State University, and
Stonybrook University. It will use these data to determine the features of
collaborative activities that foster high-quality student engagement and
meaningful learning. Special attention will be paid to the participation of
diverse student populations, such as first-generation college students and
English-language learners. Core findings from this research project will be used
to develop and disseminate faculty resources that will support creation and
implementation of effective classroom activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research design for this project is based on the understanding that collective
activity is a sociological construct that fosters the construction of ideas
through different patterns of interaction. Productive ways of reasoning emerge
as learners solve problems, explain their thinking, and represent their ideas
when engaged in well-designed and relevant tasks that are properly facilitated.
Thus, at the center of the research design is the observation, recording, and
analysis of student-student as well as student-facilitator conversations to: a)
characterize critical characteristics of collaborative task facilitation that
most strongly support productive engagement; b) explore how different features
of task design (e.g., structure; focus; cognitive demand; opportunities for
knowledge integration; co-construction of knowledge) affect students' modes of
reasoning and productive engagement in argumentation and explanation; and c)
characterize the interaction of task design and facilitation with student
discourse in large chemistry classes and determine how those interactions hinder
or facilitate the productive engagement of diverse students by reducing barriers
to their equal participation in and contribution to group work. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is in the
Development and Implementation Tier, Engaged Student Learning Track. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.