* 1914903
* Collaborative Research: Integrating GEOS-Chem Atmospheric Chemistry into the  Community Earth System Model (CESM)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Daniel Jacob, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2023
* USD 517,846.00

This project will integrate a state-of-science atmospheric chemistry model
(GEOS-Chem) into an Earth System Model (ESM) that provides state-of-the-art
computer simulations of the Earth's past, present, and future climate states.
This effort is a partnership between the National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) and several academic institutions, including Harvard and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to expand the national capabilities for
climate modeling and atmospheric chemistry research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first objective of the project is to deliver a mature GEOS-Chem module within
the Community Earth System Model (CESM) in the first year of the project. The
resulting CESM2 configuration with GEOS-Chem (CESM2-GC) will be evaluated by
comparison to a large ensemble of atmospheric observations and to CAM-chem, that
is the CESM2 configuration with chemistry. The second objective is to
incorporate the GEOS-Chem emissions tool (HEMCO) into the model as an
independent component in CESM2, not only for computing emissions but also as a
general regridding and as an I/O tool. The third objective is to implement GEOS-
Chem and HEMCO into the future-generation CESM as part of the System for
Integrated Modeling of the Atmosphere (SIMA) with interoperable components
linked by common infrastructure through the Common Physics Framework (CPF). This
will involve further partitioning of GEOS-Chem into its chemistry and deposition
subcomponents under the CPF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To assess the general
performance of the model, global datasets will be used to benchmark the standard
GEOS-Chem simulations at each version update. These include surface monitoring
data for ozone and aerosol species, ozonesondes, satellite observations of
ozone, aerosol optical depth, BrO, and other species, and vertical profiles from
NASA aircraft campaigns for a large ensemble of species in coherent regions
worldwide. The project will train several graduate students, enhance the
nation's infrastructure for research by creating a new modeling tool, and
increase the pool of personnel skilled in software engineering, a need strongly
identified within the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.