* 1914560
* The Influence of Self-Repair on the Distribution of Cyclopyrimidine Dimers in DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Steven Rokita, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

The link between DNA damage caused by ultraviolet (UV) light and genetic
mutation is well established, but the determinants of hotspots of photochemical
reactivity where UV damage is most likely to occur remain elusive. This project
will address the origins and locations of these hotspots with a focus on how
damage accumulates as a result of competition between its formation and
spontaneous self-repair. The outcomes should inform future strategies for better
protection of genomes from UV damage. The project will offer cross-disciplinary
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students as they study
molecular processes affecting the viability of life under UV exposure, and
prepare them for diverse careers that serve the public
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Curvature of duplex DNA was previously reported
as a crucial variable in the formation and distribution of photochemical damage.
Whether this property controls initial formation of the products or their steady
state levels, established by competing formation and self-repair processes, has
yet to be determined. Similarly, the sequences of DNA where damage is most
sensitive to curvature have not been determined. Both of these unknowns will be
addressed by probing a library of DNA sequences that can be switched between
linear and bent conformations. The reversibility of UV damage will be assessed
by the rate at which product profiles created by these two states of DNA
interconvert, and sequences within the library most influenced by bending will
be characterized by deep sequencing. The sequences most susceptible to UV damage
will be reconstructed by statistical analysis and used to validate the
correlation between sequence, conformation and hyperreactivity in
vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Division of
Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.