* 1914503
* Collaborative Research: How does it end? Exploring thrust terminations of an intra-continental strike-slip fault, north Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Peter Haproff, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 40,798.00

Plate tectonic theory suggests that internally rigid tectonic plates interact
with one another along narrow plate boundaries. However, deformation is often
distributed across the interior of continents, such as in the Asian continent
along the Himalayan mountain belt, where significant faulting and folding occurs
thousands of kilometers from the boundaries between the Indian and Pacific
plates. Some of the largest features in the region are east-west oriented
strike-slip faults, such as the Haiyuan fault in north Tibet. This project
investigates the western termination of the Haiyuan fault to determine how
deformation changes from strike-slip fault motion to folding and thrust faulting
within the interior of the mountain belt. Furthermore, structures like the
Haiyuan fault are sources of major seismic hazards for densely-populated regions
within the Asian continent. Thus, constraining the style, magnitude, and rate of
deformation along the length of these strike-slip faults will aid in future
hazard and risk assessment. Other societally relevant impacts of this project
include: support of early-career faculty to establish globally competitive
research programs; training a PhD student and mentoring two undergraduates in a
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) discipline;
international collaboration with researchers and institutions; and outreach at
community engagement events with a focus on earthquake hazards. The project also
supports the development of a modern publicly-accessible geologic mapping
website that features techniques and information about digital tablet-based
field mapping and digital elevation model (DEM) construction, including methods
of incorporating map data into open-access online
archives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intra-continental response to edge-driven
plate boundary conditions is a central topic in continental tectonics. The
Himalayan-Tibetan orogen results from progressive Cenozoic India-Asia
convergence, and the largest structures within the interior of this orogen are
large strike-slip faults. Therefore, Tibet is an ideal testing ground to
determine how strike-slip faulting accommodates and redistributes strain in a
collisional orogen. This multidisciplinary investigation explores the western
termination of the left-slip Haiyuan fault within northern Tibet, where strike-
slip faulting abruptly transitions to thrust faulting. Specifically, a
combination of geologic bedrock and neotectonics mapping, construction of
digital elevation models (DEMs) using structure-from-motion (SfM) methods,
surface-age dating (i.e., optically stimulated luminescence and radiocarbon),
and low-temperature thermochronology are employed to (1) constrain Quaternary
slip rates along the western Haiyuan fault segments, and (2) systematically
document how strike-slip deformation transfers to a range-bounding, thrust-fault
system in the central Qilian Shan thrust belt. Field observations of the
kinematics of the western termination of the Haiyuan fault are used to test
models for plate-convergence-normal strike-slip faulting in the Himalayan-
Tibetan orogen, including (1) clockwise-fault rotation, (2) extrusion-fault
models, and (3) strain transfer models. Insights gained from studying the
Haiyuan fault can be applied to other zones of intra-continental
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.