* 1914373
* SBIR Phase I:  Blockchain-Enabled Machine Learning on Confidential Data
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Guha Jayachandran, Onai Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,634.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project includes advances in scientific understanding and
substantial societal and commercial impacts. In an era with seemingly endless
data breaches, the project offers a way of applying the power of machine
learning while never disclosing sensitive raw data. Decentralized computation
can increase the scale of models that may be trained, which will allow the use
of deep learning on more complicated problems across a range of fields.
Additionally, allowing confidential data to be used will allow more rapid
research advances in fields with sensitive data, such as biomedicine.
Furthermore, decentralized computation offers the promise of lower cost than
existing computational infrastructures such as cloud providers. This greater,
and more democratic, power will push the boundaries of the state-of-the-art and
also enable more people to leverage large-scale machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to advance
knowledge in the area of coordinating decentralized secure machine learning with
a blockchain in a manner that maintains data confidentiality and ensures
verifiability. The R&amp;D will also advance understanding and practicality of
zero knowledge computational verification and homomorphic neural networks. While
deep neural networks have yielded astounding results in recent years, there has
been limited progress towards achieving a practical solution to training models
in a decentralized context while both maintaining data confidentiality and
ensuring verifiability. This is the key challenge and it is anticipated that
this project will yield a solution. The proposed approach involves defining a
protocol for training amongst untrusted parties that is mediated by a
decentralized ledger and involves the use of homomorphic encryption and a
computational verification technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.