* 1914798
* Collaborative Research: Implementing Multi-institutional Classroom-based Undergraduate Research Experiences to Study the Impact of Environmental Changes on Salamander Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Margaret Fisher-Reid, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 95,878.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing and implementing multi-institutional Course-
based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs). Evidence demonstrates that
CUREs can be highly effective for engaging large numbers of students in
authentic research. In addition, participation in CUREs can result in increased
persistence of students in STEM disciplines, as well as generate new scientific
data. This project is a collaboration between Michigan State University,
Bridgewater State University, the University of Massachusetts at Amherst,
Pennsylvania State University Park, and the University of Richmond. The team
will leverage the Salamander Population Adaptation Research Collaboration
network (SPARCnet) to develop and support CUREs at the collaborating
institutions. SPARCnet is a research and education collaboration that
coordinates research about salamander responses to environmental conditions. In
the CUREs developed by this project, students will study individual- and
population-level responses of the red-backed salamander to environmental
variation and changes. This salamander has important ecosystem roles in
northeastern and mid-west U.S. forests. The students will collect and analyze
data from a wide geographic range, emphasizing ecology and evolutionary
processes. The specific CURE modules will be developed and implemented
collaboratively in different science courses across the five institutions. The
project expects that the CURES will increase students' understanding of the
collaborative nature of science, as well as develop the quantitative skills
needed to work with large data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop and test CURE modules that include unique field-based research and
multi-institutional collaborations within a single research system. The CURE
modules will go beyond the single-campus structure of most CUREs by creating a
framework that integrates students into an intellectually diverse and
established research network, SPARCnet. The instructors will facilitate student
collaboration and data sharing by pairing classrooms across institutions during
the research experience. The education research component of the project will
investigate three pedagogical questions that examine how the CURE model may
contribute to improvements in students' quantitative and scientific literacy,
self-efficacy, and science identity and sense of belonging. Using the recently
developed CURE model framework applied across a multi-institutional network, the
results of this study have the potential to advance knowledge about how CUREs
promote student learning outcomes and perspectives. Finally, the project will
increase understanding of the CURE model itself by examining the impacts of this
CURE on quantitative and scientific literacy. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.