* 1914463
* CREST Center for Forest Restoration Triangle (FORT)
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Tomasz Falkowski, New Mexico Highlands University
* Continuing Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 11/30/2024
* USD 4,008,011.00

The Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology program provides
support to enhance the research capabilities of minority-serving institutions
through the establishment of centers that effectively integrate education and
research. With National Science Foundation support, New Mexico Highlands
University will develop the Forest Restoration Triangle (FORT) Center. The FORT
Center will engage in regional multidisciplinary research, education and
stakeholder collaborations to advance the understanding of the effects of
restoration activities on historically forested environments. The Forest
Restoration Triangle Center is a collaboration of three institutions: The
Department of Natural Resources Management at New Mexico Highlands University;
New Mexico State University's John T. Harrington Forestry Research Center and
the New Mexico Forest and Watershed Restoration Institute at New Mexico
Highlands University. FORT will provide novel science-based solutions for
private, tribal, state, and federal forest managers faced with the twin threat
of catastrophic fires due to overgrown forests and the inability of post-fire
plant communities and ecosystems to naturally regenerate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FORT Center articulates three research thrusts.
Subproject 1 will determine the extent to which a nucleation (planting in
aggregated pattern) planting strategy matched with an improved seedling stock is
effective to establish vegetation on damaged forest sites. This research will
contribute to understanding the combination of nucleation size and planting
density that promotes greater survival and growth. Subproject 2 will conduct
field research to enhance understanding of changes in fire regimes driven by
climate variability. It will examine post-restoration stand structure for
increased establishment and survival of natural regeneration, Subproject 3
applies a nucleation concept to pre-fire and post-fire planning at the landscape
level, introducing high impact practices to fire modeling technologies.
Nucleation sites will be evaluated and modeled in the context of strategic fuels
treatments and fire behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FORT Center will ensure
the training of a generation of highly qualified STEM investigators with the
skills and experience to address complicated ecological questions. A place-based
approach to engage students in fire management and forest ecology and
restoration will be implemented. The FORT Center will develop strategies for the
management and restoration of resilient forests in the context of climate change
and fire. Although regionally focused, FORT Center activities address a global
need for management of wildfires. The Forest Restoration Triangle Center at New
Mexico Highlands University will improve forestry education by connecting
classroom lessons with real-world problems; revitalize outreach by continued and
close cooperation with watershed and other land management groups; and promote
diversity by emphasizing recruitment, retention, and mentoring of students and
practitioners representing underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.