* 1914572
* Research and Curriculum Development to Leverage University Student Conceptual Resources for Understanding Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Rachel Scherr, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 902,167.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing curricular materials for introductory physics
courses based on Resource Theory. Physics Education Research has a rich history
of topic-specific research about student thinking. For example, researchers have
identified common student ideas about topics from introductory courses,
including mechanics, electromagnetism, and thermodynamics. In recent decades,
the work has expanded to include topics in upper-division courses, such as
quantum mechanics and mathematical physics. Many instructional materials based
on this research use an outdated, Deficit Theory of learning. The Deficit Theory
positions student ideas as incorrect and in need of fixing. In contrast, this
project will support university faculty in seeing students' science ideas as
sensible and potentially productive. It will use results of Resource Theory
research and curriculum development to create instructional modules that build
students' current ideas into sophisticated physics concepts. Based on Resource
Theory, students have many correct intuitive notions about physics. Rather than
focusing on what students do not understand (Deficit Model), students are led to
build correct knowledge based on the things they already understand. This work
is important because instructors' thinking about and orientation toward their
students' ideas affects the kind of instruction that they offer to their
students. It is also significant because of its potential improve the
recruitment and retention of members of under-represented groups in physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide university physics
teachers with the resources needed to transition from a deficit model to a
resource model in their instruction. Specifically, this project will seek to
identify productive student ideas in specific physics topic areas. It will then
develop and test instructional materials that elicit and build on these ideas.
From there it will document the instructional contexts in which specific student
ideas are elicited. Finally, the project will disseminate products and findings
to university faculty to support them in implementing effective instruction. The
project will intentionally seek a representative sample of university physics
students, to rectify the current oversampling of mathematically-prepared
students from higher socioeconomic groups in Physics Education Research data.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.