* 1914598
* RAPID: The role of vegetation-moderated longwave radiation on the spatiotemporal distribution of snow during accumulation and ablation in mountain terrain
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* James McNamara, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 38,884.00

Mountain snow provides water to millions of people in the western United States.
To predict when and where melting snow will be available, water managers need to
know how much snow is in the mountains and where it is located. But snow is not
the same depth everywhere, so comprehensive estimates are required.
Unfortunately, manual measurements of snow are too hard because of access
problems, and methods to measure snow from satellites are still being developed.
One challenge faced by satellites is trees. Satellites can't usually see snow
through a forest. In winter 2019, NASA is testing new sensors for measuring snow
from aircrafts by repeatedly flying over 13 flight regions throughout the
western US. The sensors will provide snow depth and water content data
approximately every 3 meters of very large areas. One flight path covers an
experimental field site near Boise, Idaho were scientists have a long history of
studying mountain hydrology. This project will investigate the relationships
between mountain forests and snow by making new meteorological measurements in
forest at the same time that NASA is collecting unprecedented snow depth data.
Knowledge gained can be used to improve critical water supply forecasting
methods.

Mountain snow provides the dominant water supply from most of the western US;
understanding the processes and properties that control the accumulation and
melt of snow is crucial for science and society. The patterns of snow
accumulation and melt are impacted by many climate and terrain factors that
challenge scientist's abilities to model and forecast snow-derived water supply.
Foremost among the challenges is the impact that forests have on the timing of
melt. In some regions forests preserve snow while in others they enhance melt.
Obtaining data at sufficient spatial and temporal resolutions to answer
important questions about the impact of forests on snow is typically financially
and logistically prohibitive. In winter 2019, the NASA SNOWEX project will
obtain snow depth data at 3 m spatial resolution every two weeks through the
accumulation and melt season. With additional ground-based data collected during
these campaigns, it will be possible to answer some critical questions about
forest-snow interactions. The objective of this research is to collect
distributed longwave radiation data coincident with spatially and temporally
distributed snow distribution data. Specifically, the project seeks to answer
how spatially variable longwave radiation in forested and open environments
impact accumulation and melt in relatively cold vs relatively warm snowy
environments. An array of radiometers will be deployed to measure the spatial
distribution of longwave radiation at the snow surface under forest canopies of
different density through the snow accumulation and melt seasons. Coupling the
high resolution NASA snow depth and water content data with distributed
radiation data funded by this project fill a critical knowledge gap in the
science of snow-vegetation interactions, provide training for one PhD student
and two undergraduate students, and connect to a well-established education and
outreach programs at Boise State University.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.