* 1914885
* Aspiration-assisted Bioprinting
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Ibrahim Ozbolat, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2023
* USD 464,539.00

Organ shortage has been a major problem in the United States, and the number of
people on organ donor wait lists continues to be much larger than both the
number of donors and transplants. Recent estimates suggest that 22 people die
every day waiting for an organ transplant, mainly due to the scarcity of donors.
Advances in three-dimensional (3D) bioprinting could provide a solid base for
the future creation of implantable, bioengineered tissues and organs, obviating
the need of immunosuppression and other shortcomings associated with
transplants. Printable organs have remained elusive, however, and a main reason
is the limited life of cells after printing. This project will investigate a new
process, called "Aspiration-assisted Bioprinting," in order to precisely
position tissue building blocks in a rapid manner, with the intent to increase
throughput to allow fabrication of scalable tissues. If successful, the research
will establish a method for bioprinting of tissues or tissue models, which can
be used for drug development, lesion studies, or even for replacement of body
parts. This research directly impacts the medical products and health
industries, and also has direct impact on the quality of life of wounded
veterans, and therefore is directly applicable to economic welfare and national
security of the United States. Broader impacts activities will include education
and participation of underrepresented populations and woman students through
training and laboratory tours and demonstrations, as well as the integration of
next-generation bioprinting science into both graduate and undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the great progress in bioprinting of
cells in scaffolds, such as their encapsulation in hydrogels during bioprinting,
fabrication of native-like tissues is quite challenging. Achieving cell
densities similar to that of native tissues is not quite feasible using
hydrogels. Cellular aggregates are considered a promising bioink with certain
measurable and controllable properties, and are self-assembled into tissues with
specific features through layer-by-layer stacking or direct assembly. Despite a
few attempts, bioprinting of cellular aggregates, most commonly known as "tissue
spheroids," have been rarely applied due to lack of robust and practical
bioprinting processes. Current processes have major limitations such as (i) poor
control on the localization of bioprinted spheroids resulting in tissues with
air gaps, (ii) significant damages to the cell viability and structural
integrity of spheroids, (iii) poor repeatability of the process when the
spheroids are non-uniform in shape and size. The goal of this project is to
explore Aspiration-assisted Bioprinting process and study its underlying
physical mechanism in order to understand the interactions between physical
governing forces and aspirated tissue building blocks. The research objective of
this project is to test five sets of hypothesis: 1) cell type and spheroid
culture duration influences surface tension and viscoelastic properties of
spheroids but cell density does not, 2) spheroids with more viscous properties
need less pressure to lift while they are subject to more cell death during
lifting, 3) increasing the surface tension of support gel or decreasing the
surface tension of spheroids increases the bioprintability of spheroids, 4)
larger interspace between spheroids and longer spheroid incubation duration
reduces the speed of tissue self-assembly, and 5) larger interspace between
spheroids decreases the mechanical properties and graft integration of
bioprinted osteochondral tissues. Accomplishing this objective will allow the
exploration of advanced bioprinting processes for fabrication of native-like
tissues for various application areas such as but not limited to tissue
engineering and regenerative medicine, drug screening and disease
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.