* 1914453
* Universal Mechanism of Turbulence-Induced Deflagration-to-Detonation Transition from Terrestrial Chemical Systems to Supernovas
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Kareem Ahmed, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2023
* USD 418,695.00

Efforts to predict and control the onset of detonation waves, i.e. combustion
driven shock waves, have been a serious challenge for research community and is
important for a wide range of applications where detonations can be beneficial
or harmful. In confined spaces, detonations can naturally develop from low-speed
deflagration or laminar flames through interactions with compressible or shock
waves. However, in unconfined spaces the mechanism of transition from a low
speed deflagration wave to a detonation wave remains unclear. Findings from this
research can apply to development of new power generation and propulsion
systems, e.g., gas turbine engines and Rotating Detonation Engines (RDEs), and
industrial safety of mining operations, fuel-storage, chemical processing, and
nuclear power-generation facilities, as well as unbounded astrophysical systems
such as supernova explosions. Additionally, this work will have a broader impact
by preparing next generation of scientists and engineers to be leaders in
turbulent reacting flows. Students involved in the research and education will
understand the role of turbulence in improving the efficiency of combustion-
based systems. The overarching goal is to drive student growth in STEM
disciplines through outreach, learning, and professional education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores a novel mechanism
through which fast turbulent flames can become intrinsically unstable and
spontaneously transition to a detonation even in completely unconfined
environments. The goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive
understanding of the spontaneous runaway mechanism of turbulent flames, and
Turbulence-induced Deflagration-to-Detonation Transition (TDDT). The runaway
mechanism of compressible turbulent flames will be experimentally explored in a
unique “Turbulent Shock Tube” (TST) facility. Advanced ultra-fast laser
diagnostic techniques are used for the investigation. The research entails
several novel studies of high-speed compressible turbulent flames and combustion
that is fundamental to many modern energy and propulsion systems, such as gas-
turbine/internal-combustion engines to scramjets and rotating detonation engines
(RDEs), to exploding stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.