* 1915411
* CONFERENCE: Nucleic Acids Gordon Research Seminar: From organization and regulation to structure and mechanisms, June 1-2, 2019, Newry, ME
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* George Ghanim, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 01/31/2020
* USD 7,800.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the 2019 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Nucleic Acids to be
held June 1-2, 2019 at the Grand Summit Hotel at Sunday River in Newry, ME just
prior to the associated Gordon Research Conference. The topical theme of the GRS
meeting is "From organization and regulation to structure and mechanisms". The
meeting is organized and co-chaired by two senior graduate students, thus
providing them with valuable professional development experience. The format of
the meeting will be a combination of talks and posters, aimed at encouraging
scientific exchange in both formal and informal settings. Participants will
benefit from a dedicated education, career and mentorship session featuring a
keynote lecture from an expert in science education and a panel discussion with
program directors in Federal funding agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific focus of this meeting and the accompanying Gordon Research Conference
will be on multiple aspects of nucleic acids biology including research on both
RNA and DNA. Specific topics will include telomeres, mRNA splicing, CRISPR
technologies, 3D genome organization/dynamics/repair, translation regulation,
RNA and DNA modifications, RNA quality control, and therapeutics. Emphasis on
cutting-edge, unpublished research across many biological systems offers
participants the opportunity to explore how new findings can be leveraged for
their own work. The meeting will provide an excellent forum for junior
investigators, including those from underrepresented groups, to network with
each other and to have the opportunity to present and receive feedback on their
own research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.