* 1915498
* Collaborative Research: Collaboration in the Future of Work:  Developing Playable Case Studies to Improve STEM Career Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Daniel Hickey, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 233,070.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing educational
simulations to improve career preparation among STEM students. There is a
shortage of qualified workers in many STEM careers, including cybersecurity and
data science. Although undergraduate education is a key step along the career
pipeline, in-depth experiences such as internships often come too late and are
challenging to scale up to large numbers of students whose skills are still
developing. There is a need for authentic, scalable learning experiences that
expose undergraduates to professional STEM practices. This project will examine
how educational simulations can help undergraduate students understand and
engage with STEM careers in a realistic and interdisciplinary context. The
project aims to enhance the career awareness and skills of students in two areas
of national interest: cybersecurity and crisis response. The project also aims
to generate knowledge about how simulations can be used synergistically with
traditional courses. The outcomes of the project have potential impact across
the higher education spectrum and the K-12 environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a new form of educational simulation
called a Playable Case Study (PCS). In a PCS, players collaborate with each
other and fictional characters in an authentic scenario using a multimedia
interface supported by chatbots, videoconferencing, and interactive STEM tools.
Players' actions and decisions influence the unfolding narrative. The PCS will
spawn in-class discussions to help students reflect on and gain more
disciplinary understanding from their experience. Like other educational
simulations, PCSs provide undergraduate students with a low-risk opportunity to
experience professional STEM work that can be scaled up through technology to
reach more students. The project will create and evaluate two PCSs focused on
human-centered cybersecurity and crisis response. It will use a socio-cognitive
approach, called expansive framing. Students will have the opportunity take
ownership of their learning by framing problems in their own words. The project
will combine design-based research and quasi-experimentation to answer three
research questions: 1) How do PCSs support STEM learning, engagement, career
awareness, and career intent; and how does this vary for different kinds of
students? 2) How can a situated learning simulation (e.g., PCSs) be augmented by
expansive framing to increase near and far transfer of STEM knowledge? 3) How
can a simulation with an analytics engine and embedded assessments present
meaningful student feedback about their interdisciplinary, team-based STEM work?
The results of this project have the potential to improve STEM career pathways
and will enhance understanding of how simulation can be effectively used in
educational environments. This Engaged Student Learning project is supported by
the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human
Resources (IUSE: EHR), which supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all undergraduate students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.