* 1915772
* Conference Grant: Student Travel Awards for 2019 International Workshop on Antenna Technology (iWAT) to be held in Miami, Florida, March 3-6, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2019
* John Volakis, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The IEEE International Workshop on Antenna Technology (iWAT) is an annual forum
for the presentation and discussion on the newest research and development of
innovative antenna technologies. The 2019 iWAT will be held in Miami, Florida,
on March 3-6, 2019. The workshop is sponsored by the IEEE Antennas and
Propagation Society and the local IEEE chapter. The workshop features 4 plenary
talks and 8 invited sessions with more than 40 distinguished researchers in this
research community. In addition, the workshop has 3 interactive poster sessions
with more than 100 presentations by graduate students and industry
professionals. The workshop therefore provides a unique setting for graduate
students to interact with and learn from experts from academia and industry. To
support the training and education of next-generation scientists and engineers
working on antenna technologies, this NSF grant provides travel support for
graduate students to present their research papers at the conference and learn
the advanced research and development in antenna technologies. The travel grants
will be awarded competitively to 30 graduate students from U.S. institutions. A
selection committee is formed to manage the award selection process. To promote
diversity, priority will be given to underrepresented students including women
and minority. This NSF grant will benefit participating students by enabling
them to gain experience and skills in presentation, to learn about the latest
developments in antenna research and emerging applications, and to network with
the international antenna community that can lead to future collaborations or
career opportunities. As the antenna plays a vital role in many wireless systems
and applications, this travel grant support has broad impacts to the
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.