* 1915122
* CAREER: Improving Mobile Video Delivery for Emerging Contents and Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/27/2018,04/30/2024
* Feng Qian, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 04/30/2024
* USD 556,633.00

Streaming videos wirelessly on mobile devices is an increasingly important
application. The objective of this project is to bring innovations to mobile
video delivery for new content types and over emerging networks. Specifically,
the project investigates three aspects: (1) 360-degree immersive video delivery,
(2) video streaming over multiple network paths (multipath), and (3) video
streaming over millimeter-wave (mmWave) links. These are expected to be the key
building blocks of next-generation video streaming services. First, 360-degree
videos provide users with unique panoramic viewing experience; however,
360-degree video content delivery is much more challenging compared to regular
videos. Second, multiple network interfaces have become a norm on off-the-shelf
mobile devices but their potential is far from being fully exploited. Third,
mmWave is a key technology that will be integrated into 5G wireless networks;
but adapting video streaming to mmWave largely remains an uncharted territory.
The proposed solutions will benefit the society by enhancing the user experience
and reducing the resource consumption for next-generation immersive video
services. The research will also be integrated with an education plan that seeks
to prepare computer science students with the knowledge of new technological
trends in networking and systems, and stimulate the general public interest in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes three inter-connected research thrusts. (1) For 360 video
streaming, based on the concept of field-of-view (FoV) guided streaming, the
project uses big data analytics to facilitate accurate head movement prediction,
a key prerequisite for FoV-guided streaming. It also uses a rate adaptation
scheme with a "delta encoding" design allowing the quality of a fetched chunk to
be incrementally upgraded. This substantially improves adaptability when facing
randomness in head movements. (2) For multipath streaming, the project uses
multiple network interfaces to be used simultaneously for streaming videos. The
network framework supports video rate adaptation and allows users to flexibly
configure each path's cost. The framework also supports delay-sensitive live
streaming over multipath through strategic packet scheduling. (3) mmWave links
bear unique characteristics of massive capacity and intermittent availability.
The project first designs a transport layer for mmWave links. It then proposes
several video streaming strategies tailored to mmWave, such as strategically
combining mmWave and legacy omni-directional radios. For the above research
thrusts, the project will develop algorithms, models, and systems, backed up by
real implementation and evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.