* 1915353
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Cyber-Physical Systems and Internet-of-Things Week (CPS-IoT Week)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2019
* Omprakash Gnawali, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This project will provide funding for students from U.S. institutions of higher
learning to attend the 2019 Cyber-Physical Systems and Internet-of-Things Week
(CPS-IoT Week 2019) in Montreal, Canada during April 15-18, 2019. CPS-IoT Week
(previously known as CPSWeek) is the premier conference for Cyber-Physical
Systems research, and is comprised of five flagship conferences in CPS, namely
ICCPS (International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems), RTAS (Real-Time and
Embedded Technology and Applications Symposium), IPSN (Information Processing in
Sensor Networks), HSCC (Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control) and IoTDI
(Internet of Things Design and Implementation). In addition to these 5
conferences, there are 11 confirmed workshops and demonstrations that permit
papers to be submitted and presented by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are engineered
systems that are built from, and depend upon, the seamless integration of
computation and physical components. Advances in CPS will enable capability,
adaptability, scalability, resiliency, safety, security, and usability that will
expand the horizons of these critical systems. CPS technologies are transforming
the way people interact with engineered systems, just as the Internet has
transformed the way people interact with information. Travel support to this
conference for today's graduate students and postdoctoral researchers enables
broad participation by tomorrow's researchers in this interdisciplinary
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.