* 1915929
* 2019 Crystal Growth and Assembly GRC/GRS
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Jeffrey Rimer, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 9,000.00

2019 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Crystal Growth and Assembly: New
Paradigms in the Mechanistic Understanding of Ordered Materials Assembly, and
the 2019 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Crystal Growth and Assembly are being
held at the University of New England, Biddeford, Maine, on June 23-29 and June
22-23, 2019, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our society continuously
benefits from the development of a wide range of advanced materials to solve
technological challenges in applications ranging from super-alloy turbine
blades, solar-cells, microelectronics to new therapeutics for human diseases
such as malaria. Such materials are developed by scientists with diverse
backgrounds including chemistry, physics, materials science, and engineering.
Novel materials are often developed at the boundaries of these disciplines and
the aim of the Gordon Research Conference on Crystal Growth &amp; Assembly is to
bring together leading scientists from these different backgrounds in order to
stimulate cross-fertilization. In an effort to promote broader impact, the
format of the meeting emphasizes interaction with and active participation of
young scientists, i.e. students and post-docs, in order to educate a new
generation of researchers that will have to meet future materials challenges in
a changing world where (some) resources become increasingly scarce. NSF's Solid
State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research and
the Advanced Manufacturing Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation support stipends for registration fee and/or travel
support for some early-career participants at this conference because of its
relevance to their programmatic scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Crystal Growth
and Assembly Gordon Research Conference and Seminar is dedicated to the
knowledge and understanding of the fundamental atomic and nanoscale physics and
chemistry that are central to the nucleation and growth of crystals for a wide
array of technologies. Such knowledge and understanding is needed to develop
advanced materials that are used in a diverse range of applications. The 2019
conference has a particular focus on the fundamental mechanisms of materials
assembly with sessions that will highlight nonclassical pathways in crystal
growth and assembly. This conference, with support from NSF's Solid State and
Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research and the
Advanced Manufacturing Program in the Division of Civil, Mechanical and
Manufacturing Innovation, gathers leading scientists representing the major
areas in the fields of crystallization and assembly, and brings them into
contact with each other and, more importantly, with the next generation of
researchers in the field to promote broader outreach within the crystal growth
community. With respect to this larger goal, the meeting seeks to provide a
common language for our diverse student body; to raise the comfort-level of our
student/postdoc participants; and, through these efforts, to develop a tightly-
woven community held together by a common interest in the principles of
materials assembly. The accompanying Gordon Research Seminar that is dedicated
to and organized by graduate students and post-doctoral researchers aids in the
active participation of this new generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.