* 1915142
* Tests for Lepton Universality Violating New Physics.
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alakabha Datta, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Alakabha Datta at the
University of Mississippi. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy physics focuses on
discovering the fundamental building blocks of matter and how they interact with
each other. There are two ways in which high-energy physicists try to discover
new particles and learn about the laws that govern them. The first approach is
to create conditions at high energies where these new states of matter will be
produced, and the second approach is to make very precise measurements at lower
energies where the indirect effects of these new particles can be detected.
Professor Datta's work focuses on the second approach and involves developing
methods that can search for new particles and test theories associated with
these particles via precision measurements. Over the last few years hints have
emerged at several experiments that show deviations from the existing theory.
These anomalies could indicate the existence of new fundamental particles and
Professor Datta's research will aim to confirm these anomalies and isolate the
new particles causing these effects. As a result, research in this area advances
the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most
fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical laws.
This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts. Professor
Datta will involve graduate students in his research, and thereby provide
critical training for junior physicists beginning research in this field. He
also intends to give public lectures on his research results at various schools
and universities, including institutions with significant minority-student
enrollments. He will also develop new course curricula based on the results of
his research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Datta will
explore theories that provide simultaneous explanations of the various flavor
anomalies. He will investigate models that contain not only heavy new particles
but also light and hidden-sector particles. He will also study how these
theories can be tested using various experiments dedicated to neutrino physics,
dark-matter searches, and new heavy-particle searches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.