* 1915169
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: A Data-Driven Approach to Enhancing Wearable Device Performance - An Early Asthma Exacerbation Detection Study
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Delesha Carpenter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 333,000.00

Advances on wearable devices have enabled the continuous sensing of a number of
physiological parameters such as heart rate, heart rate variability, respiratory
rate, activity levels, and coughing. These parameters can be used for a number
of health applications, including prediction of asthma exacerbation, to achieve
efficient management and prevention of severe symptoms. However, there have been
significant challenges identified for the broad adoption of wearable devices, in
particular ensuring reliable measurements and maximizing their battery-life. In
current practice, clinical gold-standard devices can obtain reliable
measurements in medical and controlled environments whereas wearable
technologies target to be integrated into daily life and be reliable in
unconstrained real-world conditions. As a result, most current procedures to
evaluate asthma-related wearable devices often take place in controlled
environments and do not capture the broad spectrum of scenarios that a device
may be exposed to during an individual's daily use. These real-world scenarios
can compromise data quality and usefulness of a device. In this project, the
investigators aim to provide an innovative framework for characterizing the
performance of wearable devices in the real-world based on contextual
information of their usage, and aim to demonstrate the framework's value by
enabling more reliable early detection of asthma exacerbations in young adults.
The data produced by this award will be used as part of projects for
undergraduate and graduate students. Demonstrations and video materials will be
produced as part of the outreach efforts for K-12 and underrepresented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators plan to achieve their
scientific goals by focusing on three research thrusts. (1) Characterization of
signal quality: A robust statistical framework will be developed to characterize
signal quality in the real-world based on the context in which they are used.
Context will be represented using activity, environmental and device-state
information. The project will develop a supervised methodology using controlled
in-lab experiments, and expand the framework to be unsupervised/ semi-supervised
in order to be applicable to real-world conditions. (2) Development of a signal-
quality and context-aware inference model for early asthma exacerbation: The
characterization of signal quality will be used to develop more reliable
inference pipelines. (3) Feedback to user and device: Users will be provided
with easy-to-interpret and actionable feedback on the inference and any
adjustments needed for the device. The effect of this feedback on signal quality
and user satisfaction will be studied. The device will also receive feedback in
the form of parameter settings associated with sampling and filtering that will
ensure accurate levels of prediction while minimizing the power
profile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.