* 1915314
* New Pathways Connecting Theory and Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Mary Gaillard, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Mary K. Gaillard,
Lawrence J. Hall, and Hitoshi Murayama at the University of California,
Berkeley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of particle physics and related areas
in cosmology and astrophysics ask fundamental questions about the inner (and
outer) workings of our Universe, how the Universe began, what it is made of, how
we have come to exist, where we are going, and what laws govern everything. This
area of research is moving very fast, venturing into unprecedented energies in
particle collisions, unprecedented sensitivities in rare phenomena, and
unprecedented accuracies in precision measurements. To accelerate the progress
in this area, Professors Gaillard, Hall, and Murayama aim to develop novel ideas
connecting deep theoretical concepts to experimentally measurable processes.
They also seek to use newly obtained data to shape theories of fundamental
physics. In particular, they aim to discover new pathways to connect theories
and experiments which aid in designing the future experimental program in this
area. Understanding these deep and profound problems advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of fundamental science. Moreover, these kinds
of profound questions excite the general public and young minds, and Professors
Gaillard, Hall, and Murayama will be engaged in training junior scientists and
in public outreach efforts through lectures, schools, public media, and popular
science books. They also actively aim to promote diversity at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, major advances are expected in
understanding the laws of physics at energy scales never probed before, with
strong connections to astrophysics and cosmology. Research in theory is needed
to tie these areas together into a coherent framework and uncover deep secrets
that span the range from the smallest scales of particles and strings to the
largest scales of the Universe. The research associated with this project
includes a number of topics: collider physics, dark matter, neutrinos, quark
flavor, phenomenology and theory of supersymmetry, observational cosmology,
field theory, string theory, and the multiverse. This research will also have
broader impacts on multiple fronts. These researchers will continue their
efforts as mentors and teachers, with strong attention to promoting diversity.
Through their QuarkNet involvement they will also reach out to high-school
teachers and their students. Finally, Professors Gaillard, Hall, and Murayama
have been very active in giving public lectures and plan to continue these
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.