* 1915874
* Collaborative Research: Visual Training in the Geosciences by Training Visual Working Memory
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2017,05/31/2022
* Christopher Sims, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 05/31/2022
* USD 608,087.00

This project identify ways to improve education and training in the geosciences,
building on fundamental research in cognitive science. Geoscience is a STEM
discipline that is of growing importance to several national and global issues,
including climate change, energy resources, and understanding earthquake
activity. Expertise in geoscience depends heavily upon unconscious perceptual
skills that are difficult or impossible to impart through traditional classroom
education. Consequently there is a great need to improve or develop new methods
for perceptual training (i.e., training students to visually detect, identify,
and interpret geologic processes) and to study how educational practices in this
area may be optimized. This project will apply a cognitive science approach to
meet this goal, by conducting behavioral experiments involving geoscience
students, and developing computational models of human cognition. This project
is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program
emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational
knowledge in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will focus on
the role of visual working memory (VWM) in perceptual learning and perceptual
expertise in the geosciences. VWM is a cognitive system that is critical to the
geosciences. For example, when a geologist views or studies a landscape, he or
she acquires visual information from multiple points in the scene by making
numerous eye movements. The geologist can then (unconsciously) use his or her
VWM to integrate information across eye movements to develop a coherent
representation of the landscape. While there is much existing research on VWM,
very little is known about the relationship between visual working memory on the
one hand, and fundamental changes in perceptual ability in specific domains such
as geoscience on the other hand. The proposed research will build upon, and
extend a recently developed model of human perception that has the potential to
connect these two domains. This model is based upon information theory, or the
mathematical study of how physical systems can efficiently communicate
information. This model suggests that training and expertise fundamentally
change a person?s perceptual system in a way that leads to more efficient use of
cognitive resources. In order to test this model, a series of behavioral
experiments will be conducted involving novice and experienced students in the
geosciences. These experiments and computational modeling efforts will
contribute fundamental knowledge that can be used to improve geoscience and
education.