* 1915790
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Fair and Accurate Information Quality Assessment Algorithm
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Vivek Singh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 315,946.00

Prevalence of poor-quality information in cyberspaces poses threats to civic
society. To increase information quality, multiple automated algorithms for
undertaking quality assessment of online information have been proposed.
However, the fairness and performance of these algorithms across political and
policy opinions has been challenged, undermining trust in such systems. Through
a unique early-stage interdisciplinary collaboration that brings together
experts from the fields of information science, computer science, communication,
political science, and journalism, this project will develop accurate and fair
information quality assessment algorithms, while also gleaning deeper insight
into the nature of information being utilized across the ideological spectrum.
The proposed research advances the science of information and will offer
insights to organizations that aim to undertake automated information quality
assessment, ultimately allowing for the creation of safer and trustworthy
cyberspaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will include: (1) the
creation of a large article dataset that has been robustly labeled for both
quality and political ideological alignment, (2) an audit of multiple existing
information quality assessment algorithms to assess their accuracy and fairness,
(3) a systematic post-hoc inductive analysis of the content mislabeled by these
algorithms, and (4) modification of existing algorithms to support fairer and
more accurate information quality assessment. These four phases will build upon
each other, leveraging the contributions of each discipline and will provide a
new interdisciplinary model for SaTC-related research. This project will provide
interdisciplinary training to graduate students, mentoring them in diverse
methods and laying the groundwork for long-term interdisciplinary research. This
project also will help broaden participation in data science
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.