* 1915647
* Clumped Isotope Reordering Kinetics in Carbonate Minerals: The key to accurate ocean paleotemperatures and basin thermal histories
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Ethan Grossman, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 01/31/2023
* USD 340,620.00

One of the most exciting new ideas in geochemistry is to measure two rare
isotopes in calcium carbonate instead of just one and "clump" them together.
This provides a new and powerful tool to study the temperature of ancient oceans
and sediments and will help scientists looking at climate change, plate
tectonics, and petroleum exploration. This study will help identify the calcium
carbonate minerals most likely to preserve ancient temperatures. It will also
provide the chemical information needed to use two minerals at the same time to
better estimate the temperature history of the rocks. This project will develop
this new tool by connecting atom-level processes with observed chemical
reactions. The study will improve temperature estimates of ancient oceans and
the temperature history of rocks related to petroleum reservoirs. The project
will train graduate and undergraduate students and will add a new section of a
capstone undergraduate course that will introduce seniors to the field. The
project will also engage chemistry graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minority groups&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most exciting
developments in geochemistry in the 21st century is the ability to measure the
relative abundance of molecules with two rare isotopes ("clumped isotopes") in
calcium carbonate minerals (e.g., calcite) and apply this technique to reveal
the temperatures of ancient oceans or the burial temperatures of sediments now
exposed at the surface. A major complication in clumped isotope paleothermometry
however is reequilibration (reordering) of the signatures at elevated
temperatures (&gt;100oC) on million-year timescales. While complicating
paleoclimate studies, this reordering provides great potential for measuring
rates of burial, uplift, and exhumation of geologic formations, but only if the
rates (kinetics) of reordering are well understood. Currently, only the
reordering kinetics of the mineral calcite (CaCO3) has been studied in detail.
To address this knowledge gap, experiments will be conducted in which different
minerals are heated and the rate at which they reorder is measured. The
mechanisms of clumped isotope reordering will be examined at an atomistic level
using a range of sophisticated chemical techniques such as programmable heated-
stage synchrotron X-ray diffraction, total scattering, Raman spectroscopy, and
scanning transmission X-ray microscopy, in conjunction with advanced models for
atomic bonding. Correlating atomic characteristics with kinetic parameters and
mineralogical characterization will allow determination of detailed equations
governing the rates of reordering in a variety of carbonate minerals. The
project will train graduate and undergraduate students and will add a new
section of a capstone undergraduate course that will introduce seniors to the
field. The project will also engage chemistry graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented minority groups&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.