* 1915121
* Collaborative Research: Scaling Up the Use of Mixed Reality in Civil Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Tarek Abdoun, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,099,539.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this collaborative project aims to
serve the national interest by improving undergraduate civil engineering
education. Building on the team's prior successful work with a primitive mixed
reality learning environment, the team plans to scale up the integration of
traditional engineering classroom experiences with authentic virtual activities.
Specifically, the project will integrate a mixed reality learning environment
into a required civil engineering course on geotechnical engineering. The
overall goal is to increase student motivation and engagement by providing real-
life contexts for classroom learning. The geotechnical engineering course
requires field visits in which the students apply what they learn in the
classroom to real-life civil engineering problems. Thus, this course is
especially suitable for testing the use of mixed reality in engineering
education because it can simulate multiple civil engineering problems without
exposing students to dangerous situations. The course and accompanying mixed-
reality educational environment will be implemented at more than twenty
universities, including Hispanic-Serving Institutions and Historically Black
Colleges and Universities. As a result, the project will test the effects of the
mixed reality component and its accompanying curriculum with over 6,500
students. Through analysis of this approach for integrating mixed reality into
curricula, the project has the potential to identify inclusive best practices
for design and implementation of mixed reality learning experiences for diverse
populations of learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project specific aims include:
(1) developing students' practical experience in the field, which is currently
rare in traditional civil engineering curricula; (2) assessing engineering
judgment, a critical competency for practicing engineers; and (3) increasing
students' engagement and motivation by providing simulated field experiences.
Grounded in the Self-Determination Theory of motivation, the project's mixed-
methods research design will feature students, instructors, and institutions as
critical informants. This comprehensive examination will increase understanding
of the ways in which mixed reality learning environments can improve engineering
education by enabling the creation of scalable, sustainable, rigorous, and
intrinsically motivating teaching and learning activities for a diverse audience
of instructors and students. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.