* 1915787
* Uncovering Fundamental Transport Principles in Novel, Ultraclean Lignin-Based Hydrogels for Bioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Mark Thies, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2023
* USD 465,746.00

Biological products, such as proteins and nucleic acids, must often be separated
from a solution as part of an industrial purification process. One approach to
this separation is to pass the fluid containing the biological product through a
membrane made of hydrogels. Hydrogels are a three-dimensional network of
polymeric chains that are designed to absorb water-based solutions. Lignin, a
plant-based polymer, can be incorporated into the hydrogel network to enhance
the membrane's ability to capture biological molecules from the solution.
However, there is relatively little information on how adding lignin to the
hydrogel changes the three-dimensional structure of the resulting composite
membrane. Additionally, conventional methods used to recover lignin from plant
material results in low-purity lignin with unpredictable chemical structure.
Using heterogeneous lignin in the production of hydrogel membranes will result
in composite materials with ill-defined network structures, making it difficult
to design membranes for real applications. The goal of this project is to
clarify how introducing lignin into hydrogels influences the resulting
structure. The project will make use of a new lignin purification process to
obtain ultraclean lignin with controlled molecular architecture. By
systematically varying the polymeric hydrogel structure with lignin, fundamental
relationships between membrane structure, molecular interactions, and protein
transport through the membrane will be uncovered. The anticipated outcomes of
this project have the potential substantially impact next-generation materials
fabrication strategies by establishing parameters for predictive materials
design of novel, composite hydrogels. Composite hydrogel membranes are finding
use in applications ranging from biological molecule separation, tissue
engineering, to protein delivery. The research efforts are closely tied to
educational outreach initiatives that aim to engage and inspire the next
generation of engineers and scientists through the development of a 'membrane
module' related to bioseparations and water purification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the proposed research is to uncover the
fundamental transport principles and key network structure-property
relationships underlying the protein separation and immobilization performance
of an emerging class of novel, lignin-based hydrogels. This aim will be achieved
by leveraging fractionated lignins of low dispersity and controlled molecular
weights to systematically vary the network structure (i.e., mesh size) of the
composite hydrogels. By tuning both the chemical functionality and the molecular
weight of the lignins, the role of both structure and molecular-scale
interactions on membrane performance can be elucidated. The lignin fractions
will be modified with functional groups that allow them to participate in the
crosslinking reaction that forms the network structure of the hydrogel. The
separation/binding efficiency of various biomacromolecules from the composite
membranes will be investigated using a combination of in situ permeation
experiments with longer-term, 'bind-and-release' experiments. The water
transport and hydrated mechanical properties of composite membranes will be
characterized using a mechanics-based technique, poroelastic relaxation
indentation. Using a Darcy's law framework, the average mesh (pore) size of the
hydrated network structure can be determined. The structure of the hydrated
membranes will be independently characterized using small-angle neutron
scattering, and the results will be compared to those obtained from indentation
experiments. Additionally, molecular-level interactions between the
biomacromolecules and the composite hydrogels, as well as protein dynamics
within the membrane, will be captured using infrared spectroscopy and quasi-
elastic neutron scattering, respectively. These findings have the potential to
impact the design of new materials in several other membrane-based separations
processes, such as materials for water purification and desalination. Finally,
the research component of this proposal is closely tied to STEM-based outreach
objectives that seek to integrate findings and materials from this research into
departmental outreach efforts related to bioseparations and water
purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.