* 1915948
* Understanding the Fundamental Mechanisms Governing Tensile Strength of High-Performance Small-Scale Carbon/Glass Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Subramani Sockalingam, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2023
* USD 536,623.00

This project is jointly funded by the Mechanics of Materials and Structures
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
High performance carbon and glass fibers are widely used as reinforcements in
composite material systems for automotive, aerospace and defense applications.
The tensile strength of commercial fibers is significantly less than its
theoretical limits. The composite systems are often overdesigned, thus any
increase in the fiber tensile strength can yield significant cost and weight
savings. Modifications of fiber surface treatment (sizing) during manufacturing
is a potential route to enhance the fiber strength. Single fiber tensile testing
at millimeter-scale is typically used to characterize the effect of sizing on
the fiber strength. However, the longitudinal tensile failure of a composite is
governed by the fiber strength distribution and defects at microscale lengths.
This award supports the fundamental research that overcomes current challenges
in characterizing the tensile strength of the fibers at the microscale using
experimental and data-driven computational methods. Besides the scientific
understanding, this project will also provide a guiding template for the fiber
manufacturing process through controlled surface treatment. A direct consequence
of improving the tensile strength would be lightweight structures for
applications in aerospace, automotive, and sports equipment sectors. As part of
this project, a specific effort will also be aimed at recruiting graduate and
undergraduate students from under-represented groups through the Society for
Women Engineers at the University of South Carolina. Furthermore, the
experimental setup developed in this research will be incorporated into a lab
course for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive
understanding of the discrepancy between experimental tensile strength of
commercial fibers and its theoretical limits has been elusive, and whether
intrinsic fiber strength follows a Weibull statistical distribution remains an
open question. This research aims to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms that
govern the tensile strength of fibers at microscale gage lengths. Experimental
and data-driven techniques will be employed to study the strength distribution
of the fibers at microscales. Microscale gage lengths will be accessed by
developing a novel in situ transverse loading experiment on single fibers under
scanning electron microscope combined with micro-digital image correlation.
Data-driven machine learning techniques will be applied to establish the scaling
laws of strength. This research will provide new insights into the functional
form of the survival probability and strength-controlling mechanisms in fibers
influenced by fiber sizing. This new fundamental knowledge of processing
(sizing)-structure (defect distribution)-property (tensile strength
distribution) relationship at microscale lengths will enable the establishment
of scaling laws for strength and will serve as a guide for fiber manufacturing
process to enhance the fiber tensile strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.