* 1915504
* SCH: INT:Prolonged Exposure Collective Sensing System (PECSS) for PTSD
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Barbara Rothbaum, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is a devastating mental disorder with
tremendous individual and societal costs. Clinicians are in urgent need of
methods, tools, and data to efficiently track, assess, and respond to mental
health needs throughout the treatment process, while patients need feedback
about how to improve their therapy. To address these issues, this project aims
to develop a computational assessment toolkit with patient and clinician
interfaces. The system is fundamentally interdisciplinary and requires combining
novel insights from multiple fields -- ubiquitous computing, human-computer
interaction, and machine learning. Findings from this project will advance these
fields and will be beneficial beyond PTSD. The system will be deployed at Emory
Healthcare Veterans Program, a nationally renowned initiative that treats
members of the military with PTSD. The project will also provide training for
students in the burgeoning field of intelligent
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Treatment for PTSD is constrained by data
collection and extraction. The data that are available can be subjective and
narrow, presenting a constant obstacle in the delivery, practice, training of
psychotherapy. This project addresses the challenge by developing a PE
Collective Sensing System (PECSS), a toolkit that will sit atop a conventional
mHealth app for PTSD (i.e., PTSD Coach, originally developed by the Veterans
Health Administration and Department of Defense). Specifically, the project will
(1) develop novel, user-tailored sensing systems that allow patient data
transfer and information extraction during both imaginal and in-vivo exposure
exercises, (2) design interfaces for continuous monitoring for both clinicians
and patients, and (3) develop, validate and deploy computational models of
heterogeneous, PE related sensor data that will support and facilitate the
improvement of treatment delivery and effectiveness. PECSS will allow clinicians
to use automated predictions to deliver better therapeutic treatment and
individualized feedback, and patients to better understand the progress they are
making and how to improve their exposure exercises. The interfaces, databases,
and computational models will be publicly accessible on the web. A course on
User-Centered Design for Intelligent Health Care will also be developed to
expose medical students and computer science students to the growing inersection
of these fields and best practices in interdisciplinary research and innovation
in a range of computing disciplines. Finally, the project should impact mental
health research approaches in the DoD and the VA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.