* 1915925
* Collaborative Research: Multi-instrumented, Two-Dimensional (2D) Studies of Equatorial Spread F
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Carlos Martinis, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 91,578.00

This research will develop new observational capabilities by reactivating two
instruments near the magnetic equator, a region which hosts a unique and
puzzling set of phenomena in the near-Earth plasma environment. These phenomena
range from large-scale plasma fountains that transport plasma away from the
equator to small-scale disturbances in the plasma density that adversely affect
satellite communication and navigation. The focus of the current investigation
is on the equatorial spread F or ESF, a multi-scale plasma structure whose
origins are poorly understood. This project will investigate generation of ESF
by conducting two-dimensional, multi-instrumented observations of plasma
conditions at the magnetic equatorial site of the Jicamarca Radio Observatory
(JRO). This project will develop a better understanding of fundamental plasma
processes including plasma instabilities and plasma-neutral coupling at low
geomagnetic latitudes which are known to be a significant source of plasma
disturbances that can disrupt radio communication channels. Further
collaborative linkages between partner institutions in the US and an
international partner (JRO) will be developed through this work. It will also
promote teaching and stimulate integration of research and education by directly
supporting one post-doctoral researcher and one graduate student, and by the
Principal Investigator incorporating results from this research into classroom
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will involve (1) a repair of a new
radar system and airglow imager at JRO, (2) conducting 2D radio and optical
observations of ESF at JRO, (3) ESF propagation analysis to determine whether
F-region structures are generated locally or transported from another location,
(4) comparing ESF occurrence and strength with plasma drift measurements to
evaluate a hypothesis that post-midnight, quiet-time ESF can develop under
conditions of weakening downward drifts, and (5) analysis of collocated radio
and optical observations to study the causal relationship between large-scale
plasma structures and ESF in the late-evening and post-midnight
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.