* 1915053
* RUI: Nonperturbative Analyses in Field Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dimitra Karabali, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 135,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Dimitra Karabali at Lehman
College of the City University of New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-energy
physics focuses on the fundamental building blocks of matter and their
interactions. As part of her research, Professor Karabali aims to advance our
understanding of the underlying theories describing these interactions, in
particular Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD), the theory describing the forces
between the quarks and gluons making up all atomic nuclei. Although QCD has been
very successful in explaining a host of experimental data, there are certain
effects to which these forces give rise which are of central importance and yet
poorly understood. These include the mechanism by which quarks are bound
together, producing massive composite objects. As part of this project, the PI
will continue her work developing techniques that can lead to a better
understanding of these effects. This project also aims to explore connections
with fundamental problems in condensed-matter physics, such as the quantum Hall
effect (QHE). The celebrated QHE, which is associated with systems of electrons
in the presence of a strong magnetic field, has, over the years, provided a
framework in which to study the interplay of many important theoretical ideas
which are critical for eventually unifying gravity with the other fundamental
forces of nature. As a result, the proposed research will advance the national
interest by improving our knowledge of fundamental science. This project is also
expected to have significant broader impacts. It will play an important role in
fostering an active, scientifically oriented research environment at Lehman
College, CUNY, a predominantly undergraduate, minority-serving institution, and
in attracting students to physics and to undergraduate research. The project
will also provide graduate-student training and foster collaboration between
researchers at Lehman and City Colleges, CUNY. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
technical terms, the key objectives of this proposal can be organized in two
topics. The first is the Casimir effect and Yang-Mills theory. Here it will
extend the study of Casimir energy within the framework of the Hamiltonian
approach for Yang-Mills theories in two spatial dimensions, as another probe to
study the nonperturbative features of the theory. The second is the quantum Hall
effect on curved spaces and pair production. Here it will use the quantum Hall
effect on curved spaces as a tool to study the effect of curvature on pair
creation and vacuum instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.