* 1915830
* The 2019 Big 10 Women's Workshop (BTWW): Closing the Mentoring Loop
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Naomi Chesler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 01/31/2021
* USD 49,950.00

Prior research demonstrates that building professional skills and support
networks of female engineering faculty, who are underrepresented in engineering
colleges, can improve their retention in academia. The 2019 Big 10 Women's
Workshop provides opportunities for assistant professors in their first three
years of their academic appointment to learn professional skills critical to
early success in their tenure track positions and long-term careers.
Additionally, the workshop generates opportunities for mentorship by senior
women faculty role models, along with a vehicle to foster research
collaborations across institutions. Participants will be provided effective
strategies and multiple pathways for pursuing rewarding and impactful careers in
the academy. The workshop and follow-on activities will contribute to the
hiring, retention, and success of women faculty, while also helping to increase
the number of women engineering students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One goal of this
project is to establish a continuous cycle of community building and networking
across the Big 10 engineering colleges. In order to do this, the workshop
includes participants from the prior 2010 conference and activities that foster
community building. The workshop attendees will return to their home
institutions with a broader professional network that will support their
successful pursuit of tenure-track positions. Increased retention of female
engineering faculty will additionally improve the nation's capacity for
research, education, and preparation of the future engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.