* 1915801
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Modeling Memory Illusion for Predicting Trust in Online Information
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Dongwon Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 316,000.00

This project integrates advances in data science and key findings from
psychological research to improve the prediction of trust in information on
social media by modeling the psychological phenomenon known as the memory
illusion. The memory illusion refers to memory errors that people make to
remember information as an outcome of interpreting and making inferences from
their past experience. This project will use social media data to examine the
memory illusion with online information, and to understand how it is associated
with people's trust in information on social media. Better understanding on the
extent and impact of the memory illusion phenomenon using big data will inform
machine-learning approaches to better measure trust in information with an
additional human information-processing perspective, benefiting society by
providing reliable online information, and increasing people's overall trust in
information on social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues several
research goals to advance the state-of-art of machine learning models to predict
people's trust in information on social media. The first goal is to characterize
the formation of associative inferences on Twitter information, and understand
how it contributes to individuals' trust in tweets. To advance this goal, the
research will use big data and data-driven machine learning models. Based on the
insights learned from big data, the second goal is to establish the causal
relations between identified associative inferences and people's trust of social
media information with laboratory and online user studies. The last goal is to
model associative inferences into machine learning algorithms to improve the
prediction of user trust in online information. The project will advance the
state-of-the-art with regard to our understanding on people's trust in social
media information in particular and human memory illusion in general. Through
interdisciplinary socio-technical collaboration, the project will advance
machine-learning models considering human information processing to improve the
prediction of people's trust in information on social media, and improve
understanding of human behavior using a big data approach to reveal relations
among psychological phenomena on a scale that has not been possible with the
smaller data sets collected in the laboratory. The interdisciplinary research
using data science and psychological research will address theory-based research
questions regarding the relationships of information veracity, trust, and
information context. Students will participate in all phases of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.