* 1915466
* Collaborative Research:  A Model for Divergent Bacterial Signaling Networks; Linking New Cyclic Dinucleotides to Environmental  and Electrical Lifestyles
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Ming Hammond, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2020
* USD 240,991.00

Some environmental bacteria have the ability to detect, attach to and react with
metal particles. This process causes release of essential minerals into rivers
and lakes, and reduces toxicity of heavy metal contaminants in waste sites
undergoing bioremediation. This collaborative project focuses on the recent
discovery of a mechanism that enables bacteria to sense and respond to these
important metals. As these bacteria are also capable of attaching to electrodes,
new techniques for monitoring metal decontamination could harness these sensing
systems. The researchers will use molecular techniques to look inside the
bacteria, where they will determine how sensing of these metals switches genes
and proteins on and off in response to different types of metal surfaces. This
project will provide cross-disciplinary college-level training including
experiential biology modules in Minnesota and internship programs serving
community college and undergraduate students in California. As outreach to K-12
students, we will adapt hands-on educational demonstrations that exhibit the
link between chemistry, water quality, and this unique microbial-electrical
activity. Finally, we will expand YouSTEM.org, a website created by the Hammond
lab for the general public to find information about free K-12 STEM programs, to
add the Minneapolis/St. Paul area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyclic di-GMP (cdiG) is
a near-universal bacterial signal that controls the transition from a free-
living state to a surface-attached biofilm. However, environmental bacteria have
many surface-associated lifestyles distinct from the classic biofilm state.
Thus, a grand challenge is to explain how signaling networks utilize only one
intracellular output molecule to control diverse adaptations. A recently
discovered novel alternative solution has been discovered, based on multiple
cyclic dinucleotides that regulate distinct genetic programs. The newfound
signal cyclic AMP-GMP (cAG) is required when Geobacter sulfurreducens grows on
extracellular metal oxide particles commonly found in sediments and aquifers. In
this same organism, the classical signal cdiG is essential for growth as an
attached conductive biofilm to relay electrons to methanogens or electrode
surfaces. Strikingly, the newfound cAG signaling pathway in Geobacter uses
biomolecular parts previously associated with cdiG signaling, revealing cracks
in the monolithic model of a cdiG-only signaling network. The sub-class of GGDEF
enzymes that synthesize cAG, called DncG, are conserved throughout diverse
Bacterial phyla, including Proteobacteria, Acidobacteria, and Deferribacteria.
However, regulators of DncG activity and downstream effectors that respond to
cAG are largely unknown. This collaborative research project will establish a
comprehensive parts map and regulatory model for the newfound cAG signaling
pathway, build a molecular toolkit to study how it operates alongside classical
cdiG pathways in vivo, and define how the signal controls environmentally
important phenotypes.