* 1915100
* Redefining Public Engagement at the University of Connecticut: Studying the Impact of an Innovative STEM Service Learning Model on the University Community
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Chester Arnold, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,375,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high quality STEM education
by expanding opportunities to connect STEM classroom instruction, service
learning, and the Extension outreach function of a land-grant university. The
project will create the Environment Corps, through which students can the use
their STEM knowledge and skills to address community-relevant environmental
issues including climate adaptation, remediation of abandoned sites, and
stormwater management. As a result, students will get "real world" experience as
preparation for the work force and communities will receive substantive STEM
assistance in responding to environmental mandates. The project also aims to
generate new knowledge about STEM education by studying the changes in
instructional practices, university culture and procedures, and the community-
university interaction that result from implementation of the Environment Corps.
It is expected that more than 400 STEM undergraduates will be enrolled in
Environment Corps courses, resulting in about 100 community
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to catalyze lasting and
impactful improvements in undergraduate STEM education, to improve understanding
of the pedagogical benefits of service learning in STEM disciplines, and to
study the process of institutional transformation. Project objectives include:
1) To create the Environment Corps, which expands the existing "Corps" model of
service learning with a focus on environmental topics; 2) to develop a faculty
and student support system to bolster success of Environment Corps and to set
the stage for expansion of this service-learning model to other topics or
academic units; 3) To contribute to solving environmental problems in at least
50 communities in Connecticut; and 4) To conduct research to better understand
best practices for student learning and student-community interaction, as well
as key characteristics and parameters for making transformational change in the
university. The project research will address two persistent challenges. The
first is expanding the role of service learning beyond a focus on student
experiences to a focus on helping communities meet real world needs. The second
challenge is related to negotiating institutional change capable of sustaining
transformative programming. These challenges will be addressed through a Design
Based Implementation Research framework. Data will be collected using a
qualitative case study design, through purposive sampling, interviews, and focus
groups to acquire information from instructors, students, university
administrators, and community partners. A major goal will be to create a service
learning paradigm that can be replicated in other institutions, multiplying the
impacts of the project on both STEM students and the communities they serve.
This Institutional and Community Transformation project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources
(IUSE:EHR), which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.