* 1915264
* SBIR Phase I:  Blockchain Microservice for connected and autonomous vehicle infrastructures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Jay Fallah, NXM LABS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2020
* USD 223,675.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAV)
from all manufacturers to operate securely and communicate efficiently with each
other and their surroundings. Current communication protocols, which require
sending data to the cloud for processing, cannot cope with the increasing demand
for efficient and secure network connectivity to operate hundreds of computer
processors for diverse functions, such as: collision detection, traffic control,
infotainment, and autonomous driving. By empowering edge computing and
Blockchain, this project proposes to develop an innovative operating system that
will enable access to smart infrastructure in a connected environment while
ensuring unprecedented cybersecurity and trusted data within CAV. The innovation
will exploit the upcoming 5G connection, to speed up the transmission of the
communication laying down the first stone for the creation of the next
generation of intelligent transportation and IoT infrastructure systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SBIR phase I project proposes to investigate the
feasibility of establishing a scalable blockchain microservice to enable access
to smart infrastructure in a connected environment while ensuring security and
trusted data within connected cars. The proposed solution will address the key
challenges of client-infrastructure networks including poor latency, bandwidth
constraints, data privacy, cybersecurity and high infrastructure cost, which
limit scalability needed to support the increasing number of connected IoT
devices. The new system takes advantage of multi-access edge computing to lower
latency and improve communication speed, transforming vehicles into intelligent
nodes of decentralized networks able to process and disseminate data. At the
same time, the system combines blockchain with a proprietary approach to machine
identity to enhance security and data integrity to inhibit hacking. In this
project, the first decentralized network will be established in a test
environment to demonstrate its improved latency, speed, scalability, and safety
in comparison to a client-server infrastructure. Since the key technical
requirements have been established after discussion with key stakeholders in the
connected car sector, the successful outcome of this Phase I project will enable
to assess the commercial feasibility of the proposed
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.