* 1915738
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Non-Contact Smart Monitor for Sleep Disorder Diagnosis and Intervention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Victor Lubecke, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 594,000.00

Sleep is a biological imperative for humans. Insufficient or disordered sleep
increases daytime fatigue and sleepiness, decreases cognitive function.
Unfortunately, there are numerous challenges associated with accurate sleep
assessment. These include difficulties in making measurements without
interfering with the sleep process, unique baseline characteristics for
individuals, and cumbersome manual analysis of lengthy data sets. In the
laboratory environment, Doppler radar technology has been demonstrated to
provide a non-invasive means of measuring vital signs through clothing and
bedding. We propose to develop a radar-based measurement system can be used to
provide autonomous in-home measurement and analysis of sleep. The proposed
effort will advance knowledge in smart radar technology measuring physiology,
big data analytics for personalized medicine; and the understanding of sleep
physiology. It will also support potential technological breakthroughs at their
intersection, including new diagnostic techniques for smart connected
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project bridges fundamental research and sleep
research together by exploring radar technology-based solutions for bio-medical
and bio-behavioral sleep medicine research challenges. The proposed research
will advance knowledge and understanding of Doppler radar physiological
monitoring by introducing new transceiver architectures to accurately resolve
requisite cross-section and displacement parameters while isolating one of two
jointly sensed subjects, and new deep learning models integrating with physical
models for recognition of apnea events and sleep disorders at personalized
level. It will advance sleep medicine by introducing this non-contact tool that
can extend patient monitoring to the home and provide patient-centered analysis.
It will also support potential technological breakthroughs at their
intersection, including new diagnostic techniques for smart connected health.
The research poses a motivating educational opportunity that leverages the
unique needs of Hawaiians for remote healthcare tools, and reaches out to a
diverse population of ethnic minority students that have been historically
under-served by local educational and industrial opportunities. Research
outcomes will be integrated with education through training a new generation of
engineers with the awareness of healthcare issues through courses (biomedical,
sensors and informatics courses), undergraduate research projects, and K-12 STEM
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.