* 1915734
* SCH: INT: TAILORED: Training for Independent Living through Observant Robots and Design
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kamalika Chaudhuri, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,248,000.00

The goal of this project is to create human-centered robotics technology to
provide personalized neurorehabilitation to support older adults with mild
cognitive impairment. The project investigates innovative approaches to this
research area, and will make the following contributions to smart and connected
health: create new approaches to support longitudinal, personalized robot
learning in real-world environments; pioneer novel methods for delivering and
sustaining cognitive neurorehabilitation, currently one of the only known
treatments to prolong independence and slow the onset of disability caused by
MCI; and contribute new methods to the fields of human-robot interaction (HRI),
aging science, and behavioral science to support the co-creation of new
technologies and new intervention delivery methods with older adults with
cognitive impairments, their caregivers, and their providers. Harnessing
technology to provide cognitive support and rehabilitation for older adults
could potentially assist millions of people to maintain or improve their
functioning and quality of life, and maintain their ability to live
independently. Ultimately, these improvements could alleviate significant human
suffering and lower healthcare costs for millions of people.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will inform multiple key research questions
including: uncovering new methods for longitudinal preference learning,
particularly with regard to how time-varying contextual bandits under concept
drift can be employed across multimodal datasets; identifying principles for
engaging in community-focused, stakeholder-centered research with people with
MCI, with a particular focus on designing for resilience and autonomy;
discovering how hybrid approaches to cognitive training delivered via a robot
can inform cognitive functioning; and exploring how to design interventions for
sustainability, both for people with MCI and other populations. The project team
will also engage the public in intergenerational research between older adults
and college students, empower older adults with cognitive impairments and their
family members by giving them a voice in technology creation, recruit research
students from groups underrepresented in computing and behavioral science, and
broadly disseminate the research via publications, representations, and publicly
available software frameworks with models, algorithms, and evaluation
metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.