* 1915005
* Theoretical Particle Physics and Cosmology at UC Irvine
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Feng, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,130,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors Kevork Abazajian, Mu-Chun
Chen, Jonathan Feng, Manoj Kaplinghat, Arvind Rajaraman, Michael Ratz, Yuri
Shirman, and Timothy Tait at the University of California,
Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particle physics stands at a crossroads. The
discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large Hadron Collider has completed the
Standard Model of particle physics, but many mysteries remain. Observations of
the Universe indicate components such as dark energy and dark matter which the
Standard Model does not describe, and the fact that the Universe is
predominantly composed of matter (as opposed to anti-matter) and the need to
incorporate gravity both point to dynamics beyond those contained within it.
Understanding these mysteries requires theoretical interpretation to realize the
implications of the vast amount of data currently being collected by particle
physics experiments such as the Large Hadron Collider, and cosmological
observations, and to propose future experimental searches. The research
supported by this award will develop innovative ideas in particle physics,
cosmology, and at their interface, to address outstanding problems in a wide
variety of fields, including searches for new particles, neutrino physics, the
nature of dark matter and its observable signatures, and particle cosmology. It
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in its most
fundamental directions: the work will deepen our understanding of the physical
Universe at both the smallest and largest length scales and further our
knowledge of the basic building blocks and forces that make up and shape our
Universe. The broader impacts of the group's activities are aimed at increasing
public interest in and improving public understanding of the exciting results of
physics and astronomy research. The group's activities include developing and
teaching a COSMOS summer course on particle physics and cosmology to high-
achieving high school students from diverse socio-economic backgrounds, programs
to strengthen the representation of underrepresented minorities in physics and
other STEM fields, a wide array of public talks and outreach activities through
print and web-based media, the training of postdoctoral researchers and graduate
students both at UC Irvine and around the world, and significant contributions
in the area of professional service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the
research will be accomplished by applying cutting edge tools in theoretical
physics, including quantum field theory, numerical simulations, and machine
learning algorithms to advance our understanding of particle physics and
cosmology to propose new models of fundamental particles and interactions, to
realize the implications of the vast amount of data currently being collected by
particle physics experiments and cosmological observations, and to propose
future experimental searches. Through applications of these techniques, this
work will advance our knowledge of dark matter, neutrino physics, and particle
cosmology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.