* 1915017
* Understanding How Integral Membrane Proteins Influence the Continuum Mechanics of Cell Membranes.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Noah Malmstadt, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

The goal of this proposal is to establish experimental techniques and develop
foundational experimental data describing how general integral membrane proteins
affect the mechanical properties of biomembranes. These tools and results will
have a transformative effect on our understanding of biomembranes as continuum
materials. Most contemporary research in bilayer-protein interactions focuses
either on how specific proteins (SNARE complexes, viral fusion proteins) exert
force on lipid bilayers or how forces in the lipid bilayer can modulate integral
membrane protein function. The PI is looking at the membrane as a continuum
material in which the mechanical properties are determined by both the lipids
and the integral membrane proteins. Given the high concentration of proteins in
the membrane, such a view is necessary in order to fully understand how
biomembranes move and deform. Membrane deformation is a central phenomenon in
biology, underlying such processes as cell division, viral infection, and
neurotransmitter release. This proposal includes a comprehensive educational
plan for outreach to high school students. The primary objective of this
outreach program is to facilitate intensive research experiences for students
drawn from the diverse population of the Los Angeles Unified School District.
This will be accomplished by cooperating with an established outreach program at
the Engineering for Health Academy at Francisco Bravo Medical Magnet High School
to bring grade-12 students into the laboratory for yearlong internships. Interns
will be mentored by the graduate student funded by this award and will undertake
their own small, independent research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
use standard methods for measuring the mechanical properties of lipid bilayers
in giant unilamellar lipid vesicles (GUVs). The key innovative aspect of this
research is enabled by a technology that the PI's laboratory recently developed
to incorporate integral membrane proteins into GUVs at relatively high
concentrations. This will allow the PI to examine the mechanical properties on
GUVs with controlled concentrations of membrane proteins. The PI will
investigate proteins with a variety of transmembrane motifs to discover how the
structure of the transmembrane domains affects how proteins are mechanically
coupled to the bilayer. The two properties that will be measured for each
protein at a range of concentrations are: 1.) The tendency of a membrane to bend
when no external forces are applied. This is described by the spontaneous (or
intrinsic) curvature JSB. 2.) The amount of energy required to bend the membrane
away from its intrinsic curvature. This is described by the bending modulus kc.
These two parameters are central to describing the energetics of membrane
deformation during biological processes. The PI will use a combination of
micropipette aspiration and vesicle fluctuation analysis to independently
determine the value of each parameter for a given set of
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Molecular
Biophysics program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.