* 1915150
* Improving Online Learning with Tutorial Dialogue Videos
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Yi-Chun Hong, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

With support from NSF's Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and
Human Resources (IUSE: EHR) program, this project aims to serve the national
interest by enhancing the value of online learning environments. Specifically,
the project will develop and implement "tutorial dialogue videos" designed to
improve students' learning in online STEM courses. In online classes today,
videos are a major medium for the delivery of content. However, most of the
videos are presented using a monologue style, such as a presentation delivered
by an instructor, along with associated visuals, animations, and related
materials. The monologue presentation format leads students to passively engage
with what is being said and is less effective for learnito impng than active
approaches. To move online courses beyond passive learning experiences, this
project will develop and implement a dialogue video format along with an online
collaborative learning space. This format will capture tutorial dialogues
between an instructor (tutor) and a student (tutee) that contain not only
correct information but also misinformation expressed by a struggling tutee.
Prior research has shown that such dialogue videos promote deeper learning than
monologue videos. The online collaborative learning space will allow students to
discuss with peers the content of the dialogue videos. This approach has the
potential to be used for improving existing online courses, as well as to inform
efforts to develop new courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a
translation study based on a decade of laboratory studies conducted in the PI's
laboratory as well as the lessons learned from a prior NSF-funded classroom
implementation study (NSF Award DUE-1504893). In the new study, the
investigators will implement both dialogue and monologue videos in four
introductory-level college STEM classes (including General Physics and General
Biology) and will compare the effectiveness of the videos in promoting student
learning. Using the Interactive-Constructive-Active-Passive (ICAP) theory of
engagement, this project will test two hypotheses: (1) Students' learning from
the dialogue videos exceeds their learning from the monologue videos. (2) Online
dialogue patterns of dialogue observers are more "Constructive" and
"Interactive" than those of monologue observers, accounting for the learning
benefits of dialogues. A stratified randomized sampling technique will be used,
and learning outcome measures (i.e. pre- and post-tests) and process/product
measures (i.e. online dialogues and worksheets) will be used to test the
hypotheses. The first year of the project will be devoted to the development of
the dialogue videos and the online learning space. During the second and third
years, two iterations of the implementations and the research activities will
take place in college-level STEM courses in multiple disciplines. The
implementations and the research findings will not only provide insights into
factors that mediate the benefit of dialogue videos but also yield practical
guidelines for creating dialogue videos that will have a positive impact on
students' learning in STEM fields. NSF's IUSE: EHR program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools, such
as the activities proposed by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.