* 1915714
* Undergraduate Data Science Education at Scale
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* David Harding, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving undergraduate data science education for STEM and
non-STEM majors. It plans to achieve this goal by implementing, refining, and
expanding an innovative prototype data science program at the University of
California Berkeley (an R1 university), the University of Maryland, Baltimore
County (an R2 university) and Mills College (a primarily women's liberal arts
college). The prototype program serves as an entry point into data science for
students with limited previous experience in statistics or data science. It is
built around a zero-prerequisites data science course, with concurrent connector
courses that introduce how data science is used in different fields. It includes
modules that "push" data science into existing courses and Discovery Projects
that enable students to apply data science skills in real-world settings. It
also incorporates a Data Science Scholars program to support student success,
particularly students from groups underrepresented in STEM. The prototype
program uses a peer instruction model to support student learning, build
community, provide mentoring, and co-create course materials with faculty. The
project will produce a set of open source curricular materials and the technical
infrastructure to facilitate successful implementation of the prototype program
at other institutions. It is expected that the models and materials developed
through this project will support the teaching of data science at scale to a
diverse set of students in diverse types of institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because data science is a comparatively new field, much
work needs to be done to investigate how pedagogical and curricular approaches
function in this domain. This project aims to generate new knowledge about how
to best design data science curricula and pedagogy to promote learning among
diverse undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented groups
in STEM. The project's research objectives include evaluation of how specific
components of the prototype program impact student outcomes; and assessment of
whether and how the prototype can broaden participation in data science. The
project's mixed-methods evaluation will include formative evaluation to enable
continuous quality improvement, as well as summative evaluation to measure
project outcomes. The project will develop curricular and pedagogical data
science materials and technical infrastructure that can be efficiently tailored
and scaled at different institutions with diverse student bodies and disparate
resources. The materials and research findings will be widely disseminated, to
help drive a community transformation in undergraduate data science education
that can scale with student demand and ultimately broaden participation in data
science across multiple, diverse institutional settings. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. This project is in the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, which supports efforts to transform and improve
STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.