* 1915101
* 2019 Neural Crest &amp; Cranial Placodes Gordon Research Conference &amp; Gordon Research Seminar (Italy, April 13-19)
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Clare Baker, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 01/31/2020
* USD 20,250.00

The Gordon Research Conference "Interdisciplinary Approaches to the Neural Crest
and Cranial Placodes", and a preceding 2-day graduate student/postdoc-led Gordon
Research Seminar on the same topic will be held from April 12-19 in Lucca,
Italy. Neural crest and cranial placodes are transient embryonic structures made
up from cells that would otherwise become skin in regions next to the embryonic
brain; they are present only in animals with backbones (vertebrates). Crest and
placode cells subsequently participate in extensive migrations, and contribute
to an extraordinary diversity of different tissues in the body. Their evolution
and elaboration are thought to have been critical for the evolution and
diversification of vertebrate species. The symposium presents a unique
opportunity to promote dialogue and exchange of ideas among investigators who
work on very different aspects of neural crest and placode biology, and who
normally would not be interacting at the same meeting venues. All speakers are
expert investigators in their fields. Although the workshop is being held at a
location in Italy, 17 out of the 39 already-confirmed scientific participants
have appointments at US universities and research institutes. An expected
outcome of the symposium is the development of new collaborations that will lead
to novel work on fundamental questions about neural crest and placode
development, function and evolution.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Gordon Research
Conference "Interdisciplinary Approaches to the Neural Crest and Cranial
Placodes", and a preceding 2-day graduate student/postdoc-led Gordon Research
Seminar on the same topic will be held from April 12-19 in Lucca, Italy. The
vertebrate neural crest and cranial placodes are transient embryonic structures
derived from skin cell precursors next to the embryonic brain, which undergo
extensive migration and morphogenetic changes, and contribute to an
extraordinary array of cell types. Their evolution and elaboration are thought
to have been critical for the evolution and diversification of vertebrates. The
symposium presents a unique opportunity to promote dialogue and exchange of
ideas among investigators who work on very different aspects of neural crest and
placode biology, and who normally would not be interacting at the same meeting
venues. The invited speakers include investigators who study the gene regulatory
networks and epigenetics of the neural crest and placodes; their role in birth
defects and disease; and the developmental and evolutionary biology of neural
crest and placodal cells. All speakers are expert investigators in their fields.
An expected outcome of the symposium is the development of new collaborations
that will lead to novel work on fundamental questions about neural crest and
placode development, function and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.