* 1915810
* Conference: FASEB Science Research Conference on Mobile DNA: 25 Years of Discussion and Research, June 23-29, 2019, Palm Springs, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Victoria Belancio, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2020
* USD 7,200.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the FASEB Science Research Conference on Mobile DNA: 25 Years of
Discussion and Research to be held June 23-29, 2019 in Palm Springs, CA. This
meeting is designed to bring together scientists from around the world to
present and discuss new research on diverse topics that promise to reveal
insights into the function of mobile elements, also known as transposable
elements. Compared to previous meetings, which had a focus on mammalian mobile
elements, this meeting will include presentations on organisms from many
branches of the Tree of Life. The meeting format will feature keynote lectures
from leaders in the field, as well as a combination of talks and posters to
promote scientific exchange in both formal and informal settings. Early-career
participants will benefit from engagement as speakers and poster presenters. A
special session in memory of Barbara McClintock will recognize the contribution
of women to this field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of the
meeting will be on topics that were chosen to highlight the importance of mobile
elements in multiple biological functions. Sessions will highlight: comparative
genomics of transposable elements, mobile DNA defense and regulation, mobile DNA
modulation of epigenetic and gene regulation, mechanisms of mobilization, mobile
DNA and the environment, and population genomics of mobile DNA. The meeting will
provide an excellent venue for graduate student and postdoctoral participants,
including those from underrepresented groups, to share their research with
researchers from the U.S. and abroad and to receive feedback on their work from
experts in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.