* 1915873
* A Novel Magnetic Separation Method to Isolate Active Compounds from Complex Matrices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Yuping Bao, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2023
* USD 450,318.00

Natural products are rich in biologically active (bioactive) compounds and serve
as great sources for drug discovery. One of the major challenges in screening
drug leads from natural products is the lack of effective tools to identify and
separate the bioactive compounds. This project will develop and characterize a
new magnetic separation approach based on cell membrane-encapsulated iron oxide
superparticles (a cluster of nanoparticles) for the separation and
identification of bioactive compounds from natural products. This method
overcomes limitations of costly and time-intensive conventional approaches and
the nonspecific binding problems of magnetic bead separation techniques. The new
approach is also broadly applicable to many different types of transmembrane
drug targets. The success of this project will advance industrial processes for
identification and extraction of new drug leads from complex samples. The impact
of this project will be further enhanced through student-led educational and
outreach activities, including: (a) establishing a goal-oriented training
mechanism and relevant course work for undergraduate researchers and (b)
developing a STEM lead the way program with an emphasis on math concept
building. Specific science outreach projects to be developed are Science middle
school-targeted Olympiad training modules and magnetic fishing experiments for
elementary school students through the "Science Party for Kids" program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a new magnetic
separation approach based on cell membrane-encapsulated iron oxide
superparticles (CSMPs) for the identification and separation of bioactive
compounds from natural products. CSMPs will feature immobilized cell membranes
with fully functional receptors that allow for identification of compounds
specifically binding to the transmembrane receptors. The full encapsulation of
magnetic superparticles inside a cell membrane overcomes the non-specific
binding problems associated with the current magnetic bead separation
technology. The use of magnetic superparticles enables rapid identification and
extraction of compounds targeting transmembrane proteins. The CSMP approach is
also easily translated to different transmembrane protein targets, which
significantly broadens the applicability of this separation technique. Toward
the overall objective, the PIs will develop, characterize, and evaluate the CSMP
approach using cell membranes with functional nicotinic receptors to effectively
identify binding compounds both in an artificial mixture (known binders and non-
binders) and cigarette smoke condensates. The technique will be further verified
using cell membranes with functional transient receptor potential (TRP) channels
(e.g., TRPV1) and voltage-gated sodium channels. Both types of receptors have
been shown as valid targets for the development of novel analgesic drugs. The
outcome of the project will be fundamental knowledge related to efficient
separation of bioactive compounds from complex
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.