* 1915827
* Society for Economic Botany Conference 2019: The Future of Forests: Perspectives from Indigenous Peoples, Traditional Practices, and Conservation: June 2-6, 2019, Cinncinati, OH
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* David Lentz, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2020
* USD 14,604.00

This award supports the participation of students and indigenous peoples in a
plenary panel at the 2019 annual meeting of the Society for Economic Botany
(SEB). The meeting will be hosted by the University of Cincinnati on June 2-6,
2019. The theme of the meeting is, "The Future of Forests: Perspectives from
Indigenous Peoples, Traditional Practices, and Conservation." It is well-known
that the world's forests are important for a sustainable economic future, it is
also the case that they are threatened by increased demand for forest products,
population growth, climate change, and uncertain fire suppression policies.
Globally and nationally, there are ongoing debates on various topics about
forest management including sustainability, biodiversity, and economic impacts.
This timely panel brings together anthropologists, foresters, botanists, and
ecologists to discuss forest management on four continents from multiple
perspectives.

The panelists include ethno-ecologists, whose research highlights indigenous
agroforest management practices. Cultural anthropology provides a unifying
theoretical perspective and a set of methodological approaches, including
participant observation and linguistic competency, which underpin the research
of the presenters. Participation in the meeting will enable students to gain
invaluable experience at an international meeting, assimilate new idea, and
expand their professional networks and opportunities for collaboration. The
conference organizers anticipate publication of the plenary panel and selected
organized sessions in a special volume of Economic Botany.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.