* 1915064
* Dynamically Corrected Nonadiabatic Geometric Quantum Logic Gates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jason Kestner, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,996.00

The prospect of quantum computing has the potential to transform the landscape
of our information-based economy. However, the idea of quantum computing was
initially deemed to be a nonstarter because of its reliance on creating blends
of exponentially large numbers of possible states of the quantum computer,
blends whose delicate balance could easily be ruined by even very small errors.
Quantum computing was rescued by the notion of quantum error correction, which
uses a large number of physical bits to encode each logical bit and inserts into
each computation a series of periodic measurements, error diagnosis, and
subsequent remediation to achieve fault-tolerance. In order for this to work,
though, the fidelity of each operation on a physical qubit has to be above a
certain threshold, called the fault-tolerance threshold of the particular
encoding scheme. The fault-tolerance threshold is around 99% for surface codes,
and around 99.99% for other codes. While a few experiments have shown one-qubit
and two-qubit fidelities above the surface code threshold, in general raising
the fidelity remains a major challenge for quantum computing to become a
reality. This research addresses that challenge by constructing control
protocols that are robust to noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach taken is
to combine the strengths of dynamical decoupling and nonadiabatic geometric
gating. Dynamical decoupling is effective in suppressing low-frequency noise,
but tends to exacerbate high-frequency noise. Nonadiabatic geometric gate
operations are effective in suppressing high-frequency noise, but are sensitive
to parametric low-frequency noise. By fusing the two concepts, this research
seeks efficient suppression of errors over a broad noise bandwidth without
requiring auxiliary energy levels. The major research aims are to find the
filter functions of single-qubit nonadiabatic geometric gates that characterize
their robustness to noise at all frequencies, to combine with single-qubit
dynamical decoupling techniques to improve the filter function at low
frequencies, to incorporate physical constraints for experimental
implementation, and to use the insight from the single-qubit considerations to
extend the new framework to two-qubit entangling operations, attaining a
universal set of robust nonadiabatic geometric gates amenable to solid state
experiments. Success will be assessed via the average error rates calculated
from numerical simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.