* 1915813
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Econometrically Inferring and Using Individual Privacy Preferences
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* David Evans, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 315,585.00

Many online platforms use economic mechanisms to estimate the best ways to match
consumers and businesses with products and services. Effective matches may
require using personal consumer data but doing so may intrude on consumers'
privacy. This project will use formal concepts of privacy to analyze the use of
personal information in mechanism design. The goal is to develop tools for
understanding the value and cost of collecting and using personal data, and
provide mechanisms that allow designers to build systems that make meaningful
and well understood tradeoffs between utility and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines research on mechanism design
and econometrics to provide a new perspective on privacy. The project will
develop methods that use ideas from econometrics to reveal concrete privacy
preferences for individuals and aggregate distributions, and connect those
preferences to formal privacy models, including differential privacy. The
revealed privacy preferences for individuals, or aggregate for distributions,
can then be used to design mechanisms with concrete and meaningful privacy and
utility tradeoffs based on users' individual privacy preferences. The broader
goal is to transform abstract privacy guarantees into concrete tools for
incorporating privacy preferences to maximize consumer utility as well as
business decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.