* 1915574
* Adoption and Adaptation of Educational Innovations in Multiple Settings and the Role of Institutional Culture
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Edward Berger, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,504,959.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest in high quality engineering education by propagating evidence-
based teaching practices. Educators have pursued innovations to improve
undergraduate engineering education for decades. Many of these innovations have
compelling evidence of their effectiveness in a single classroom or institution.
However, adoption of these innovations in new settings is not always successful,
and sometimes the innovation requires substantial changes to adapt it to the
local environment. This Institutional and Community Transformation (ICT) project
in the Development and Implementation tier will explore the ways in which an
educational innovation is adopted and adapted to new settings. It will also
evaluate the success of the innovation, as measured by student outcomes. This
research will help the community understand the conditions under which
educational innovations can propagate and the reasons why some innovations
succeed in being scaled to other settings while others fail. Students will
benefit when innovations can be readily adapted to new environments because they
will have increased access to teaching and learning tools that support their
education in the best possible ways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
propagate Freeform, a pedagogical system developed with prior NSF funding.
Freeform encompasses active, blended, and collaborative components in a
resource-rich learning environment. Five new settings will implement Freeform,
and the project team will simultaneously evaluate the cultures of the new
settings to assess their receptivity to innovation as determined during the
implementation. Receptivity to innovation is important because many attempts to
reform the core educational practices in traditional engineering departments
have failed because they have either been centered on a few enthusiasts who
transformed one or two courses, or they have focused on curriculum reform
without consideration of the underlying culture of the academic unit. The
changes are often not sustained because they are not appropriately aligned with
the local culture. This project will focus on two coupled issues, innovation and
propagation. If these two issues are explored and understood together as a
system, the ability to develop pedagogical innovations that can be propagated to
new environments will be significantly enhanced. The corresponding process of
adoption and adaptation will be examined through a cultural lens using
anthropological approaches. Prior work has resulted in unique datasets and
research approaches that explore pedagogical innovation and resources to support
students and the role of departmental and university culture in the adoption of
pedagogies. The current research will use a mixed-methods approach to shape
detailed data collection and analysis, leveraging the research team's expertise.
This project has the potential to expand understanding about how pedagogical
innovations are adopted, adapted, and implemented for diverse students in
multiple settings. It is expected that this research framework will be
applicable to the propagation of other educational innovations to new settings,
and it will provide the engineering education research and practitioner
communities with a new approach to implementing and evaluating pedagogical
changes. IUSE: EHR supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.