* 1915022
* Successful Transition to the Academic Realm 2.0
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Milton Faison, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,373,217.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving STEM curricula and the academic performance of
STEM undergraduates. Of the US students who enter college intending to major in
a STEM field, less than half persist to earn a STEM degree. The loss is even
higher for students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM. Introductory
"gatekeeper" courses often have a high failure/withdrawal rate, resulting in a
major barrier to student success. Many efforts to improve student performance
have focused only on academic preparation and tutoring. However, research has
demonstrated that other factors contribute to student performance. Such factors
include ineffective teaching, difficulties students have in negotiating social
and academic cultures in the university, diminished academic confidence, and a
sense of disconnection or feeling like an imposter within the STEM community. To
improve the academic performance of STEM majors, this project will design and
implement faculty professional development aimed at improving teaching, as well
as curricular enhancements to STEM courses and a peer mentoring/ learning
community-based approach to student support. This project has the potential to
further understanding about how early interventions that focus on both cognitive
and non-cognitive factors affect student learning. Since Virginia State
University is a historically black public land-grant university in central
Virginia, the project has the potential to broaden student success in STEM, thus
contributing to a well-educated, diverse US STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on previous efforts that
resulted in increased student success in the introductory course for biology
majors. Project objectives include: 1) To integrate critical components of the
successful biology majors' model into the biology course for other STEM majors;
2) To develop and implement a peer mentoring structure that integrates evidence-
based and piloted practices targeting effective academic habits and maximizing
student engagement through learning communities; and 3) To implement a rigorous
evaluation plan to determine program impacts, based on cognitive measures
(grades, concept inventory, persistence, etc.) and non-cognitive measures (self-
efficacy, self-regulation, STEM identity, etc.). The evaluation component of the
project will provide formative assessment regarding the impact of project
activities, and explore the impacts of the program within and beyond the student
cohorts and faculty in the early gatekeeper courses. Results and activities
developed by this project will be disseminated through workshops and
presentations at regional and national conferences, presentations at peer
institutions, and publications in scholarly journals. The project will include a
research study about the use of a peer-led team learning paradigm informed by
social cognitive theory to mitigate standard predictors of low achievement and
improve academic performance in STEM gatekeeper courses. Thus, it has the
potential to will generate new knowledge about strategies to increase STEM
student performance. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.