* 1915544
* Sustaining and Growing a Dispersed Community of Practice that Engages Undergraduates in Course-Based Genomics Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Douglas Chalker, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,999,426.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving undergraduate education in genomics. As the
economy becomes more dependent on science and technology, the need for highly
capable STEM workers is increasingly important. As a result, high-quality STEM
education is critical for the U.S. economy, particularly STEM education that
includes training in data science. It is also important to identify successful
strategies to retain and inspire undergraduate STEM students, especially those
from underrepresented groups, so that they may thrive in STEM careers. To help
address STEM education needs, the Genomics Education Partnership seeks to
integrate active learning into the undergraduate curriculum through Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) centered in genomics. In these CUREs,
students engage in authentic scientific research and develop valuable skills in
data science while also practicing problem solving and perseverance to produce a
scientific publication. The only tool required for a student to carry out the
research is access to the internet, making the program financially accessible to
all institutions, including ones that are under-resourced. This project has four
objectives: 1) to restructure the Genomics Education Partnership to more widely
distribute management and oversight responsibilities throughout the Genomics
Education Partnership; 2) to identify effective strategies for recruiting and
retaining faculty from community colleges as Genomics Education Partnership
members; 3) to develop and optimize a system of online training for new faculty
members in the Genomics Education Partnership; and 4) to diversify the
scientific projects included in the CUREs. Achieving these objectives will
contribute to a cost-effective program that provides high-quality CUREs to a
greater diversity of undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Genomics
Education Partnership is a dispersed Community of Practice founded in 2005 that
integrates active learning into the curriculum through genomics-centered CUREs.
Its research projects investigate the evolution of genes and genomes, as well as
CURE effectiveness. Since its inception, the Genomics Education Partnership has
used a centralized leadership structure to create a nationwide research and
teaching consortium. To meet challenges associated with growth and diversifying
its scientific and pedagogical impact, while maintaining its core mission and
achieve sustainability, the Genomics Education Partnership is transitioning to a
distributed leadership structure and broadening the scope of Genomics Education
Partnership's scientific research projects. The Genomics Education Partnership
will optimize a suite of virtual tools to facilitate collaboration and build
community across its geographically dispersed members and trainees. Further, it
will provide mentorship and teaching assistant support for faculty implementing
the curriculum in under-resourced institutional environments. CUREs have been
demonstrated to have substantial benefits for minority and disadvantaged
students in STEM. The Genomics Education Partnership CURE is an extremely low-
cost research opportunity for students, making it financially accessible to a
broad range of institutional types. This project will increase the diversity of
engaged faculty, students, and institutions. Further, this transition in the
Genomics Education Partnership provides the opportunity to identify factors that
improve the organization's resilience and scalability providing a model for
sustaining and expanding a STEM Community of Practice. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.