* 1915130
* Engineering Reservoirs and Optimizing Response Function Measurements in Quantum Simulators and Computers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* James Freericks, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 320,000.00

We are at the dawn of the age of quantum computers. These new machines perform
computation by exploiting the "spooky" quantum property called entanglement.
Entanglement forces quantum systems to respond in a cooperative fashion (as if
they are connected by an ethereal web), which enables them to provide powerful
new methodologies for computation. Unfortunately, quantum entanglement is very
fragile, so managing it to enable these advances is a scientific challenge. This
research focuses on engineering the entanglement between the active quantum
elements (corresponding to states of ions trapped in a lattice) and the jiggling
motion of those ions (that are controlled by lasers that shine onto the ions).
By entangling the quantum states of the ions with their jiggling motion, one can
protect the entanglement from being broken. When the entanglement has been fully
developed between the ions and their vibrations, it can then be transferred back
to the ions and used in quantum computing applications. In addition, research
will be performed on determining how to measure the response of quantum systems
to external forces which can be used to determine the results of measurements on
complex quantum materials in magnetic or electric fields. Understanding this
behavior is critical for developing the next generation of electronic devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research falls into the general field of reservoir
engineering. Ion trap quantum simulators are ideal platforms for investigating
such behavior because they have both high quality qubits and carefully
controllable reservoirs (given by the vibrations of the ions). By deliberately
engineering the entanglement between the qubits and the vibrations, one can
actually protect the entanglement against decoherence during the main part of
the computation and then harvest that entanglement at the end of the computation
by transferring it back to the qubits. Additional planned research includes
using the Penning trap to create a quantum eraser, investigating Kramers escape
in a trapped ion simulator, and determining how to best measure the response of
a digital quantum computer to an external field. Outreach activities involve
both performing research with undergraduates, high school students, and citizen
scientists and in developing a novel quantum mechanics textbook that employs a
minimum of advanced math but still maintains a high level of treatment of the
material. The book will be accessible and thorough.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.