* 1915550
* Collaborative Research: Integrated memristor neural networks for in-situ analysis of intracellular neuronal recordings
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Wei Lu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2023
* USD 249,042.00

The ability to detect and analyze individual neuron spiking patterns over large
areas will have profound impacts on neuroscience and medicine, as it allows the
functions of the brain to be directly mapped to underlying neuron activities and
enables precise brain disease detection and drug developments. However, although
recent advances in neuroprobes such as nanoelectrode arrays make it possible to
pick up signals from single neurons, scaling the systems to thousands and
possibly millions of neuron sites is not practical due the enormous resources
and time required to digitize, store and analyze the vast amount of data. This
proposal aims to precisely address these challenges by integrating an artificial
neural network on the nanoelectrode array, such that cell signals picked up by
the electrodes are directly processed by the artificial neural network, and only
the processed, "useful" data need to be amplified and transmitted, allowing
real-time analysis with very low power. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be trained to obtain state-of-the-art nanotechnology and neuroengineering
techniques. Knowledge and techniques developed during research will be
incorporated into course materials and other types of publications to allow
cross pollination for students among different disciplines and broad
dissemination to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed new neural
recording system will offer unparalleled spatial resolution and processing
capabilities, where high density and highly sensitive nanoelectrode arrays are
integrated with a memristor-based artificial neural network that allows real
time signal processing. By optimizing and utilizing internal dynamic ionic
processes in the memristors, the artificial network can be directly driven by
the spike trains from biological neurons without amplification or other pre-
processing, where responses from the memristor network can be used to analyze
temporal patterns in the neuron spikes and to connect detected neuronal activity
with functions of the biological networks. The tightly coupled memristor network
with the biological network can further allow functions in the biological system
to be directly mapped on the electrical system, and potentially lead to future
neural prosthesis and augmentation applications. New materials, devices, and
networks will be developed, along with new recording and computing strategies
that broaden the impact of the proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.