* 1915860
* STTR Phase I:  Resonant Sensors for Wireless Monitoring of Viable Cell Concentration in Small, Disposable Bioreactors
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Charles Glatz, SKROOT LABORATORY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/29/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a resonant sensor system to
monitor cell viability in small bioreactors. Cell factories are responsible for
producing more than $150B worth of cell therapies, protein therapies, industrial
enzymes, and small molecules each year. At the development phase, there are few
technologies to monitor viable cell concentration, a critical quality attribute
in a large array of bioreactors. Current methods to monitor cell viability are
labor intensive, expensive, and can compromise quality. The proposed technology
could be embedded into the walls of disposable flasks and bioreactors to provide
real-time measurement of viable cell concentration. This could enable
substantial "big data" improvements for bioprocess developers, clonal selection,
and small batch production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to demonstrate passive, wireless sensing of viable cell concentration
with resonant sensors. Dielectric probes are used in industry to correlate
culture capacitance to viable cell concentration in large culture volumes. In
this proposal, the change in culture capacitance in small culture volumes could
be wireless reported with a passive sensor embedded as part of the disposable
culture flask or single-use bioreactor. In this form factor, it would never make
contact with the cell product, would be wirelessly implemented, and would have
potential to be easily multiplexed. Technical objectives for this work are 1)
determining the extent of confounding signal effects from movement, media
composition and temperature; 2) building a Bluetooth enabled reader pad for
implementation in an incubator; and 3) developing an algorithm that translates
the complex resonant sensor amplitude and phase data into simple parameters that
can be used to track viable cell concentration. In addition, the plan is to
model and test the effect of resonator geometry, material composition, and
sensor placement. The goal is to produce a robust sensor system for cell
viability to test in real culture conditions on numerous cell
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.