* 1915515
* Scalable Remote Peer Help for Programming Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Steve Oney, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 598,926.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving computer programming education. The project aims
to augment the interactive textbook environment, Runestone, which offers online
computer science courses with associated learning materials and programming
exercises. The goal is to enable Runestone to provide context-specific help to
students on exercises, including a mechanism to assist students in composing
effective questions. The project team plans to develop predictive models for an
accompanying system that matches students who are offering assistance with those
requesting assistance. The effectiveness of the remote assistance system will be
evaluated in three introductory Python programming courses: one at the lead
institution, one at a community college, and one through a massive online course
platform. Beyond increasing accessibility to help, this new functionality will
support collaborative learning, which can help students develop a deeper
understanding of course material as they clarify concepts through conversation.
The project seeks to identify the factors that affect a student's willingness to
help others, the effectiveness of the help, and the perceived learning value to
the helper. By supporting students through collaborative learning, this project
addresses the national demand for instructional resources to meet the increased
demand for enrollment in computer science courses by both majors and non-
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enable collaborative
learning opportunities in computer programming courses offered by Runestone. To
accomplish this goal, a tool that facilitates remote conversations about code
(Chat.codes) will be extended and integrated into Runestone. This integration
will enable students to request help from peers in the context of their online
Runestone textbook. As students are working on an exercise, they will see
requests for help associated with that exercise. Once a student clicks through
to the conversation about a specific help request, the conversation will be
indexed to code runs resulting from an editor shared by all participants. In
addition to integration of a peer help function, the project will develop a tool
to guide students in crafting well-formulated questions. Additional enhancements
include the expansion of peer help beyond on-campus cohorts, thus increasing the
pool of potential helpers, with the aim of matching help requests more
selectively with helpers. This project has the potential to enrich computer
science education in multiple contexts for thousands of students. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This is a Development and
Implementation project in the Engaged Student Learning track. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.