* 1915756
* US Ignite: Focus Area 1: An Integrated Reconfigurable Control and Self-Organizing Communication Framework for Advanced Community Resilience Microgrids
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Lei Wu, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2021
* USD 477,018.00

The United States is experiencing an increasing frequency of catastrophic
weather events that inflict serious social and economic impacts. A critical
issue associated with such catastrophes is the availability of electricity for
the recovery efforts. Community resilience microgrids can connect critical loads
in the community and share the distributed energy resources of multiple
providers to enhance the availability of electricity supply during disruptions.
However, community resilience microgrids are complex networked systems, and
their operation can be often interrupted or halted due to the cascaded growth of
failures in interconnected electrical and communications components or the
unwillingness or inability of individual microgrid partners to respond. In order
to enable the full functionality of community resilience microgrids, this
project investigates an integrated reconfigurable control and self-organizing
communication framework for enhancing operations in both grid-connected and
islanded modes. The effectiveness and benefit of the proposed framework will be
demonstrated and evaluated through the hardware-in-the-loop simulation and an
actual community microgrid project, which will ultimately provide a model for
the successful deployment of community resilience microgrids in the U.S. and
beyond. In addition to including doctoral students in research and creating
educational materials for the next generation operators and researchers of
electrical and communications systems, projects will involve underrepresented
students in evaluating social, economic, and resilience benefits of integrated
control and communication approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coordinated dynamic
control strategies for distributed energy resources and loads of multiple owners
across different timescales, together with their distinct communication
requirements, are the key to the resilient and economic operation of community
microgrids in both grid-connected and islanded modes. This research will address
these challenges by (1) exploring a hierarchically reconfigurable
centralized/distributed control strategy to optimally manage power flows of
distribution lines, dispatches of distributed energy resources and flexible
loads, and the voltage and frequency of the microgrid across multiple
timescales; (2) investigating a self-organizing infrastructure with network
topology adjustment and multi-scale data aggregation for flexible, fast, and
reliable communication; (3) developing an integrated reconfigurable control and
self-organizing communication framework to study the interdependency and
interaction between control strategies and communication requirements; and (4)
validating, demonstrating, and promoting the developed framework through the
hardware-in-the-loop simulation and an ongoing community microgrid project.