* 1915842
* Flexible Statistical Modelling for High Dimensional Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Hui Zou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 179,535.00

Scientific and technology innovations have made massive high-dimensional data
ubiquitous in various fields, such as biological science, medical studies,
public health, social sciences, e-commerce, finance, climate studies, and so on.
During the past decade statisticians have developed a rich collection of new
tools for high-dimensional statistical modeling. Despite these important
advances, there are still many challenges and open problems to be dealt with in
high-dimensional data analysis. Their solutions require innovative ideas and
techniques to handle the methodological, computational and theoretical
challenges. The goal of this research is to develop mathematically solid and
computationally efficient methods to address these pressing and important
inferential challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research consists of three
projects. The first project concerns measurement errors in high-dimensional
M-estimation. The PI will study a new unified convex approach to solve the
error-in-variables penalized M-regression including Huber regression, logistic
regression, quantile regression, and the support vector machine. In the second
project the PI will establish a new inference tool named composite M-estimation
and demonstrate its applications in high-dimensional learning. In the third
project the PI will study a flexible heterogeneity pursuit method for
understanding the heterogeneity effects in high-dimensional data. Software
packages will be created to make the new methods readily available to other
researchers and practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.