* 1915477
* RUI: Physics of Cytoskeletal Organization in Neural Development
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Erin Craig Ricketson, Central Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2024
* USD 193,190.00

Neurons are specialized cells that transmit electrical impulses to control heart
rate, movement, and higher brain function. A complex network of neurons must be
"wired" properly to support the spatial and temporal coordination of neural
signals. During nervous system development, neurons project fibers called axons,
which undergo directed growth to form connections with other cells. A network of
dynamic protein filaments called the cytoskeleton facilitates several distinct
mechanical functions underlying axonal outgrowth and development. The goal of
this project is to apply computational models to better understand how forces
and movements in the cytoskeleton mediate neural development and function. The
project will provide training to a diverse group of undergraduate students at a
regional comprehensive university that is approximately 95% undergraduate, 40%
first-generation college students, and 20% from underrepresented minorities. The
proposed project will build on the impact of existing university programs that
provide research opportunities for students from underrepresented groups.
Undergraduate students involved in the research will have the opportunity to
become immersed in basic research full time for two months during the summer
(10-12 students over the funding period). The PI has developed several novel
courses at the boundary of physics and biology, and has developed and led
interdisciplinary science outreach workshops designed to engage low-income
students and other underrepresented groups in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop agent-based computational
models to investigate cytoskeletal organization and mechanical function in
developing neurons, with particular emphasis on two distinct neuronal
compartments: (1) a slender fiber called an axon, along which neural impulses
are conducted from the cell body to other cells; and (2) a sensory-motile
structure at the tips of axons called a growth cone, which guides axonal
outgrowth during development or regeneration. These regions of the neuron both
contain many of the same cytoskeletal components, but in each context these
molecular components are repurposed for functionally distinct mechanical tasks.
Novel mechanical models will be developed to investigate emergent behavior that
arises on a systems level from the molecular scale interaction of the parts. The
models will be tested and refined in close collaboration with experimental
colleagues, and model predictions will guide the design of new experiments. The
project will address fundamental mechanistic questions about developing neurons,
including: How do axons grow in the correct direction during embryogenesis to
form the appropriate connections with other cells? How do growing axons develop
and maintain an organized internal structure capable of facilitating directed
intracellular transport of neurotransmitters and other cellular vesicles? When
cytoskeletal organization in axons is disrupted due to disease or injury, what
mechanisms may contribute to axonal repair? Specific objectives are: (1)
Investigate how cytoskeletal filaments and growth cone substrate adhesion are
coordinated to facilitate growth cone steering in response to chemical guidance
cues; (2) Investigate how developing axons establish and maintain an organized
array of polar microtubule filaments that is essential to support healthy
nervous system function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.