* 1915520
* Enhancing Additive Manufacturing Education with Cybersecurity and Virtual Reality
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2026
* Amitava Jana, Southern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2026
* USD 851,877.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE:EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by building the nation's additive manufacturing engineering
workforce. Additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing, is redefining
manufacturing in ways that make it increasingly accessible to the average
citizen. It is also deeply connected through digital platforms and the Internet.
This connectivity provides opportunities, such as allowing design of parts to
happen in one place and 3D printing of the parts to happen elsewhere. However,
this connectivity has also exposed additive manufacturing to cyber-threats.
Reportedly, manufacturing is the leading target for infrastructure-related
cyberattacks, sustaining even more of these attacks than the energy and
utilities sectors. Therefore, it is critical to national security and the
nation's financial growth to educate the next generation of engineers, computer
scientists, and other STEM professionals about cybersecurity for additive
manufacturing. Future STEM professionals will be needed who can detect, address,
and prevent additive manufacturing cyberattacks. To support education in
cybersecurity-additive manufacturing, this project includes the use of virtual
reality, an emergent technology with increasing uses in eduation. Fueled by
powerful computing that can simulate nearly unlimited environments, virtual
reality allows students to access and explore environments that, historically,
have only been available for passive viewing in images and videos. This Engaged
Student Learning project at Southern University Baton Rouge, a Historically
Black College/University, explores using multiple forms of virtual reality to
educate students to identify and resolve cybersecurity threats in additive
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Both the development and use of technology
such as additive manufacturing, and the development of solutions to complex
open-ended problems such as cybersecurity-additive manufacturing require deep
knowledge and higher-order thinking skills. Thus, in addition to developing a
cybersecurity-additive manufacturing curriculum, this project also aims to study
the use of virtual reality, in the cybersecurity-additive manufacturing context,
to develop computational thinking. Computational thinking is a problem-solving
methodology that originated as a programming approach in computer science and is
now widely recognized as an effective method for solving open-ended problems in
all disciplines. In this project, students will be exposed to virtual reality
cybersecurity-additive manufacturing training appropriate for their major and
interests. The project will use the Computational Thinking Scale to survey
students engaged in cybersecurity-additive manufacturing. Administration and
analysis of pre- and post-surveys should reveal computational thinking
development in students exposed to virtual reality environments. The research
study also incorporates semi-structured student interviews to explore the
relationship between virtual reality fidelity and scalability. The results of
the study are anticipated to identify correlations and emergent themes related
to virtual reality and computational thinking. Peer reviewed publications,
presentations, a workshop, and partnership with America Makes, the national
accelerator for additive manufacturing and 3D printing, will provide educators
and industry access to the projects' cybersecurity-additive manufacturing
curricular materials and project findings. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.