* 1915724
* Leveraging In-Context Online Discussion of Course Materials to Enhance Student Engagement and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Karger, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,271,151.00

With support from NSF's Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and
Human Resources (IUSE: EHR) program, this project aims to serve the national
interest by enhancing the value of online learning environments. Teaching and
learning are increasingly happening online. Interactive texts and videos
delivered through the Internet have the potential to lower the cost of content
delivery, promote greater learning than traditional methods of content delivery,
and provide more personalized and equitable access to education. To be
successful and broadly adopted, however, any new online educational platform
must provide greater value for the students and instructors than the
technologies that it replaces. One promising idea to enhance the value of online
learning environments is to leverage their ability to enable interactivity
between students and instructors by using "smart" interactive technologies that
can provide customized feedback to both groups. In this project, researchers at
the University of California, Davis and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
will build new understandings of how student engagement with online content can
be shaped to enhance learning. Student engagement will be captured in short
written notes, comments, and questions that students place in the margins of
documents, web pages, and videos. By capturing feedback about how students feel
about and engage with online resources, instructors will be able to modify
digital resources and restructure classroom time to be more effective. Students
will get an opportunity to engage with and reflect more deeply on the course
content, connect with other students to discuss course content, and engage the
instructor in new ways. The project will improve students' and instructors'
experiences with online content, increase the value of online content delivery,
and contribute to the personalization of online
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will build upon NotaBene, a
system that allows students to discuss online course content (PDFs, websites,
and YouTube videos) in the margins of those content sources. The investigators
will gather information about student engagement by mining the discussion
content in the margins and will present information about student engagement to
instructors, help the instructors make use of this information for class design
and for interacting with students, and test the hypothesis that increasing
engagement leads to better learning outcomes. The analytical models in the
research will consider three distinct types of engagement: emotional engagement
(a measure of how students feel about what they are interacting with online;
e.g., interest;curiosity; confusion; boredom); cognitive engagement (a measure
of how deeply students are thinking about what they are interacting with); and
temporal engagement (a measure of how much time students are spending
interacting with different parts of the online content). Collecting these three
measures of engagement will allow the investigators not only to look at each
type of engagement independently but also to uncover how they are interrelated.
Understanding the interplay between these types of engagement should enable
instructors to respond with more finely tuned and effective interventions. The
enhancements to NotaBene, the accompanying visualization tools, and the analyses
that result from this project will give students and instructors greater insight
into how students are learning from online content, and this insight will enable
instructional and content corrections to overcome barriers to learning and
facilitate greater student engagement online. NSF's IUSE: EHR program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.