* 1915210
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Uniting Causal and Mental Models for Shared Decision-Making in Diabetes
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Jessecae Marsh, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 281,942.00

Diabetes affects a growing portion of the population and, like many chronic
diseases, it is primarily managed by patients themselves without day-to-day
input from doctors. Keeping blood glucose within a healthy range is important
for prevent long-term complications of diabetes, but many patients with Type 2
diabetes do not achieve this. As a result, it is important for patients to be
invested in and knowledgeable about their treatment goals and plan. One
promising approach to address this is shared decision-making (SDM), where a
patient and clinician work together to understand the patient's preferences and
collaboratively formulate a treatment plan. SDM can potentially increase patient
trust and satisfaction, but patients, doctors, and other caregivers begin with
different sets of beliefs about disease and treatment. This creates challenges
for SDM, as each participant may have a different understanding about what will
result from an action, and when a patient's beliefs differ from information
provided by a doctor this can lead to communication challenges and reduced
trust. Further, treatment guidelines generally focus on one factor at a time,
like the role of exercise or nutrition, and are rarely personalized to
individuals. Causal models could potentially be used to help people understand
the link between their goals and actions, but they can be too complex for people
to reason with. This project will lead to methods that can automatically learn
personalized causal models that are specific to the decision-making situation
and individual's health, and communicated in the context of an individual's
knowledge. This work will close the gap from data to decisions by bridging
computational methods for causal inference, insight into the cognitive processes
underlying decisions, and shared decision-making. The project will also aim to
reduce treatment disparities by creating training modules to educate clinicians
about patient beliefs and how these influence trust and decision-making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by improving outcomes in
Type 2 Diabetes (T2D), this work will fundamentally advance computational
methods, and our understanding of cognition. While factors affecting blood
glucose differ considerably between individuals, prior work has focused on
finding population-level models. To address the need for personalized guidance,
this work 1) develops novel approaches for finding personalized causal models
(e.g. individual factors affecting blood glucose) from limited personal data by
leveraging simulation, and 2) develops personalized abstractions of the inferred
models, taking into account patient preferences and decision context, to reduce
cognitive burden. This allows more relevant information to be delivered during
decision-making. Since decisions are made in the context of existing knowledge,
the second core focus of the project is linking causal models and mental models.
While prior work has examined differences in mental models, it has not shown how
to reconcile models across individuals. This work develops new approaches to
more efficiently and accurately elicit an individual's mental model, map the
elicited model to inferred causal models, and reconcile differences across
individuals. The approaches will be deployed in shared decision-making between
patient-provider and patient-caregiver pairs for T2D management both online and
in local clinics. The methods developed will be applicable to many types of
shared healthcare decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.