* 1915822
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Collaborative: A Sociotechnical Metrics Framework for Network and Security Operations Centers
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Bradley Fidler, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Network and Security Operations Centers (SOCs) are central components of modern
enterprise networks. SOCs manage network operations, defend against cyber
threats, and maintain regulatory compliance. Typically, management and SOC
operators use monitoring software and metrics, such as open and closed tickets,
to manage SOC efficiency. These metrics may fail to represent the real
effectiveness of the SOC and the security posture of the network. This project
will study how improved metrics could better incentivize productive routines,
reveal potentially fundamental security vulnerabilities in the network, and
trigger stabilizing right-sizing processes in the controlling organization. The
project will afford an opportunity for students to participate in research on
security operations and thereby encourage careers in security research or
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new metrics
framework that measures and validates SOC performance against enterprise network
security. The specific goal is to create a framework that SOCs and parent
organization personnel could use to create tailored metrics for their unique
security environment. The research includes a technical study of network
monitoring, as well as a qualitative approach to the study of organizational
environments that analyzes people and technological artifacts as interacting
components in complex systems and describes stability and change in the
functioning or mis-functioning of these systems. By treating networks, security
components, and operations staff as part of an interdependent system, the
metrics will be able to account for factors such as outstanding security
vulnerabilities, strategic and long-term planning, and constituency interests,
and will provide on-the-ground SOC analysts with ways to input local knowledge
into higher-up decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.