* 1915345
* Analysis of a Teaching School Model for Improving STEM Undergraduate Teacher Education and Professionalism
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Bridget Maher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,467,941.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project serves the national
interest by expanding the number of well-prepared STEM majors who choose careers
in urban STEM teaching. An important national priority is to provide all young
people in US schools with STEM teachers of the highest caliber. To be fully
successful, urban STEM teachers must have deep STEM knowledge, the ability to
translate STEM knowledge and practices into something young people can
understand, and deep understanding of urban environments and youth. To prepare
the next generation of highly-skilled, urban STEM teachers at scale requires new
ways of attracting, preparing, and retaining teachers. A team of researchers and
educators from the University of Michigan and the Detroit Public Schools
Community District seeks to bring about substantive institutional-level changes
in how undergraduate STEM majors at the University are recruited and prepared to
be STEM teachers. At the core of this project is the design and implementation
of a "Teaching School," which draws upon the best dimensions of the Teaching
Hospital Model to prepare novices for skilled and contextually sensitive
professional practice. During students' college and early teaching years, the
Teaching School will provide an immersive teaching practice in a shared urban
school setting. It is expected that this experience will enhance the pre- and
in-service teachers' professional skills and professional identities as
teachers. An associated research study will examine the success of the Teaching
School Model. Thus, the project has the potential generate new knowledge about
how alignment of university and secondary school systems can support the
preparation of skilled teachers who can provide rigorous STEM teaching for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project's Teaching School, undergraduate
STEM majors enrolled in the University's secondary teacher education program
("Interns") will learn to teach using sophisticated inquiry-based and student-
centered approaches. This learning will occur as the Interns teach alongside one
another, with guidance from expert teachers ("Attending Teachers") and
university-based teacher educators ("Attending Teacher Educators"). As they move
through the three-semester training program, the Interns will take on
increasingly higher levels of responsibility. After graduation and
certification, they will have paid "Residencies," with continued mentoring by
Attending Teachers and Attending Teacher Educators. This project will employ
design-based research methods and process evaluation across iterative cycles of
work and multiple institutions to support and study the implementation of the
Teaching School. The project will examine: 1) how STEM undergraduates' learning
is related to and supported by institutional structures, practices, and tools;
2) how STEM teachers trained in the Teaching School contribute to adolescents'
STEM learning; and 3) the sustainability and practical value of the Teaching
School model. The analysis intends to improve the teacher-training model,
establish a proof of concept, and generate new knowledge about how undergraduate
STEM pre-service teachers can be recruited and supported to provide equitable
and rigorous STEM teaching through the transformation and alignment of
university and secondary systems. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the IUSE Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.