* 1915614
* Adapting an Experiment-centric Teaching Approach to Increase Student Achievement in Multiple STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias, Morgan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,500,008.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE:EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by implementing an evidence-based, experiment-focused teaching
approach in multiple STEM disciplines. The Experiment Centric Pedagogy (ECP) has
been successful in promoting motivation and enhancing academic achievement of
electrical engineering students. ECP uses an inexpensive, safe, and portable
electronic instrumentation system that can be used in classrooms and student
laboratories. When paired with appropriate software and sensors, it can be used
to measure a wide range of properties, from vibration to oxygen levels. In this
Engaged Student Learning project, ECP will be adapted for use in biology,
chemistry, civil engineering, computer science, industrial engineering,
transportation systems, and physics. Because using electronic instrumentation to
make scientific measurements is common in all STEM disciplines, ECP may be an
especially valuable STEM teaching approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will adapt and implement ECP, as well as assess the impact of ECP on student
success measures. The first project objective is to provide workshops at which
STEM faculty will learn how to use ECP as an active learning pedagogy. These
workshops will be open to all STEM faculty, not just project faculty. Non-
project faculty might adopt ECP, thereby yielding secondary project benefits.
The second objective is to integrate ECP into multiple STEM disciplines and in
various settings, such as in traditional classrooms and teaching laboratories,
and at home use by students. Instructors may implement ECP for in-class
demonstrations, for cooperative group experiments in class or laboratories, and
for homework assignments. Project faculty will be supported from early ECP
adaptation through implementation and assessment. The third objective is to
measure student success outcomes resulting from the use of ECP. Student success
will be measured by academic performance as well as retention and graduation
rates. In addition, validated instruments will be used to measure key constructs
associated with student success, such as motivation, epistemic and perceptual
curiosity, engineering identity, and self-efficacy. Results of formative
assessments are expected to guide the project, and the summative project
assessment is expected to demonstrate positive impacts on more than 1,000 STEM
students, a considerable proportion of whom are from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.