* 1915843
* Quantifying the effects of ions and collective rearrangements during ribosome function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Paul Whitford, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2024
* USD 797,314.00

This project focuses on understanding the molecular factors that govern gene
expression. To this end, large-scale simulations will be applied to study how
the ribosome can accurately and efficiently synthesize proteins. The production
of proteins is essential for nearly all biological functions, making the
ribosome one of the most important biological machines. While modern experiments
can resolve static configurations of the ribosome, detailed simulations will
allow the research community to understand how molecular structure enables
specific biological function. This can reveal strategies for controlling
cellular dynamics, as well as provide a "rule book" that can aid in the design
of novel molecular-scale machines. This project will involve a range of
activities that will provide introductory science seminars for high school
students, valuable training experiences for undergraduate and graduate student
researcher and workshops for experimental
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical models will be developed and
applied to identify the detailed role of localized, "diffuse" ions during
ribosome function. Characterizing several critical substeps of the elongation
cycle (tRNA accommodation, hybrid-state formation, translocation and domain
rotations) will elucidate how the ionic environment shapes the energy landscape
of the ribosome. This will help uncover the modes by which ions can enable
conformationally-complex biological dynamics. With the high negative charge
density of RNA, the dynamics of ribonucleoprotein assemblies rely critically on
a locally diffuse ionic environment, which can lead to attraction between
negatively charged RNA molecules. Accordingly, to fully characterize the
energetics of large-scale biological assemblies, one must properly describe the
statistical properties of the ionic environment. To address this challenge,
simplified energetic models will be developed that employ all-atom resolution,
as well as explicitly represented monovalent and divalent ions. Calibration of
the energetic parameters will be established through comparison with experiments
and explicit-solvent simulations of prototypical systems. These simplified
models will then enable the simulation of large-scale (20-100 Angstroms)
conformational transitions in the ribosome. This will implicate the influence of
fluctuations/changes in local ionic distributions. While this study will focus
on ribosome dynamics, the models and computational methods will be transferrable
to a broad range of biological assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.