* 1915196
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Brownfield Programming Assignments in Undergraduate Computing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Christopher Hundhausen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 453,338.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping undergraduate
computer science students develop the soft skills needed for successful careers
in software development. The most common type of software development project is
called a Brownfield project, in which a software solution is developed within an
existing software system. In a Brownfield project, developers modify, debug,
refine, and expand an existing code base that they may not have been originally
involved in writing. Although most modern software design projects are
Brownfield projects, undergraduate computer science curricula focus almost
exclusively on teaching students to write code from scratch. This emphasis on
"design from scratch" leads to graduates who lack key soft skills required in
the software profession today. These skills include the ability to plan, reflect
on, and direct the programming process; the ability to locate, assess, and apply
needed information; and the ability to ask and answer questions in team
settings. This project aims to involve instructors, students, education experts,
and professional software developers in designing Brownfield programming
assignments and teaching strategies that will help undergraduates in computer
science courses gain these skills. The project includes a series of rigorous
research studies that will provide insights into the educational effectiveness
of this educational approach. The findings from these studies will inform
efforts to integrate Brownfield projects into undergraduate STEM education at
other colleges or universities and in other STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Brownfield pedagogy will apply social learning theory.
It will require students to first complete a series of multimedia instructional
modules that provide explicit instruction on the targeted soft skills (i.e.
metacognition, information literacy, and communication). Students will then be
placed on teams and tasked with fixing bugs and implementing features in an
existing code base. A specialized dashboard will scaffold the process through
strategic prompts and guidance. The dashboard will also log data about the
students' software development processes, search queries, and online
interactions with teammates. The project will use a participatory design process
for iterative improvements that enable the pedagogy to be educationally
effective and readily adaptable to a variety of instructional contexts. Through
pilot studies and a quasi-experimental study involving 10 instructors and over
4,500 students at seven diverse institutions, the project will gain insight into
the pedagogy's educational effectiveness. The study will explore the
relationships between formation of soft skills and development of programming
abilities. In addition, the project will contribute novel approaches to
measuring soft skills development and new understandings of the interplay
between soft and technical skills development. It also aims to develop new
theories about the collective contributions of metacognitive, information
literacy, and communication skills in self-regulated learning and technical
skills development. The pedagogy and technologies developed through this project
may be useful as a model for supporting and assessing Brownfield projects in
other STEM disciplines. As a result, the project addresses a national priority
by helping to produce graduates who possess 21st century STEM workplace skills.
This Engaged Student Learning project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR),
which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of
STEM education for all undergraduate students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.