* 1915782
* 2019 Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar (GRC)/(GRS) on Radiation and Climate; Lewiston, Maine; July 20-26, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Andrew Gettelman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 04/30/2020
* USD 21,040.00

This award supports the eleventh Gordon Research Conference (GRC)on Radiation
and Climate, to be held at Bates College in Lewiston, Maine, 21-26 July 2019.
Additional support is provided for the fifth Gordon Research Seminar (GRS),
convened the weekend prior to the GRC. The GRS is a pre-conference meeting
targeted specifically at students and early-career scientists, intended to
provide a comfortable environment in which participants with comparable levels
of experience and education come together to discuss their current research and
build informal networks for long-term collaboration. The theme of the GRC and
GRS is "Bridging Spatial and Temporal Scales in Radiation and Climate", and
specific topics include the the changing Arctic, atmospheric dynamics and
climate from gravity wave to global circulations, ice processes from microscale
to global scale, cloud observations, aerosols and radiation, climate sensitivity
from current cloud processes to paleo-climate, greenhouse gases, and the
radiation budget from cloud to global scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC and
GRS have scientific broader impacts by serving as a venue for the exchange of
results and ideas among researchers attempting to understand the radiative
processes that govern weather and climate. The meeting is expected to be
particularly advantageous for early-career scientists, as it is formulated to
promote in-depth interactions among junior and senior scientists over the course
of a week, in a conducive setting of manageable size with few distractions. The
topics to be addressed are of societal interest given the key role of radiative
effects in controlling and regulating climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.