* 1915313
* Cultivating Scientific Literacy and Action through Place-based Experiential Learning: Expanding the Use of a Campus Farm as an Interdisciplinary Learning Hub
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Brandon Sorge, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,850.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in undergraduate STEM education
by studying how place-based experiential learning (PBEL) can enhance
undergraduate student learning about science. PBEL is an instructional strategy
that connects student learning to a local context. It also provides students
with opportunities to identify, define, and solve real problems. The nation's
ability to solve the complex problems it faces and to maintain national
prosperity require educating both students who enter the STEM workforce and
students who pursue non-STEM careers. Consequently, this project will serve both
STEM majors and non-majors. Although the number of campus farms has increased
13-fold since 1992, they remain an underused resource for undergraduate
education. This project aims to use campus farms as a local context for
authentic, interdisciplinary STEM learning. To achieve this goal, the project
will develop and implement campus farm-based PBEL modules that integrate STEM
disciplines and non-STEM disciplines such as business and communication.
Students will have opportunities to apply multiple types of knowledge and
inquiry strategies within their PBEL course work. Such learning experiences have
been shown to increase student and instructor enthusiasm, enjoyment, engagement,
content knowledge, critical thinking, and civic mindedness. Results of this
project have the potential to make STEM accessible to more students, to educate
the future workforce about how to successfully participate in interdisciplinary
collaborations, and to enhance perceptions about STEM's role in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Urban Ecology and Sustainability at
Butler University will leverage Butler's campus farm as a place of inquiry,
discourse, and community engagement. The project will pursue two goals: 1) to
develop and implement a collection cross-disciplinary PBEL course modules for
both STEM major and non-major courses; and 2) to measure project efficacy in
achieving outcomes including student learning (e.g., environmental science
literacy; scientific reasoning; place attachment and meaning; civic mindedness),
faculty collaboration, and institutional sustainability. To achieve these goals,
the Center's previously-developed PBEL framework will be refined and used to
guide a faculty-staff learning community. This learning community will
facilitate the effective design and implementation of farm-situated PBEL modules
in STEM and non-STEM courses. Researchers from the Purdue School of Engineering
and Technology and the STEM Education Innovation and Research Institute of
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis will quantify and
qualitatively examine PBEL implementation fidelity, identify best practices to
improve curricular implementation, and determine impacts on targeted student
outcomes. Long-term, the project expects to scale its approach to other
undergraduate institutions that have campus-based farms, and to expand the
curriculum to include ethics. The project activities have the potential to be
modified for use in multiple formal and informal educational settings. This
project is a Development and Implementation project (Engaged Student Learning
track) that is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
(IUSE) Program: Education and Human Resources (EHR). The IUSE : EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all undergraduate students. Through the Engaged Student Learning
track, the Program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of
promising educational tools and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.