* 1915191
* Evaluating the Potential of Community College Guided Pathways Reforms to Increase Undergraduate STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Thomas Brock, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,999,855.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest in maintaining a well-educated, diverse STEM workforce. To do
so, it focuses on understanding how to increase the capacity of community
colleges to broaden participation and success in undergraduate STEM programs.
Almost two million first-time college students enroll in community colleges each
year. Unfortunately, few of these students successfully complete an associate or
bachelor's degree in STEM. The structural organization of most community
colleges does not provide critical supports that could improve STEM success. For
example, they generally lack the structural organization needed to help students
consider STEM careers or to align students' coursework and learning experiences
with STEM career demands. Consequently, efforts to improve community college
student access and success in STEM must address these structural barriers.
However, hundreds of community colleges are fundamentally redesigning programs,
policies, and practices at scale to better help students choose and complete
STEM programs suited to their interests and talents. They are doing this by: (1)
creating clear "program maps" to completion, transfer, and careers in fields
such as sciences, engineering, and computer science; (2) helping new students
explore career and college options and develop a full-program academic plan; (3)
monitoring students' progress to help them stay on their plan; and (4) ensuring
that students are building essential skills and knowledge across programs. This
project, is designed to evaluate how these whole-college "guided pathways"
reforms are changing practices in STEM programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team will partner with higher education agencies in three states that
are leading statewide community college Guided Pathways reforms: Ohio,
Tennessee, and Washington. The goals of the project are to evaluate how these
Guided Pathways reforms are changing practices in STEM programs, advising, and
other supports; what barriers and facilitators college and STEM program leaders
face in implementing these reforms; what metrics colleges should use to
formatively evaluate the effects of these reforms on STEM program effectiveness;
and what relationship exists between Guided Pathways reforms and enrollment,
early progress, and persistence in undergraduate STEM programs by community
college students generally and by underrepresented students in particular. The
research design is based on a mixed methods approach that will include field
research to assess the scale of implementation of Guided Pathways reforms,
statistical analysis of student unit records, and qualitative analysis of
interview and focus group data. Resulting analyses will be the basis of
practitioner-focused reports and briefs and peer-reviewed journal articles. The
study is designed to inform college practices and public policy through the
identification and validation of metrics. The project team will produce a
practitioner guide that includes metrics that for formative use to evaluate the
effects of Guided Pathways reforms on STEM outcomes. The team will also produce
a practitioner guide on how community colleges can leverage ongoing community
college Guided Pathways reforms to improve access to and completion of
undergraduate STEM programs. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.