* 1915347
* Collaborative Research: IIBR Informatics: Data integration to improve population distribution estimation with animal tracking data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* William Fagan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2023
* USD 762,952.00

Identifying how environmental factors affect where particular species occur is
important for the preservation and maintenance of biodiversity. Specifically,
this knowledge can be used to delineate species' ecological niches, provide
benchmarks for measuring change, and help prioritize areas for conservation.
Given this importance, ecologists have developed many statistical tools for
identifying linkages between environmental factors and species occurrence
patterns. Most of these tools can be sorted into two categories, based on
whether they use traditional survey data, or animal tracking data. In either
category, the amount and quality of available data is frequently limiting. This
project aims to unify these two approaches under a single methodology that can
simultaneously use both types of data. This is important because it can help
overcome limitations in each data source, and because these different data types
have complementary strengths, and are thus more informative in combination.
Project work will focus on at-risk species including jaguars and lowland tapirs,
where both data types are available, to demonstrate how these techniques can
inform conservation efforts. By combining the strengths of multiple data
sources, these new methods will be able to better resolve priority habitats and
areas for these vulnerable species. Senior project personnel will participate in
the AniMove.org animal movement analysis courses to teach students to apply
these methods to conservation problems and will also host a data-integration
workshop at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Science (NCMNS). Leveraging the
&gt;1 million yearly visitors that NCMNS receives, this project?s outreach
efforts will focus on creating and displaying immersive videos that bring to
life the entire scientific process, ranging from study design and field work,
through analysis and forecasting, and on to informed conservation decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tools that identify linkages between environmental
drivers and species' occurrence patterns are routinely used in ecology, with
species distribution models (SDMs) and resource selection functions (RSFs) being
especially prominent examples. Though these approaches are closely related, SDMs
tend to be employed on large scales with survey data, while RSFs are typically
used for local populations and applied to animal tracking data. The ubiquitous
auto-correlation within, and frequent cross-correlation among, individual
tracking datasets violates the key independence assumption of standard
distribution models. To unify these approaches, a novel weighted log-likelihood
function will be developed to account for non-independence both within and among
tracking datasets, as well as for differing sampling schedules and study
duration. This weighted log -likelihood will be integrated with both presence-
only and presence-absence survey data in the very general in homogeneous Poisson
point process framework for distribution modeling. This approach has two primary
advantages. First, it would allow accumulating stockpiles of tracking data to
validly inform a broad range of distribution analyses, from RSFs at the local
scale, to SDMs at the geographic range scale. Second, it will counteract the
often -pronounced spatial biases in survey data by leveraging the fact that
tracked animals frequently go where surveyors don? t. Compared to conventional
distribution models, this novel methodology will scale seamlessly from local
populations to geographic ranges, increase overall sample size, and exploit the
contrasting properties of the different data types to reduce spatial bias and
more accurately estimate uncertainty. To facilitate broad use of this
methodology, a freely available software tool, the Distribution Data Integration
Module (DDIM), will be developed to both construct the necessary multi-source
datasets, and annotate these data with relevant environmental covariates.
Project results will be available at
http://biology.umd.edu/movement.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.