* 1915355
* Collaborative Research: Root Dynamics and Control in Heterogeneous Soft Substrates
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel Goldman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 503,999.00

The above-ground portion of plants has been almost exclusively studied largely
due to imaging difficulties associated with soil-growing roots. Thus, little is
known about the interaction of root architectures and substrates critical to
plant health. The root system is amenable to integrated study of a living system
across length and organizational scales, linking genomic to micro and
macroscopic phenotypic traits and control behaviors. Plant root systems are
vital for nutrient and water absorption, anchoring and support as well as soil
conditioning. Such systems couple space and time to achieve excellence in
complex spatial environments. Roots must grow from a seed into a complex network
structure via cell division without central planning of optimal paths, adjusting
to interactions with substrates of varying particle size, moisture, and
compaction. Recently, advances in genetics and sequencing coupled with imaging
in soil and gel-based soil mimics have begun to elucidate principles. However,
real time interaction dynamics and control decisions for such processes are
largely unknown. The terradynamic aspects of tip-growth interactions between
root and soil are also largely unstudied. In this collaborative proposal two
experts, Goldman in biomechanics, robophysics and soft matter physics, and
Benfey in plant development, genetics and genomics, will work to discover
principles of effective root exploration, penetration and anchoring. The
proposed work will focus on the genetically well-characterized model system,
rice, subjecting multiple cultivars to a suite of comparative and integrative
experimental assays coupled with robophysical and computational models. A better
understanding of root system development is an important step towards increasing
crop yields in poor soils, critical in the face of rapid climate change.
Interaction with Atlanta Botanical Gardens to study orchid growth will
facilitate the Garden's conservation activities. Given the PIs' past success in
interfacing with the public via popular press and interaction with local museums
and schools, it is expected that the physics of plants (including robophysics)
can be used to generate broad interest in plant science in a way that pure
botany or plant genetics cannot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To discover novel
interactions, dynamics and genes, root growth will be monitored across length
and time scales, imaging with x-ray and gel systems (to study root tip dynamic
growth behaviors) and confocal microscopy (for cell division and elongation)
varying different soil properties and heterogeneities in well-controlled
laboratory soil-mimics. Insight into root growth behaviors will be obtained via
time-dependent stresses such as compacted or loose soil, as well as changes in
nutrient availability. Questions associated with control of growth via cellular
changes (e.g. root thickening) in response to changes in environment (e.g. soil
compaction) will be of interest. Such perturbations will be complemented by
utilizing genetic mutants to study how root dynamics change upon modification of
key behaviors such as circumnutation. To more accurately model aspects of the
living systems, the collaboration will develop experimentally validated
computational models of tip-driven biological growth, calibrating the soft-
matter interaction aspects of the simulation via mechanical tests and robot
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the
Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.