* 1915404
* Using Program Dependence Graphs to Propagate Feedback to Students on Programming Assignments and Promote Responsive Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Zack Butler, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,728.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by enabling faculty to improve their ability to assess student
understanding in computer science courses and give feedback on student
assignments. Student interest in computer science courses is rapidly increasing
nationwide, putting strain on departments and instructors to offer a quality
education. Providing effective personalized feedback to students is a critical
part of the learning process, but a limited number of qualified instructors and
large student enrollments make providing such feedback a challenge when student
to faculty ratios are high. This Engaged Student Learning track Exploration and
Design tier project will develop a new teaching platform to assist instructors
in computer science courses by automatically propagating feedback to a large
body of students. In addition, the new teaching platform aims to help
instructors understand collective strengths and weaknesses of students in their
courses based on their assignment submissions. This project aims to affect over
1,000 undergraduate students each year at the Rochester Institute of Technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teaching platform developed by this project will
analyze student program submissions to create program dependence graphs that
combine control and data flows for Java and Python programs. The graphs will be
used to cluster similar student submissions using graph alignment, and to detect
semantic expected code patterns using subgraph mining. The goal of the platform
is to promote improved teaching effectiveness by presenting analytics that will
help instructors understand the performance of individual students and classes
as a whole. It is also designed to suggest avenues for further discussion with
the class. The technical evaluation of the project will study how well the
platform identifies clusters and patterns in both synthetic and real
assignments. Instructors from Rochester Institute of Technology, several
neighboring universities, and local high schools will participate in training
workshops, and the platform will be used in introductory courses at Rochester
Institute of Technology. An additional goal of the project is to develop
knowledge bases to enable the use of the teaching platform with new assignments,
and to evaluate the impact of the platform on the instructors' grading and
teaching style. The teaching platform targets instructors of computer science
courses and has the potential to influence any student studying computer
science. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.