* 1915898
* NSF INSTRUMENTATION CY19 DEERING
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Timothy Deering, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 09/30/2020
* USD 40,480.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation for the R/V Hugh R
Sharp, a 146-foot Regional research vessel operated by the University of
Delaware as part of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System
(UNOLS) research fleet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The R/V Hugh R Sharp is a state-
of-the-art, coastal research vessel that is owned and operated by the University
of Delaware. The vessel can carry fourteen to twenty scientists on cruises up to
eighteen days in duration and supports projects from all disciplines of
oceanography. The vessel is a regional asset, serving researchers from many
institutions throughout the mid-Atlantic. The vessel typically operates in the
coastal waters from Long Island, New York, to Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, as
well as the Delaware and Chesapeake Bays. Projects occasionally require the
vessel to work as far north as the Gulf of Maine, as far south as Florida, and
as far offshore as Bermuda. In 2018, the R/V Hugh R Sharp completed 143 days at
sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 18 days or 15% of the sailing schedule.
In 2019, R/V Hugh R Sharp is scheduled for 86 days with NSF days accounting for
21% (18 days) of the total sailing schedule. Oceanographic Instrumentation
requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Big Eye Binoculars
$40,480 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review
Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure
support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in
support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually
undergo separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The
acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-
funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.