* 1915878
* Development of Electrochemical Mass Spectrometry for the Study of Protein Redox Chemistry and Protein Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Hao Chen, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 05/31/2021
* USD 313,493.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in the
Division of Chemistry and the Molecular Biophysics Program from the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Dr. Hao Chen and his group at Ohio
University are developing powerful new analytical tools for the fundamental
study of protein chemistry, with long-term aims of probing protein functions in
living cells and organisms. The study seeks new methods for rapid elucidation of
protein structures and insights into the mechanisms of electrochemical reactions
involving proteins. The work provides research opportunities for both
undergraduate and graduate students, including members of underrepresented
groups. Dr. Chen is also actively involved in educational outreach activities,
including ChemShows/Workshops/Seminars for pre-college students to learn about
modern instrumental analysis and to develop enthusiasm for scientific research.

In this project, Dr. Chen's group is combining mass spectrometry (MS) and
electrochemistry (EC) techniques for the study of protein redox reactions. The
aim is a powerful tool for identification of the protein electrochemical
reaction products and intermediates. One specific target is to combine fast and
selective cleavage of disulfide bond linkages in a protein (via
electroreduction) with MS analysis to enable protein sequencing and disulfide
bond mapping. The work is also probing biomolecular electron transfer pathways
for increased understanding of cellular oxidative stress and similar phenomena.