* 1915919
* RESEARCH-PGR: Transdisciplinary Comparative Analyses of Halophytic and Glycophytic Grasses to Reveal Novel Mechanisms of Salt Tolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Maor Bar-Peled, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,298,767.00

Soil salinity is an increasing problem worldwide, and greatly limits crop
production. Most crop plants are salt sensitive (glycophytes), and breeding for
improved salt tolerance has met with limited success. A small percentage of
flowering plants, however, can complete their life cycle under saline
conditions, and are considered halophytes. Some halophytes are closely related
to salt-sensitive crop plants and an investigation of the genetic,
morphological, physiological and biochemical differences between glycophytic
crops and their halophytic relatives may identify novel mechanisms that can be
used to increase the salt tolerance of crops. Furthermore, it has been
hypothesized that glycophytic species related to halophytes may already have
most of the basic machinery needed for salt tolerance. This project will focus
on the halophytic turfgrasses seashore paspalum and zoysiagrass, which have leaf
adaptations that allow plants to sequester and/or excrete salt, and their salt-
sensitive relatives sorghum and finger millet, two cereal crops. Understanding
the genetics behind salt-adaptations in halophytes will ultimately find
applications in breeding for enhanced salt tolerance. Furthermore, the project
will be used as a vehicle to train graduate and undergraduate students, and to
introduce 6-12 graders to inquiry-based learning and instill in them a passion
for plant science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the results of
preliminary studies that identified structural adaptations on the leaf surface
as well as the presence of novel sulfated glycans as hallmarks of the halophytic
grass seashore paspalum (Paspalum vaginatum). Combining element mapping, MALDI-
mass spectrometry imaging, and biochemical, physiological and genetic analyses
in halophytic and glycophytic grasses belonging to two taxonomic groups, the
Panicoideae and Chloridoidea, the project aims to investigate (1) whether
sulfate is essential to halophytic growth under high salt; (2) whether ions
(e.g. Na+, K+) and sulfur-containing compounds accumulate differentially in
halophytes and glycophytes; (3) the composition and biosynthetic route of
sulfated glycan; (4) the role of leaf adaptations in salt tolerance of
halophytes; and (5) the genes involved in these structural and biochemical
adaptations. The comparative analyses between halophytes and glycophytic
relatives within taxonomic groups represent a novel approach to identify traits
that contribute to salt tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.