* 1915154
* Collaborative Research:  A community resource for genome-scale identification of genotype-phenotype relationships in a model photosynthetic eukaryote
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Paul Lefebvre, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2023
* USD 622,199.00

This project will generate physical and data resources that will dramatically
advance understanding of the functions of thousands of genes in photosynthetic
organisms. Photosynthetic organisms provide food and energy for nearly all life
on Earth, yet most of their genes remain uncharacterized. This project will
expand the availability of mutants needed to study the functions of genes in the
single-celled model photosynthetic alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. The new
project will use the newly generated mutants to identify relationships between
genes and observable characteristics and will allow genes to be assigned to
genetic pathways on an unprecedented scale. The resulting mutants will be
available to the research community via the Chlamydomonas Resource Center, and
the resulting data will be searchable on a website. The basic knowledge and
resources generated by this project will lay the groundwork for advances in
biotechnology, agriculture, and health. The placement of thousands of genes into
pathways will identify new opportunities for pathway engineering in
photosynthetic organisms. Mutants with enhanced or deficient growth in specific
environments will reveal genetic targets for enhancing resistance of crops to a
broad range of stresses. Mutants with defects in cilia will advance our
structural and molecular understanding of these organelles, which play key roles
in development and disease. The project will enhance infrastructure for research
and education by providing urgently needed high-quality disruption mutants for
many genes. The project will directly contribute to the training of many
undergraduates, college graduates, and a postdoctoral fellow, and will advance
the training of countless young researchers as they use the resources
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the team's success in
developing the existing Chlamydomonas mutant resource and extensive preliminary
studies demonstrating that mutant phenotypes can be assessed in pools, where
each mutant's growth rate is tracked by measuring the abundance of its unique
DNA barcode. High confidence in a genotype-phenotype relationship requires three
independent high-confidence alleles disrupting the gene of interest. The first
aim of this project is to increase from 9% to 84% the percentage of genes
covered with three high-confidence disruptions by improving the mapping accuracy
of existing mutants and by generating additional mutants. The second aim is to
systematically assign genes to pathways by identifying high-confidence genotype-
phenotype relationships across the genome. The phenotypes of 70,000 mutants will
be determined under hundreds of conditions, half of which will be selected by
the community. Genes will be clustered into pathways based on the principle that
mutants affected in in the same pathway show a similar pattern of phenotypes
across a broad range of conditions. The third aim is to make the resulting
mutants and data broadly available to the research community. Mutants generated
by the project will complement the Chlamydomonas Resource Center's existing
collection by providing coverage for genes not currently represented. Insertion
sites, mutant and gene phenotypes, and gene pathway assignments will be
searchable online. This project will transform our understanding of
photosynthetic organisms by producing a comprehensive genotype-phenotype map.
The availability of mutants and phenotypes will allow the community to make
rapid progress on determining the molecular functions of uncharacterized genes
and the proteins they encode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was jointly funded
by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Program and the Genetic Mechanisms Program
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Infrastructure
Capacity for Biology Program / Collections in Support of Biological Research in
the Division of Biological Infrastructure. All three programs are in the
Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.