* 1915343
* Collaborative Research: Building Assessment Capacity in Chemistry Education - The CHemistry Instrument Review and Assessment Library (CHIRAL) Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jordan Harshman, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 186,657.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in high-quality undergraduate
chemistry education by promoting the adoption of evidence-based tools for
assessing instruction. Understanding the impact of an educational initiative on
student learning requires data from valid assessment instruments that are
aligned to the outcome of interest. This project aims to help chemistry
instructors and chemistry education researchers select valid instruments for
classroom use. Specifically, the project will develop and host a catalog of
assessment instruments used by the chemistry education community. The catalog
will be available in a user-friendly format and hosted on the Chemical Education
Xchange, an American Chemical Society community resource established in 2012. To
further support the selection of high-quality instruments, this catalog will
also: 1) provide information about the validity and reliability of data
collected using the instrument; 2) develop a glossary of the concepts and
methods related to validity and reliability; and 3) include expert reviews
regarding the available evidence for each assessment. Through this work, the
CHemistry Instrument Review and Assessment Library (CHIRAL) platform will be
developed as a central resource for the chemical education community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet its goals, the project team will systematically
review available literature to identify assessment instruments that are used in
chemistry education. A panel of experts will write a summary report about each
instrument, to aid users in selecting the most appropriate assessment instrument
for a given context. Along with basic metadata, such as the topic and format of
an instrument, each instrument in the CHIRAL platform will include an overview
of the evidence regarding the instrument's validity and reliability. This
information will include results from the developers and from other studies that
have used the instrument. Additionally, key principles of validity and
reliability included in the summary and overview will be hyperlinked to a
dynamic glossary. This glossary will summarize and reference existing quality
resources that explain common psychometric terminology and methods in a
standardized format that scaffolds from basic to advanced topics. To support the
value of the CHIRAL platform to the chemistry education community, users will
have multiple ways to provide feedback on its features. The information gathered
and presented by the CHIRAL platform is predicted to improve users' decision-
making processes in evaluating and implementing educational assessments in
chemistry. To measure the extent of this impact, a qualitative evaluation study
will be conducted to gauge faculty's perspectives of hypothetical instruments
supported with varying levels of evidence for the validity and reliability of
their data. Within the chemistry education community, the combination of the
catalog, peer-review process, and the glossary have the potential to increase
the rigor of the learning assessment process, enhance the value of scholarly
work in instrument development, and reduce the time educators and researchers
dedicate to locating or developing appropriate assessments for their needs. As a
result, this project is expected to enhance both instruction at the classroom
level and educational research on student learning in chemistry. This project is
supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education
and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), which supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.