* 1915300
* Collaborative Research: The Polaris Project - Catalyzing Change in the Arctic Research Community
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Seeta Sistla, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2022
* USD 70,235.00

The Polaris Project engages a diverse group of undergraduate students in
cutting-edge arctic research and provides them encouragement, mentoring, and
opportunities to continue pursuing arctic studies. The program, which is
designed to address the lack of racial and ethnic diversity in the polar
geoscience workforce, will also train students in the process of co-production
of knowledge with local communities in the Arctic. In addition to the inherent
benefit of linking scientific progress to societal needs, undergraduate
students' scientific motivations are increasingly focused on a desire to 'make a
difference' that extends beyond collecting, synthesizing, and reporting data.
The Polaris Project will develop an undergraduate student research and mentoring
model that supports this need. The central element of the Polaris Project is the
month-long summer experience, which includes a field expedition to the Yukon
Kuskokwim Delta in Alaska, during which students will complete a research
project of their own design. Expedition participants tackle an issue of great
scientific and societal importance, the impacts of fire and permafrost thaw on
the vulnerability of the Arctic landscape. As part of the expedition, students
and faculty will also spend time interacting with and learning from local and
indigenous residents of Alaska who are experiencing the effects of the changing
environment first-hand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engaging with local and indigenous
Arctic communities in the generation of scientific knowledge is critical to
understanding the Arctic system and to applying this knowledge to effectively
address societal needs at local to global scales. The project will develop a
model for undergraduate education that includes conducting scientific research
combined with invaluable expertise, training, and input from local and
indigenous communities. Evaluation of the model will improve our understanding
of how to design projects that engage undergraduates in research that
encompasses co-production of knowledge with local communities, and particularly
in arctic-related science in Alaska. This proposal is supported by the Office of
Polar Programs and by the Division of Undergraduate
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.