* 1915954
* African Diaspora Joint Mathematics Workshops (ADJOINT)
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Helene Barcelo, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2022
* USD 47,115.00

This project is to support the African Diaspora Joint Mathematics Workshops
(ADJOINT) program whose goal is to strengthen the mathematical sciences by
facilitating research among African-American mathematicians as well as
increasing their visibility and inclusion in the mathematical community. This
program will host several extended workshops of small groups of mathematicians
at the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI) in Berkeley, California
during the summer of 2019. Each group will be predominantly made up of African-
American researchers, will be led by an established African-American researcher
and will include mathematicians at various stages in their careers. The goal of
each workshop will be to develop and extend a focused research project. Funds
will also be available for participants to further interact or travel to focused
workshops in the 2019-20 academic year. Having core, productive and visible
groups of African-American mathematicians in various mathematical fields will
stimulate further participation by this community in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the groups will have an outline of possible
research directions and problems before they arrive. This plan will be refined
and implemented while participating in the workshop at MSRI and a plan to
continue will be drawn up before the researchers leave. The participants will be
made aware of future research programs at the NSF Mathematics Institutes and be
encouraged to apply to appropriate programs as well as to organize Special
Sessions at AMS or other meetings. While in residence at MSRI, the members of
each group will also interact with students at the Graduate Summer Schools which
are held at the Institute each summer as well as with the students in MSRI-UP,
MSRI's long-running and successful REU program for students belonging to
underrepresented populations. The presence of these role models will further
enhance the experience of the graduate and undergraduate students. Concurrent
residency of some of the groups will also allow for development of further tools
to support research in this community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.