* 1915847
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Privacy Enhancing Framework to Advance Behavior Models
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Aggelos Katsaggelos, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 315,471.00

This project is designed to advance research on problematic eating behavior. The
project investigates wearable sensors to measure eating behavior and developing
models of behavior that comprise multiple observable behaviors such as eating
alone or with friends, or chewing speed. These data can help scientists improve
upon current traditional methods such as self-reported eating diaries, which
tend to be inconsistent, sparse, and rarely timely. We capture human behavior
using a custom wearable augmented camera. Wearable cameras provide rich data,
but raise privacy concerns. The project will address these concerns by building
a framework using machine learning and information theory while including human-
reported privacy concerns. The framework will address wearers' concerns that may
limit recording authentic behavior in real-world settings and will optimize
algorithms to enhance the detection and classification of human
behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project explores the acceptability of
obfuscation techniques on varied activities and their requisite tasks. The
proposed research will design a suite of computationally efficient task-specific
algorithms that use raw images in computationally restrictive (in situ) and
obfuscated images in unrestrictive environments (offline) to build information-
performance curves for the scalable development of personalized ground truth
wearable cameras. The project also will develop a modular, plug-and-play, low-
complexity and efficient obfuscation computing hardware device to facilitate and
accelerate the use of the proposed methods and algorithms. This work will
validate an overeating behavior model in a real-world setting using the design
framework and device, providing visual confirmation of eating behaviors, showing
how it can be used to test existing models. This project is likely to be useful
to other domains in the social sciences, fundamentally changing the way
researchers build and validate behavioral models in real-world settings. There
are potential applications in health (especially preventive medicine), social,
and economic sciences: energy balance, infant development, medication adherence,
consumer behavior, and human-environment interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.