* 1915334
* Overcoming Impediments to Computer Science Students' Understanding of Code:  Scaling Up Automated Methods and Broadening Participation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jiannan Zhai, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 162,491.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving computer science education. To achieve this goal,
the project will identify misunderstandings that arise when students reason
about code and develop strategies to overcome these misunderstandings. The
project will focus on using automated analysis to teach students how to use
mental execution and/or tracing to predict the execution behavior of program
code, one of the most basic and important objectives of computing education. The
ability to trace through a segment of code to understand its behavior is central
to learning how to write new programs, as well as to reason about, debug, and
improve existing programs. The best programmers can predict behavior on specific
inputs, and extend their reasoning to generalized inputs, developing an
abstract, broad understanding. This project seeks to identify the aspects of
automated methods that are most effective in identifying and overcoming learning
obstacles associated with students' reasoning about software
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two objectives. First, it aims to
understand the learning obstacles students face in tracing code on specific,
concrete inputs, and the obstacles they ultimately face in generalizing that
reasoning to abstract, symbolic inputs. Second, the project aims to understand
why these obstacles arise and how they can be overcome. To collect and analyze
information about student reasoning, as well as to provide student feedback, the
project will develop an online reasoning tutor that can capture and respond to
students' choices, written explanations, and verbal explanations. These online
reasoning tutors will be used in conjunction with other instructional strategies
to support development of students' abilities to reason about code. To enable
the findings to be broadly applicable to all students, the research will include
diverse student populations. The effort involves Clemson University, a large
land-grant public institution, Florida Atlantic University, an HSI, and Howard
University, an HBCU. The evaluation effort is led through Rose-Hulman. Computing
is fundamental to the nation's society and commerce. To become successful
computing professionals, student programmers need to develop the debugging and
reasoning skills that are the focus of this project. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. This is an Engaged Student Learning project; through
the Engaged Student Learning track, the IUSE: EHR program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.