* 1915218
* Quantum Simulation of Out-of-Equilibrium Spin Models
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Paola Cappellaro, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 379,330.00

Simulating complex systems on a computer improves our understanding of natural
phenomena and helps to develope new technology. Yet, some systems are beyond the
simulation capabilities of even the most advanced supercomputers. Quantum
simulators could overcome this challenge and greatly impact quantum chemistry,
material science, condensed matter, and high-energy physics. While general-
purpose quantum computers promise to more broadly revolutionize computing, they
are still in their infancy, while quantum simulators can already tackle some
task-specific problems. This is achieved by following a different approach than
computer-based simulators, by using one quantum system to directly mimic the
evolution of another, target system. The weakness in this strategy is that it
lacks flexibility. &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to expand the capabilities of
quantum simulation by introducing programmable analog quantum simulators which
combine the ease of directly mimicking a system evolution, with the flexibility
of engineering the simulator dynamics via logic gates. In addition, the project
will develop novel metrics to evaluate performance and to acquire the most
comprehensive information about the simulated system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, the researchers will employ a hybrid approach, combining
evolution under the natural Hamiltonian (as in analog quantum simulators) with
periodic control (collective quantum gates) to engineer a Floquet Hamiltonian
approximating the interaction models of interest. As the simulation performance
should be assessed on large (scalable) quantum systems not accessible to
classical simulators, the project will validate the quantum control protocols
experimentally, devising experimentally accessible metrics that can characterize
the many-body dynamics, such as out-of-time ordered correlations and Loschmidt
echoes. The systems used as quantum simulators will include quasi-1D nuclear
spin chains, nuclear spins in 3D crystals, and spin impurities in diamond. There
are several advantages of using spin systems to address these questions over
synthetic matter systems such as cold atoms and ions. First, the system directly
maps to typical spin Hamiltonians studied theoretically and it can build upon
the long tradition of magnetic resonance investigation of condensed matter
physics. In addition, these spin systems allow exploring broader regimes than
cold atoms and ions, for example high-temperature conditions, and conditions
that are well beyond what can be simulated exactly, such as large, 3D systems,
and open systems interacting with a well-defined environment. Exploring the out-
of-equilibrium dynamics of such rich spin systems will bring forward a host of
new physical phenomena, as it will be demonstrated with a few paradigmatic
examples of quantum spin models. A particular focus of the project is on
investigating quantum thermalization or its absence due to localization or
prethermalization, a key question in the quest to exploit many-body systems for
quantum applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.