* 1915375
* NSF-BSF: Optical Coherent Control of  Quantum Dot Spin for Ultra-Fast Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 454,894.00

Among the many choices for solid-state quantum emitters, indium arsenide quantum
dots exhibit some of the best optical properties. They emit photons with nearly
perfect efficiency and purity. In addition, quantum dots can trap single
electrons that act as quantum memories that strongly interact with photons, a
key ingredient for long-distance quantum networks. But these spins lose their
quantum properties extremely fast because they interact with a large number of
nuclear spins that always exist in the natural crystalline structure of the host
substrate. In order to improve the quantum properties of these spins and
increase the timescales over which they persist requires a better fundamental
understanding of spin-nuclear interactions in semiconductors. This improved
understanding could directly enable methods to decouple the electrons from the
large nuclear spin bath, resulting in orders of magnitude improvements in their
coherence lifetime. This program aims to both attain a better understanding of
spin nuclear interactions and improve spin lifetimes in semiconductors using a
technique called dynamical coherent control. This approach manipulates the spin
rapidly to decouple it from noise sources on different timescales. Using this
technique, the principal investigator will study the noise properties of spins
in a semiconductor host material, and develop new techniques to eliminate them.
Success of this program could enable a new generation of chip-integrated quantum
devices that can efficiently store and transmit quantum information over long
distances. This program is a collaborative NSF-BSF proposal which combines the
expertise of the University of Maryland in quantum dot spectroscopy and the
Hebrew University in Jerusalem on noise spectroscopy and coherent spin
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the program goals, the
collaborative team will combine state-of-the-art noise spectroscopy and
dynamical decoupling with nanophotonic engineering. They will develop a novel
optical excitation scheme based on ultra-fast modulation of a narrowband laser
to achieve complete spin control along all three axes. Such modulation can be
programmed to create nearly unlimited control sequences, thus enabling spin
control with significantly greater complexity and opening new possibilities for
quantum information processing. They will use this new scheme to perform noise
spectroscopy of the quantum dot spin qubit, elucidating the physics underlying
its dominant noise sources. Using the physical insight gained from these
experiments, they will develop optimized dynamical decoupling sequences that
could significantly extend the coherence time of the qubit beyond current state-
of-the-art. Coupling these optically active quantum memories to nanophotonic
cavities will provide a path to engineer efficient spin-photon interfaces, and
achieve large scalability. The ability to control and decouple nuclear spin
interactions in III-V semiconductors would provide a qubit system with long-
lived coherence properties and nearly pristine quantum emission. Such a system
could form the fundamental building block for quantum networks, photonic quantum
computers, and quantum sensors. In the III-V semiconductor community, spin
dynamics remains a poorly understood area of research with many open questions
regarding the dominant noise interactions and fundamental coherence limits. This
research will shed light on this poorly understood physics, opening up brand new
applications and control tools for spin in III-V semiconductor materials. In
addition to the research component, this program will include a strong outreach
effort to educate high school students and broaden participation in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.