* 1915815
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Improving the Bug Bounty System
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* William Robertson, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 316,000.00

Bug bounty programs were once a novel way to encourage security researchers to
report vulnerabilities. They are now common. Hundreds of organizations--from car
manufactures to the Department of Defense--now operate bug bounty programs that
purchase flaws from independent vulnerability researchers. Yet, while bug bounty
programs are widely viewed as a promising strategy for reducing software attack
surfaces, unsolved social and technological issues can limit the efficacy of
these programs. This project uses detailed interviews with market participants
and associated research to examine how bugs are identified, sold, and mitigated.
It seeks to identify the persistent challenges that confront the market. The
insights generated through this interdisciplinary inquiry will inform the
development of innovative social and technical mechanisms that can help improve
bounty programs for vulnerability researchers, program operators, and society at
large. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project follows the life stages of a
commercial bug: examining how bugs are discovered, sold, and mitigated. It takes
commercial bugs to be sociotechnical artifacts that are situated within a web of
social and technical processes. The project is interdisciplinary: it focuses on
an often overlooked form of infrastructure labor--the work of discovering,
selling, and fixing bugs--from the perspective of workers; and it explores how
technical solutions might provide accountability into the market. The project
employs interviews with market participants, review of legal and administrative
data, and analysis of technical artifacts in order to better understand the
barriers and frictions that dot the market. Insights developed through market
observation and analysis will inform technical work to explore the design of a
novel, decentralized, and trustworthy bug bounty platform. This platform will
serve as a technological substrate that protects the interests of different
participants in the bug bounty ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.