* 1915768
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Understanding group digital security practices
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Glencora Borradaile, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 315,984.00

Grassroots groups seek to protect their digital security but also to be
transparent and open, and to affirm their legitimacy and authority. This
research will examine how organizations and groups shape the ways they balance
what may be conflicting needs to avoid censure and harassment while being open
enough to encourage trust and participation. The research will examine the role
of organizational structure and digital security practices, and to uncover
processes, practices, or behaviors that increase or reduce security threats to
online groups. This project enlists graduate students in computer science and
social sciences in the research process. The research will also develop security
training programs for nonprofit and community groups. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research methods for this project include semi-structured interviews with small
and informal activist collectives as well as larger, bureaucratic NGO
organizations. The data will be used to develop principles and methods for
secure practices in grassroots groups and community organizations. The findings
will contribute to fundamental knowledge of how organizational characteristics
intersect with security protection choices and new ways to counter threats of
harassment, privacy violations, and surveillance without impinging on openness
and legitimate advocacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.