* 1915083
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Detection, Assessment and Rehabilitation of Stroke-Induced Visual Neglect Using Augmented Reality (AR) and Electroencephalography (EEG)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Skidmore, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 787,594.00

Unilateral spatial neglect is a perceptual disorder that is one of the most
common consequences of right-side brain damage after stroke, occurring in 29% of
the 15 million people who sustain stroke worldwide. Patients with neglect
demonstrate inattention to objects or events on the side that is opposite to the
damaged part of the brain. They often miss food on one side of the plate,
missing words on one side of the page, bumping into the left door jamb, getting
confused by moving objects, and being fearful of walking in crowded places. The
current gold standard for detecting and rehabilitating neglect lacks
generalizability to dynamic tasks and contexts encountered during activities of
daily living (ADL). The investigators in this project will develop a brain-
computer interface (BCI) system that will be implemented in augmented reality
(AR) environment for detection, assessment and rehabilitation of unilateral
neglect during ADL. More specifically, the system will in real-time monitor the
brain activity recorded through electroencephalography (EEG) for the detection
and assessment of visually neglected extra-personal space. Moreover, the system
will also include haptic, auditory and visual stimulation while the users are
engaged in real-world tasks conducted during rehabilitation for reducing
neglect-related disabilities. It is also anticipated that the novel scientific
discoveries and engineering enhancements of this project will have effects on
the current practice on BCIs: (i) enabling design and implementation of such
systems in more naturalistic environments providing more immersive experiences;
and (ii) expansion of the use of BCIs in the design of intervention and
rehabilitation techniques for other neurological disorders. This project will
promote STEM education and provide rigorous training and variety of hands-on
experiences to researchers from K-12 to graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to introduce a prototype for stroke-
induced neglect detection, assessment, and rehabilitation system, featuring: (i)
seamless integration of EEG and AR in the design of visually evoked EEG-based
BCIs to operate during activities of daily living; (ii) accurate and continuous
EEG event related potential detection for neglect assessment and mapping through
Bayesian inference models; (iii) information theoretic optimum design of neglect
intervention focusing on activities of daily living; and (iv) multimodal real-
time feedback for rehabilitation of neglect related disabilities during
intervention. Unlike the common computerized neglect assessment methods, EEG
will not require any physical responses from the patient. Also, the use of EEG
permits automation, making it an ideal method to guide a personalized and
automated neglect intervention. It is known that one common element among the
existing interventions that have shown promise for reducing neglect is
multimodal stimulation to the neglected side of the body or environment. Timely
feedback to the user when neglect is detected during the continuous EEG
monitoring will enable this stimulation. Finally, used in conjunction with AR
headset and skill-based training during acute inpatient rehabilitation, the
planned system will provide the opportunity to deliver high-intensity repetitive
stimulation with progression during meaningful everyday activities. The outcomes
of this project will be disseminated to the scientific community through
technical reports, journal publications and conference presentations. All
software developed through this project will be publicly available through
archival repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.