* 1915134
* IOS EDGE: Expanding the toolkit for functional genetics in threespine stickleback to place genomics into its natural context
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Daniel Bolnick, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,232,068.00

'To learn about human biology, researchers use non-human species as stand-ins,
or 'models'. Because no single species is a perfect model of human biology,
science benefits from a broad portfolio of model organisms, each with its own
relevance to human biology. This project will create new methods to study an
emerging model, the threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus). This small
fish offers an important advantage over traditional lab models. Since the
glaciers retreated in the northern hemisphere ~12,000 years ago, many beneficial
genetic variants have survived in thousands of distinct natural populations.
Unlike laboratory genetic screens, which reveal mutations in genes causing
abnormal development or physiology, these natural variants reveal biological
innovations: new ways of resisting parasites, for instance. A large community of
researchers (&gt;100 labs) now studies stickleback to understand behavior,
development, and immunology. The research team has identified candidate genes
affecting important traits like brain and bone development, but require tools to
experimentally alter gene function for confirmation. This grant will support a
team of five researchers developing new gene-editing methods for stickleback.
Because stickleback are easily studied in the wild as well, this research team
can take the unique step of linking laboratory genetics back to gene function in
their natural environment. The researchers will train undergraduates, graduate
students, and researchers from around the world, via new online communities and
in-person courses. The project will also build infrastructure (a stock center)
to perpetuate research-useful populations and provide research experiences for
Native American students and communities, exposing them to scientific studies of
local native animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stickleback are a leading model in
organismal biology for several reasons: 1. Marine populations independently
colonized many diverse coastal watersheds, yielding exceptional phenotypic
variation from a massively replicated natural experiment. 2. Ancestral alleles
persist in modern oceanic populations, enabling genetic mapping of adaptive
traits in known ecological contexts. 3. Stickleback are easy to breed and
manipulate in large numbers in the lab and in nature. 4. Published genomes,
transcriptomes, and microbiomes provide references for robust candidate gene
identification and probe development. Consequently, hundreds of researchers
study the genetics of stickleback adaptation. However, this research is largely
confined to correlative approaches: QTL mapping, divergence mapping, and
association studies. It remains rare for researchers to validate suspected
candidate genes using experimental gene manipulation. To enable functional
genomic studies of stickleback, this project will refine methods for gene
editing. First, the research team will use transcriptomics and ChIP-Seq to
improve genome annotation, to better locate candidate genes. Second, they will
develop methods for more efficient gene editing with CRISPR-Cas9 delivered via
embryo microinjection or cell culture transfection, or using viral-mediated gene
transfer. Finally, the team will construct a stock center where natural and
transgenic lines can be maintained and shipped to users, enabling studies on
standardized genetic backgrounds spanning sticklebacks? natural diversity. The
work will be disseminated via webinars, methods blogs, cross training of
students, and a large lab course. This will provide research training to
undergraduates, graduate students, postdocs, and colleagues around the world, as
well as Native American communities in Alaska.