* 1915807
* Detecting and Inverting Magnetic Waves for the Structure and Dynamics of Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Bruce Buffett, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2022
* USD 237,292.00

Fluctuations in the Earth's internal magnetic field are known to occur over a
broad range of time scales. Magnetic reversals are detected in the geological
record at irregular intervals of roughly several hundred thousand years, whereas
modern ground-based observations reveal abrupt changes in the magnetic field
over just a few years. Higher fidelity records from recent satellite missions
now suggest that the abrupt changes in the magnetic field occur more frequently
than previously believed. These events affect our ability to forecast the
magnetic field, yet the origin of these disturbances is poorly understood. One
viable interpretation involves waves at the top of the core. The investigators
have found several types of waves that account for the periods and spatial
patterns of the magnetic disturbance. The goal of this research is to detect
these waves in geomagnetic observations and to recover estimates for the wave
propagation speeds. This information will enhance our ability to forecast the
magnetic field, and it will also provide unique insights into the physical state
of the Earth's core, which will improve our understanding of how the magnetic
field is generated by convection in the core. The project will support the
research of a Hispanic graduate student at the University of California,
Berkeley. This student will be introduced to advanced data analysis and
computational methods, as well as parallel computing and scientific
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose to use
observations from the SWARM satellite to identify the origin of rapid
geomagnetic fluctuations in the equatorial region of the Earth's core. They
hypothesize that these fluctuations are a result of waves at the top of the
core, and plan to adopt several types of wave models to interpret the
geomagnetic signals. The investigators intend to use the wave models to extract
information about the physical conditions that prevail near the core-mantle
boundary, including the possible presence of stable stratification. They also
seek to characterize the source mechanism for the waves because it connects the
wave amplitudes to convective processes deeper in the core. The researchers also
plan to search for evidence of topography on the core-mantle boundary using
high-fidelity records of time variations in the geomagnetic field. Recovery of
information about the topography on the core-mantle boundary would offer
unexpected constraints on the style of convection in the lowermost
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.