* 1915063
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Foundations for Caregiver-in-the-loop Suppression of Non-Informative Alarms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* James Won, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2023
* USD 217,825.00

Systems used to continuously monitor vital signs in hospitals and home settings
generate alarms intended to warn caregivers, clinicians in the hospital, or
parents at home of conditions that warrant their immediate attention. However,
less than 1% of these alarms are considered actionable or informative, which has
led to clinical alarm fatigue being ranged as one of the Top 10 Health
Technology Hazards. While there have been advances in human factors, operational
factors, and technical factors independently, their interdependencies have yet
to be collectively considered. Consequently, current alarm suppression systems
aimed at addressing clinical alarm fatigue are generally not extensible, suffer
from low adoption rates, and/or have poor performance in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop foundations for the
design of next generation smart alarms. Smart Alarms 2.0 will utilize caregiver-
in-the-loop alarm suppression systems to reduce the frequency of non-informative
alarms in-clinic and at home. Realizing an effective caregiver-in-the-loop alarm
suppression system requires fundamental advances in robust alarm suppression
design methodologies and caregiver-in-the-loop modeling and analysis. The
potential impact of the proposed design and analysis techniques is evaluated in
medical scenarios for alarm suppression applications, spanning pediatric wards
and at-home monitoring of Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) patients. This
project will lay the foundations for designing caregiver-in-the-loop alarm
systems in which physicians, nurses, and parents monitor the right children, at
the right times, using optimal alarm settings to maximize
informativeness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.