* 1915011
* Symmetry, Geometry, and Topology of Quantum Many-Body States for Quantum Computation
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Akimasa Miyake, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 222,635.00

Information processing devices, like computers, have become ubiquitous and
indispensable in modern life. A new promising paradigm, called quantum
information processing (QIP), takes advantage of microscopic quantum variables
(such as spins of electrons) to encode information. Counterintuitive quantum
effects, such as superposition and quantum correlation or entanglement, enable
us to process information with shades of gray, as compared with conventional
black-or-white (so-called 0-or-1) logic, and so to attain drastic improvements
over conventional devices. However, there are two major challenges to this
paradigm. One is to figure out how to scale up further QIP devices, building on
several current experimental platforms made of dozens of quantum bits. The other
is to identify the information processing tasks for which QIP devices surpass
conventional computers. The goal of this project is to address these key issues
from the perspective of quantum many-body theory of macroscopic systems. It is
advantageous, for example, to recognize that superconductivity and magnetism are
quantum many-body phenomena that can be viewed and interpreted using quantum
information concepts. In particular, it has been recently discovered that
strongly frustrated quantum spin systems which manifest certain symmetries and
topological phenomena might function as a quantum computer. Through this
concrete example, the project seeks a deep connection between macroscopic
quantum orders and quantum advantage in computation and simulation, by analyzing
the important roles of symmetry, geometry, and topology. This research will also
contribute to the knowledge base of quantum information science and to the
training of future scientists in a highly interdisciplinary field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental interplay between entanglement and
measurement lies at the heart of quantum information science. While the
complexity of entanglement represents a uniquely quantum resource, its
characteristic nonclassical features only reveal themselves through measurement.
From Bell's inequality to recent quantum simulations of the so-called boson-
sampling problem, landmark results of quantum information science have all
relied upon balancing these two contrasting ingredients to practical effect. The
framework of measurement-based quantum computation (MBQC) is convenient to study
such an interplay and to analyze the origin of quantum speed-up in computation.
Recently, it has been recognized that certain macroscopic entanglement, which
would be naturally found in quantum spin liquid phases of frustrated quantum
spin systems called symmetry-protected topological orders (SPTO), is capable of
becoming a resource for MBQC. The project takes advantage of this unique,
concrete connection between macroscopic quantum orders and computational
complexity, to answer a key question "How do symmetry, geometry, and topology
embodied in SPTO empower quantum computation and simulation?" Considering
different lattice geometries and corresponding sublattice symmetries, the
project will develop the classification of SPTO and analyze the associated
structure of quantum cellular automata. These characterizations establish a
direct route to quantum advantage using the order parameters of SPTO for certain
short-depth quantum circuits. The approach would be effective to tackle two key
challenges in the era of noisy intermediate-scale quantum technology, in that
the natural structure of SPTO is explored to realize robust macroscopic
entanglement with well-scalable control as well as complex computation and
simulation beyond possible classical simulation. Broadly, the project cross-
fertilizes two research fields, quantum information science and quantum many-
body physics, timely at the coming age of quantum simulation when quantum many-
body physics suggests many problems which quantum computers should be more
efficient to solve than conventional computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.