* 1915363
* Collaborative Research: Empowering faculty to run online learning experiments
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Duane Nykamp, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,506,108.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by creating and improving open educational content in
mathematics that resides on an open data-driven educational technology platform.
The project will empower faculty to design and implement online learning
experiments to test the effectiveness of new content and innovative teaching
strategies. The data on how students use and learn from these materials will
help instructors make effective use of the material in the classroom and enable
authors to develop engaging educational experiences to maximize learning. Using
this platform, instructors will be able to readily modify their materials in
line with rapidly changing STEM fields and to adapt those materials to students'
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop the Distributed Open
Education Network (Doenet), which is, at its core, a mechanism for measuring and
sharing student interactions with web pages and storing anonymized data in an
open distributed data warehouse. The Doenet platform will include tools for (a)
authoring interactive educational content, (b) conducting educational research
using the content, and (c) discovering the most effective content based on the
research results. Doenet will reduce barriers to the development and access of
online content and learning experiments. Faculty and researchers from a variety
of institutions will employ Doenet to develop open interactive educational
content and conduct small scale learning experiments, including experiments to
investigate the influence of different ways of guiding students through the
interactive content. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This
project falls in the program's Engaged Student Learning track, which enables the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.