* 1915481
* SCH: INT: Simulation and Decision-Analysis Algorithms for Integrated Modeling of Diseases: A healthy lives for all approach
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Peter Haas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Smart and Connected Health (SCH) award will contribute to the advancement
of the national health and welfare by studying the effectiveness of public
health investments in impacting a collection of related chronic diseases. It is
generally accepted that social conditions, including access to essential public
services, early childhood development and education, economic and food security
and environmental conditions, are important determinants of individual health.
Referred to collectively as Social Determinants of Health (SDOH), research in
social epidemiology has shown that structural interventions aimed at improving
SDOH can prevent diseases, thereby improving well-being. This project addresses
the important interactions between a variety of risk factors for chronic
diseases, and develops mathematical models and decision-support methods that
enable economic analysis of cost-effective combinations of structural
interventions as part of an overall public health strategy. Focusing on a
complex of high-burden chronic diseases with viral origins (e.g., HIV, HPV, HBV
and HCV infections), this project aims to develop and validate a multi-disease
model that captures the syndemic nature of transmission and disease progression
and enables better prediction of the overall effectiveness of structural
interventions. The research team will exploit ongoing collaborations with key
staff at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health
Organization who are potential stakeholders in this work. The project engages
both engineering and computer science students in multi-disciplinary research
aimed at developing innovative decision-analytic models for informing national
and global public health decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objectives are to: 1) develop a computational framework for integrated multi-
disease prediction modeling; 2) develop new methodologies for parameterizing the
natural progression of interacting communicable and non-communicable diseases in
a population influenced by socioeconomic and demographic factors; and 3) develop
a dynamic decision-analytic model for evaluation of structural interventions.
The computational framework combines agent-based simulation and compartmental
analysis to incorporate viral transmission and progression. This project employs
techniques from system dynamics, machine learning, graph theory, and
optimization to extend current state-of-the-art in simulation and
parameterization methods. Data on disease incidence, morbidity and mortality
will be obtained from national surveillance and survey databases for model
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.