* 1915015
* NSF-BSF: Efficiently Modeling Continuous Quantum Measurements of High-Dimensional Multi-Qubit Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Justin Dressel, Chapman University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 321,000.00

Modern computers developed rapidly, leading to a historically unprecedented
wealth of technology. This technological revolution has improved standards of
living globally and has become a cornerstone of the modern economy. Recently,
the rapid growth of computational power has slowed, in part because the size of
hardware components has shrunk to microscopic scales. At microscopic scales,
hardware behaves according to the laws of quantum mechanics, which are quite
different from the laws expected for traditional computers. These differences
have impeded continued growth using established hardware techniques, but also
allow for new possibilities. Efforts are ongoing to develop a paradigm of
hardware that leverages the nuances of quantum mechanics to accelerate
computation. This project contributes to these quantum computing efforts by
addressing a pressing simulation problem for superconducting quantum circuits,
which are a promising candidate for scalable quantum technology. The difficulty
in accurately describing such a quantum circuit grows rapidly with the size of
the system, making hardware design challenging. If successful, this work will
provide numerical methods and open source software that dramatically simplify
this modeling task for common scenarios, which should help accelerate the future
development of superconducting quantum circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large
numbers of parameters are generally required to describe quantum circuits,
making brute force simulation challenging. A particularly important example of
this high dimensionality occurs during the standard measurement protocol for
quantum circuits. In this protocol, traveling microwave fields couple with
microwave resonators, which in turn couple with nonlinear oscillators that have
several energy levels. As the traveling field is collected, the quantum system
continuously evolves in accordance with the measured stochastic signal,
producing complicated dynamics. This project will develop efficient methods for
simulating these continuous quantum measurements using several design phases.
After developing a full reference numerical model for the microwave
amplification and readout circuitry on a multi-component chip, we will develop
simplified semi-classical representations that compress the high dimensionality
into a smaller number of parameters. These simplifications will extend known
weak-field coherent steady-state approximations of the microwave dynamics to
account for nonlinear effects. This project will explore the use of machine
learning methods, particularly recurrent neural networks, to automatically learn
how to compress the dynamics efficiently. In parallel, undergraduates will
perform outreach to the local community through demonstrations, videos, and more
to raise public literacy of quantum mechanics. This project will deliver open-
source software, online interactive notes, and tutorials as part of its broad
outreach effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.