* 1915174
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Fractal Physics of the Cell Cortex
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2020,04/30/2024
* John Crocker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Angel Garcia
* 04/30/2024
* USD 254,581.00

This project will investigate fundamental aspects of the ways that living cells
interact with their physical environment. It is known that cells exhibit a wide
range of mechanical responses to inputs such as external forces and the
stiffness of the tissues in which they live, but models that attempt to describe
the complex mechanical properties of cells are incomplete and cannot predict key
aspects of cellular behavior. Improved physical understanding of cellular
mechanical behavior is important as such activity drives both normal biological
process, such as the development of embryos, as well as pathological ones
including the spread of cancer. This project is a collaboration between
researchers at Johns Hopkins University and the University of Pennsylvania. It
will build on a recent discovery by the Investigators that promises new
understanding of cell mechanics by exploiting analogies between the physics of
cells and the dynamics of a class of materials termed soft glasses. These
materials exhibit intermittent motion in response to external stresses, over a
wide range of length and time scales, in a manner that is reminiscent of
earthquakes or avalanches. The research team recently observed such phenomena in
cells using a novel approach that can measure both cells’ intrinsic mechanical
properties and the highly dynamic and fluctuating forces they exert on their
environment with unprecedented accuracy. In this project, new experiments with
this tool will be used to guide the development of a new physical model of key
aspects of cellular mechanics. This model will then be used to advance
understanding of the origin of cells’ physical responses to critical cues, such
as the stiffness of their environment. An important outcome of this project will
be the interdisciplinary research training it will provide for its participants,
including a postdoctoral fellow, graduate students, Masters students and
undergraduates, that will prepare them for careers in academia and industry. The
project will also provide educational opportunities for Baltimore City high
school students through research internships at Johns Hopkins University, and
interactive instructional materials will be developed for K-12 use and for
science outreach initiatives in Philadelphia sponsored by the University of
Pennsylvania.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The actomyosin cortex and associated
machinery of living cells is a remarkable example of a self-assembled active
material. This project will develop a long-standing analogy between the
actomyosin cortex and soft-glassy materials (SGMs). Co-PI Crocker has recently
developed the first successful model to explain the unusual mechanics of SGMs
from first principles. Initial experiments by the team, using active micropost
array detectors recently developed by Co-PI Reich, which provide a uniquely
powerful experimental platform for studying active cytoskeletal dynamics,
suggest that cortical mechanics and fluctuations closely resemble those in the
SGM model. The goals of this project are (i) to make a detailed experimental
study of the mechanics and microscopic fluctuations of the cell cortex; (ii) to
use that data to develop, refine and validate a new mechanistic model of
emergent cortical mechanics that carries over the recent insights from SGMs to
the cortex; and (iii) to use this model to understand cellular mechanical
“outside-in” signaling in the context of cells’ ability to match their internal
stiffness to that of their surroundings. This will enable testing a novel
hypothesis: that like SGMs, cortical active matter behavior is the consequence
of the system’s high-dimensional energy landscape giving rise to fractal energy
minimizing paths, and that the evolution toward mechanical equilibrium in this
fractal energy landscape leads to cells’ emergent dynamics and rheology. By
moving the description of subcellular cortical dynamics beyond the
phenomenological and providing a bridge between the well understood nanoscale
molecular biophysics of actomyosin and cell-level mechanics, this work will help
enable further understanding of more complex cell-level functions such as
motility and tissue morphogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.