* 1915038
* Gravity, Holography and Strongly Coupled Quantum Matter.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Sera Cremonini, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Sera Cremonini at Lehigh
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our best understanding of gravity currently
relies on Einstein's theory of general relativity. Despite its many successes,
the theory is not equipped to describe gravity at all length scales --- it fails
when quantum-mechanical effects and gravitational effects are equally important.
The development of string theory and of deep connections between certain
theories of gravity and purely quantum-mechanical theories have given us new
insights into the basic building blocks of nature and the structure of
spacetime. They have also led to valuable new tools to probe quantum systems
whose constituents interact strongly with each other --- systems which are
notoriously difficult to examine using standard techniques. The goal of
Professor Cremonini's research is to advance our understanding of quantum
gravity and the microscopic structure of spacetime. In addition, this research
aims to unveil the fundamental mechanisms driving the unconventional behavior of
strongly interacting quantum materials such as high-temperature superconductors.
Progress in this direction can lead to the development of new technologies that
can benefit society as a whole. Thus, this research has potential long-term
applications to technology and industry as well as fundamental science, thereby
advancing the national interest in all of these areas. The proposed work will
also have significant broader impacts. Professor Cremonini will involve graduate
students in her research, providing critical training for junior physicists in
the early stages of their careers. She will also share exciting research
advances with the broader community through public lectures and incorporate
research highlights into her teaching through the development of new courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the duration of this research project, Professor
Cremonini will address these questions working within the framework of
holography, building on her expertise in both fundamental and phenomenological
aspects of the duality. The proposed projects will involve studies of
renormalization-group flow for non-relativistic geometries, extensions of the
holographic dictionary to settings with fewer symmetries and the construction of
new infrared geometries, holographic realizations of symmetry broken phases, and
studies of transport in strongly interacting phases of matter. The projects are
structured along several complementary directions which are deeply intertwined
with each other. Each direction addresses a different aspect of the research
program through both short-term and long-term projects, using both analytical
and numerical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.