* 1915845
* Nonparametric Curve Estimation in Presence of Missing Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sam Efromovich, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 190,000.00

The project focuses on statistical activities motivated by medical and
engineering applications in the presence of missing data, a familiar and often
inevitable complication in statistical analysis. The first main activity is
motivated by the analysis of functional magnet resonance images of the human
brain. The project will develop and test statistical procedures that allow
doctors and bioengineers to take into account missing data with potential
applications in understanding the neural plasticity and developing new methods
for diagnosis and treatment of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. The second
main activity is the statistical analysis of radiation and drug therapy of
cancer cells and finding efficient treatments for prostate and breast cancers.
The third main activity is to develop new statistical methods for time series
analysis with environmental applications in wastewater treatment and reducing
pollution. The project has the potential for impacts on environmental,
actuarial, and cancer and brain studies. Graduate students will participate in
the project, and obtained results will be disseminated through publications,
presentation at conferences and the distribution of free R
packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on several topics in
nonparametric curve estimation in the presence of missing data. Firstly, missing
may be destructive when based solely on the data no consistent estimation is
possible, and then an exploratory sampling is needed to unlock information
contained in missing data. The project will develop methodology, theory and
methods of efficient (minimal cost) exploratory sampling that allows matching
the performance of an oracle that knows the missing mechanism. Secondly, missing
always decreases available information. The PI plans to develop theory and
methods for the sequential estimation with assigned risk and minimal stopping
time, which becomes an attractive and feasible remedy when a priori knowledge of
the size of available observations is precluded by missing. Thirdly, the PI
plans to develop a shrinking local minimax methodology for missing data and
construct a new type of data-driven estimators that can attain the faster
minimax rate. Lastly, the project will develop sharp minimax theory and
efficient nonparametric estimator for survival analysis in the presence of
missing data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.