* 1915131
* Innovating Life Sciences Education Through Computational Modeling and Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Wendy Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,896,570.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in excellent undergraduate STEM
education by improving students' training in modeling and quantitative skills.
Workforce sectors from advertising to life science research are drowning in data
and lack employees with the critical thinking and technical skills to manage,
process, analyze, and interpret it. Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education, calls for an increase in technical and systems biology training,
reflecting the shift in life science research to incorporate mathematics and
computer science. Traditional methods are inadequate for teaching complex
subject matter. Thus, it is increasingly important for life sciences education
to evolve to equip students with skills to reason mechanistically and
quantitatively, and to answer emerging life science questions. The long-term
goal of this project is to transform the way biology students learn about
complex living systems by enabling them to use computational modeling, both to
acquire and to apply scientific knowledge. The project will build on successes
from previous NSF-funded efforts that resulted in a new simulation- and
modeling-based approach to learning about complex biological processes. This
effort is facilitated through Cell Collective software that makes computational
modeling accessible to any student and instructor, regardless of setting or
prior modeling experience. This project will extend previous work involving Cell
Collective by focusing on training and engaging instructors in its use with
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
framework for understanding the barriers and impact of instructors deploying
computational modeling and simulation lessons via Cell Collective to students
across institutions with demographically diverse student populations. Teaching
and learning challenges will be simultaneously addressed and minimized through
new user-centric features in the Cell Collective software. Examples of features
already identified include accessibility of the technology and streamlined
access for students to modeling and simulation lessons across different life
science courses. Furthermore, this project will provide professional development
for 50-80 instructors about how to overcome challenges to integrating
computational modeling and how to implement these tools in the classroom. It is
expected that instructors who participate in the project will be better prepared
to support the shift toward more quantitative and systems-level education in
life sciences. It is also expected that the broad adoption of Cell Collective
for teaching undergraduate life science topic will, over time, help to transform
biology instruction so that it better prepares students to enter the modern
data-driven workforce. The project thus has the potential to support United
States innovation and economic growth. Resources developed in the project will
be made available to researchers and instructors interested in incorporating
computational modeling into their own learning technologies and methodologies.
This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
Program: Education and Human Resources, which supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.