* 1915872
* Bio-inspired Exoskeletons and Safety in Human-Exoskeleton Cooperation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Nils Hakansson, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2023
* USD 323,997.00

The natural patterns of human movement depend on interactions between the
nervous system, muscles and skeleton. A problem with any of these elements--
perhaps due to medical conditions, illnesses or injuries--can lead to movement
limitations. In such cases, people may follow physical therapy procedures to
recover the loss or change in movement ability. Currently, robots and
exoskeletons are used in physical therapy to help individuals return to their
prior level of functioning and to assist them to do activities-of-daily living
(ADL). However, these robots and exoskeletons do not align with the human
anatomical joints, which can result in discomfort or injury to the user and
affect the success of the rehabilitation therapy. In this research project,
human joint motions during ADL will be studied, recorded, and analyzed using
video motion capture data and musculoskeletal computer simulations. The analyzed
human motion patterns will be used to inspire the design of bio-exoskeletons
that are capable of mimicking the complex 3D motions involved in human movement.
The bio-inspired exoskeletons developed will then be compared to the traditional
exoskeletons designed to mimic a human joint. The outcome of the comparison
study will help to advance the knowledge in the design and utilization of bio-
exoskeletons for the improved synergy between the human-exoskeleton systems in
medical, industrial, and military applications. To inspire the new generation
and STEM education, findings will also be shared with the public via
publication, exhibitions at the Exploration Place science museum in Wichita, and
university sponsored summer camps for K-12 students. Additionally, at the
university level, the team will integrate research findings from the proposed
work into the undergraduate and graduate courses to motivate students to perform
systematic research and to reduce conceptual learning barriers of assistive
devices through the implementation of Project-Based-Learning (PBL) approaches in
the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
investigate a correlation model between parameters involved in human joint
movements in the fitting and alignment of exoskeletons to a human body for an
effective human-exoskeleton cooperation. Traditionally, exoskeletons are
designed to align with the human joint axes of motion by assigning each human
joint with an equivalent exoskeleton joint (e.g. a hinge joint for the elbow)
that assumes that the location of the axis can be accurately known, and that
such a fixed axis exists for the range of motion of the joint or set of joints.
Unfortunately, this is not always the case. The compound motion of joints makes
their alignment with an exoskeleton more difficult and misalignment can create
large stresses on the attached systems and underlying human anatomy, giving rise
to the need for novel exoskeleton design strategies that permit the complex 3D
motions independent of anatomical measures and landmarks. To address this need,
the Research Plan is organized under four tasks. The FIRST Task is to collect
joint movement parameters involved in human joint movements (hand and arm) while
performing desired limb trajectories. Conventional motion capture systems
(MoCap) will be combined with a mobile MoCap system that uses sensors to obtain
inertial measurements that are communicated wirelessly to a mobile data logger,
e.g., a smartphone. The data base assembled will provide 1) fundamental
knowledge on the underlying human limb motion and 2) techniques to identify and
select functional limb motion for a desired task. The SECOND Task is to analyze,
model, and simulate the parameters involved in human joint movements using a
musculoskeletal software application. The parameters of an arm, wrist, and hand
musculoskeletal model will be scaled using the OpenSim Scale Model tool to best
fit the experimentally measured subject mass and marker positions. The
simulations provide 1) muscle force interaction and joint reaction forces during
the execution of the desired motions and 2) a tool for the identification of
sources for misalignment and fitting challenges. The THIRD Task is to
investigate bio-inspired exoskeletons based on the related human joint
parameters related to the desired trajectory of the human limb. This task will
provide: 1) geometrical and algebraic insight\representation of the human limb
workspace based on the motion captured data and 2) an atlas of mechanism
topologies and their workspaces to closely approximate the geometrical pattern
of the human limb workspace. The FOURTH Task is to prototypes and investigate
the correlation between parameters and exoskeleton fitting and alignments. A
bio-inspired prototype will be fabricated using an additive manufacturing
process followed by integration of electronic components for real-time control
and feedback. The bio-inspired exoskeletons will be compared to a 3 DOF joint-
based exoskeleton previously developed by the investigators. The exoskeletons
will be mounted on a wheelchair and be used in human subject testing on persons
with reduced upper limb mobility, and the ADL performed will provide datasets
such as trajectory path, EMG signals, FMG readings, and effectiveness and
comparative analysis using the two different exoskeleton mechanisms. Data
collected will be used to 1) develop a correlation model for the two
exoskeletons independently and 2) to assess the intervention of each of the
exoskeleton designs (the task-based approach based on the bioinspired method and
joint-to-joint alignment-based design approaches).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Disabilities and Rehabilitation Engineering
(DARE) program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.