* 1915219
* Particle and Quantum Field Theory Investigations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Alberto Sirlin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,050,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professors S. Dubovskiy, G.
Gabadadze, M. Porrati, and A. Sirlin at New York University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities of these four investigators center
around several topics aimed at answering some of the truly fundamental questions
in physics: How to best determine the fundamental constants of nature? What is
the correct theory of gravity? What is gravity at cosmic scales? How is
cosmology constrained by string theory or quantum gravity? Are there different
models that explain the past and present accelerated expansion of the Universe?
How can we describe strongly interacting subatomic matter? Can quantum gravity
be solved in simple "toy model" settings? The PIs will work towards answering
these questions both in parallel and in collaboration, involving postdocs and
graduate students in the research process. As a result, research in this area
advances the national interest by promoting the progress of science in one of
its most fundamental directions: the discovery and understanding of new physical
laws. This project is also envisioned to have significant broader impacts,
including the training of a new generation of scientists at all levels.
Dissemination of results will also include review articles for specialized and
popular science journals, organization of workshops, video- and Internet-based
courses, and popular lectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor
Dubovskiy will continue to study many aspects of a special deformation of
quantum field theories, called "T-T bar," and its applications to two-
dimensional gravity, confining strings, and to a novel perspective on the
hierarchy and cosmological-constant problems. Professor Gabadadze will search
for possible UV-complete theories of massive gravity, and study holographic QCD
as well as a theory of condensed-matter systems giving rise to equations for
their sound modes that are identical to the ones Hawking solved to predict
black-hole radiation. Professor Porrati will study simple models of gravity and
supergravity, the infrared dynamics of gravity and ague theories, inflation in
supergravity, and the link between massive gravity in three dimensions and
conformal field theories. Professor Sirlin will apply a novel approach to
evaluate electroweak corrections in important elementary particle-physics
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.