* 1915727
* Organization and Dynamics in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers and Model Membrane Architectures
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Photosynthetic reaction center (RC) is a remarkable machine that absorbs light
and transfers electrons across a biological membrane. Membranes are very thin
insulators, so this process is like charging a capacitor. Once charged, the
capacitor discharges by driving the biosynthesis of stable energetic molecules
or fuels. All life on earth depends on this process. This research will lead to
a better understanding of the mechanisms by which photosynthetic reaction
centers harvest and store solar energy, and the development of model membrane
assemblies that mimic natural biological membranes and their interactions. This
project will modulate the properties of key amino acids near to the reactive
chromophores in the RC to systematically understand why electrons take the
pathway they do and by what precise mechanism. A significant part of this work
involves the development of new experimental and theoretical methods that will
have a broad impact in other areas of science and technology. This research
program will continue to support the development of a generation of young
scientists with diverse backgrounds, primarily graduate students, who go on to
productive careers at the interface of the physical sciences and biology,
biotechnology, and energy-related science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on two related topics; the mechanism of charge separation in bacterial
photosynthetic reaction centers, and the development of novel methods to
assemble and image model membrane architectures. This project will implement
site specific modification of functionally important amino acids with non-
canonical amino acids and the introduction of nitrile spectator probes for
electron transfer and membrane potential. This project will continue development
of a "membrane interferometer", designed for simultaneous optical and electrical
measurements on single integral membrane proteins such as ion channels, and
develop novel methods to measure lipid diffusion on sub-micron sized membranes
to explore the effects of curvature on diffusion. This project is supported by
the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.