* 1915058
* Auroral Radio Emissions: A Window Into Electron Acceleration Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* James LaBelle, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 198,994.00

The Northern Lights or aurorae result when energetic particles interact with the
atmosphere ? producing a colorful sight in the night sky. The Arctic region near
the North Pole is a prime location for viewing aurorae. This project is a
follow-on to an NSF funded program that deployed and calibrated a receiver array
in Toolik Lake, Alaska. This instrumentation will be used to view the aurorae
and make new discoveries about how they are created. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained and the scientific datasets will be shared with the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant manifestation of high-latitude
electromagnetic energy and particle flows is the terrestrial aurora which
involves many acceleration processes affecting electrons and ions. These
processes occur in both the magnetosphere and the ionosphere and are a key
component of magnetosphere-ionosphere (M-I) coupling. Radio emissions from the
accelerated auroral electron beams, with their complicated temporal and spatial
variations, provide a window into the accelerated electron distributions and the
processes that produce them. Auroral Medium Frequency Burst (MFB) emissions are
especially promising in this regard because they are associated with substorm
expansion arcs and exhibit structure on a range of time scales overlapping with
those of Alfvenically accelerated suprathermal electron bursts and other
phenomena such as flickering aurora. MFB is, however, relatively poorly
understood: its source altitudes is not known, and although a mechanism has been
proposed that suggests a connection to Alfvenic aurora, it has not been
conclusively confirmed by observations. The proposed experiments, which will
answer these and other outstanding questions about MFB and auroral radio
emissions, are critical steps toward using MFB and its time and frequency
structure as a diagnostic of auroral acceleration and nonlinear wave processes,
to answer key questions about the temporal and spatial dynamics of these
processes in the ionospheric context as well as their relation to larger
dynamical processes such as storms and substorms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.