* 1915909
* Collaborative Research: Scale-dependent processes as the drivers for understanding range- and niche-expansion in a widespread native species
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Gil Bohrer, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2023
* USD 115,000.00

Eastern Red Cedar (Juniperus virginiana) is native to the eastern United States,
where this attractive tree has been a popular choice for landscaping. But out in
the Great Plains, Red Cedar is known as the "green glacier", because this slow-
growing species is taking over once-productive grasslands. Ranchers face
substantial economic costs in removing Red Cedar from grazing lands, and it
reduces grassland biodiversity through competition with native species. But how
do you stop a "green glacier"? Populations might be expanding because
environmental variability has altered frost and drought regimes, or because
humans have implemented prairie management practices such as fire suppression,
or even because of changes in the migration patterns of seed-dispersing birds.
It is more likely, however, that many factors are at work. For example,
environmental variability might allow plants to move into a new region, but seed
dispersal by birds could promote population expansion within a region. Rather
than focus on one factor, this study will determine the relative importance of
several causal factors. Data from experiments will be used in a model that
predicts the rate and locations where Red Cedar range expansion is likely to
occur. Findings will be presented to the public at the Holden Arboretum
Scientist Lecture Series and incorporated into Holden Arboretum's "Working with
Nature" K-12 Camp and "Tree Corp" adult workforce development program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncovering scale-dependent mechanisms controlling range
and niche expansion of plants is a key issue in biodiversity research. This work
integrates physiological and ecological processes across scales to determine the
potential for further range expansion. The central hypothesis is that, at a
large spatial scale, changes in prairie management are more important than
physiological climate tolerance for promoting range expansion, while at smaller
scales, biotic factors such as avian dispersal, competition and facilitation are
more important. The spatial scale of variation will be determined using
microsatellites in historical, encroaching and niche expanding populations. The
effects of fire will be examined using long-term data from the Konza Prairie
NSF-LTER, while manipulative and field experiments will determine how the
interaction of frost and drought impact Red Cedar performance. Seed dispersal by
birds and changes in bird migration over time will be examined to determine how
far, and where, birds disseminate Red Cedar. Empirical data will be integrated
into a spatially explicit population-level age/stage matrix model, based on
inputs from structural equation modeling at all three spatial scales, with
spatial resolution determined by the results of microsatellite
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.