* 1915971
* Optical Fiber Grating Characterization for Haptic Sensors in Minimally Invasive Diagnostics and Surgery
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Thomas Gaylord, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

Each day in the United States, on average, 30 women die of ovarian cancer and 80
men of prostate cancer. There is a 55% greater incidence of prostate cancer in
black men than in white men. A major obstacle in the fight against these cancers
is conclusive early detection. Minimally invasive diagnostics provide a
potential solution to this problem. However, without a sense of feel (haptic) of
the relevant bodily region, the medical professional cannot make a complete
informed diagnosis. This leads to lower efficacy and increased danger in some
cases when compared to traditional techniques. To overcome this deficiency,
fiber gratings can potentially be used as haptic feedback sensors to provide the
otherwise missing sense of feeling in minimally invasive procedures. However,
this promising approach is being stymied by a lack of clear information on the
detailed designs needed and how to measure and verify quantitatively that the
required fabrication has been achieved. Until the present, the approach to
fabricate these sensors has been very rudimentary in nature. This research
project takes a major step in quantitatively measuring the physical
characteristics of fiber gratings and then correlating them with the needed
haptic sensing capabilities. This research is directed toward expanding the
safety and efficacy of minimally invasive procedures. Further, there is a
significant additional dividend coming from this research. Namely, the present
methodology could also be used in subsequent surgical procedures if such
procedures are indicated based on the diagnostic results. Overall, this research
is directed toward more accurate diagnostic procedures based on a quantitative
understanding of fiber gratings and their quantitative use as haptic sensors in
medical practice. This research project incorporates numerous female and
minority students. Namely, &lt;br/&gt;1) a program with Agnes Scott College
(women's college) to provide research experiences in micro-fabrication and
quantitative phase imaging,&lt;br/&gt;2) the NSF-funded Summer Undergraduate
Research in Engineering/Science (SURE) program that gives minorities exposure to
on-line journals and library databases, reference management software, and
successful research approaches in quantitative phase
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Ovarian and prostate cancers
are challenging to diagnose at their early stages. More effective diagnosis for
these cancers would obviously enable improved techniques for other cancers and
medical conditions as well. Minimally invasive diagnostics provide a potential
solution for this problem. However, these diagnostic techniques largely lack a
sense of feel (haptic) for the medical professional. Fiber optic grating sensors
can potentially provide the needed haptic feedback. However, at the present
time, it is not known what detailed fiber grating designs are needed and how to
measure and verify quantitatively the fabricated structures. In order to address
this deficiency, the goal of this research project is to apply quantitative
phase imaging (QPI) to develop methodologies that will characterize concurrently
the refractive index distributions and residual stress distributions in fiber
gratings. The new methods being developed in this research project are
extensions of the tomographic deconvolution phase microscopy (TDPM) approach
conceived and first implemented at Georgia Tech. Fiber configurations to be
treated include 1) single gratings in single fibers, 2) multiple gratings in
multiple combined fibers, and 3) multiple gratings in multi-core fibers. These
measurements represent the first concurrent determination of the cross-sectional
refractive-index and stress distributions at the proposed high level of accuracy
and high spatial resolution. The fiber Bragg gratings (FBGs) and long-period
fiber gratings (LPFGs) formed by various processes are further being analyzed to
provide insights into the effects of fabrication on the performance of these
gratings as a haptic feedback sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.