* 1915763
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Multi-regulation computation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

This interdisciplinary project investigates whether existing cryptographic
techniques for analyzing siloed data comport with participants' legal
restrictions on data disclosure. Secure multi-party computation (MPC) is a
technique from cryptography that allows several participants, each with
sensitive information, to analyze their data collectively without ever sharing
it. Several companies, governments, and non-profit organizations have adopted
MPC to provide people with socially beneficial information (e.g., computing the
city-wide wage gap while hiding individual salaries) that may otherwise be
impossible or near-impossible to learn due to the sensitivity of the raw data.
MPC is well-suited toward analyses of protected education, healthcare, or
judicial data; however, deployments of MPC in these areas are scarce, in part
due to the difficulty of assessing whether MPC technology suffices to meet legal
regulations on the disclosure of data that includes personally identifiable
information. The core question for this project is to develop MPC technology
that simultaneously provides cryptographic and legal protection of sensitive
input data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three phases, with a
bidirectional flow of knowledge among cybersecurity and legal researchers in
each phase. First, the investigators are identifying use cases in which
information to be analyzed using MPC algorithms is subject to multiple state,
federal, and international regulations that impose privacy restrictions and
limit data sharing, and they examine the relevant legal constraints on
information use. Second, the investigators are designing MPC protocols that, in
addition to the usual cryptographic security notion that each party's view can
be simulated, also guarantee the impossibility of reconstructing any legally-
protected information under legally-compliant assumptions of trust and
collusion. Third, the investigators are examining critically whether the newly-
developed protocols provide sufficient protection to allow parties to use
regulated data without triggering additional legal constraints on data use, by
analyzing the legal requirements and potential policy objections. This three-
phase process will pave the way for greater adoption of MPC by demonstrating to
the legal community that MPC can improve data analysis without triggering
additional burdensome legal obligations or policy
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.