* 1915257
* Exploring Second-Chance Testing as a Practical Form of Mastery Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Craig Zilles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by investigating how second-chance testing improves student
learning and retention. The significance of this work is rooted in the
observation that some students fail courses, even though they have to ability to
succeed and willingness to work. These students often fail because they
overestimate the adequacy of their preparation for an exam or misunderstand
course expectations. This failure can prevent these qualified students from
persisting in STEM majors and joining the STEM workforce. Second-chance testing
is the practice of allowing students to take an exam and then giving them
feedback on their performance. They are then allowed to further study the
material and then take a second, equivalent exam for some form of grade
replacement. Preliminary data show that second-chance testing improves average
exam scores and reduces exam failure rates. This project will investigate best
practices with respect to second-chance testing and characterize its benefits.
The project will also study whether second-chance testing disproportionately
helps students who are traditionally under-served by existing course structures.
It will also study what can be done to help instructors adopt this
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second-chance testing can be a powerful technique
because it exploits both the "testing effect" (increased long-term memory
resulting from deliberate retrieval practice) and "test-potentiated learning"
(increased ability of a learner to benefit from an opportunity to restudy a
concept). In addition, it offers the potential to mitigate students' failures on
exams due to their inability to correctly assess course expectations and their
level of readiness. Preliminary data at the University of Illinois on second-
chance testing has shown improvements in student performance measured by mean
exam scores and a reduction in exam failure rates. In addition, this data showed
that variations in the grading policy can exert considerable influence on which
students choose to take the second chance exam. The goals of this project are to
more rigorously measure the benefits of second-chance testing, map out the scope
of grading policies and their impacts, and better understand the factors
involved in faculty adoption of second-chance testing. The project will focus on
three research questions. First, how much does second-chance testing improve
students' cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes? Second, how do second-chance
grading policies affect students' cognitive and non-cognitive outcomes on first-
chance and subsequent second-chance exams? Third, does second-chance testing
disproportionately help students who are traditionally under-served by single
opportunity exam structures? The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.