* 1915819
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Developing the Concept of a Near Misses Analysis Capability and NTSB-Model for Cyber Incidents
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Stephen Flynn, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,942.00

The idea of extracting information out of cyber incidents that can be used to
prevent other, similar incidents at other organizations has often been compared
to creating a National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) for cybersecurity
incidents. This project would further this idea by holding a workshop engaged in
exploring the barriers to information sharing and data use among organizations,
the possible costs and rewards of such a board, the steps required for
implementation through policy proposals, and alternative mechanisms, other than
a security incident sharing board. The workshop focuses on the financial or
banking industry. It will achieve enhanced understanding of cyber incident
sharing in industry and have a broader impact of increased partnerships between
academia, industry, and others through the workshop activities. Workshop
participants will be invited from government agencies, victim organizations,
financial services organizations, cybersecurity providers, incident responders,
and the insurance industry. Further workshops will be planned with the ultimate
goal being to provide a substantial new source of data on cyber incidents for
research in security, for organizations that must protect themselves against
cyber incidents, and for the security industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.