* 1915748
* HFIR-SNS Advanced Neutron Diffraction and Scattering 2019 Workshop (HANDS2019)
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Flora Meilleur, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2022
* USD 10,329.00

This workshop will educate, train and enable a new and diverse generation of
researchers for the use of neutrons with state-of-the-art instrumentation and
software as applied biological problems. The use of neutrons offers excellent
potential to provide previously elusive information about complex biological
systems unobtainable with other measurement tools. The workshop is specifically
designed for structural biologists and biophysicist. The topics will cover a
broad length and time scales relevant to structural biology. One day symposium
of talks by leading scientists will be followed by four days of hands on
experimentation using neutron beam lines. The organizers will recruit female and
members of underrepresented groups to broaden the user base for the use of
neutrons in biological research for the future generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;Recent development of high intensity neutron sources and
novel instrumentation will enable to address many of challenges in understanding
complex biological systems and to integrate this information with other
experimental techniques like cryo-EM, NMR and single molecule fluorescence
techniques. A particularly desirable property of neutrons for biology has to do
with hydrogen (H), the most abundant element in biological systems. With just
one electron, hydrogen is all but invisible to x-rays or light. Neutrons, on the
other hand, interact with nuclei, and protons have a relatively strong and
negative scattering length. Furthermore, different sensitivity of neutrons to
hydrogen and deuterium allows for enhanced visibility of specific parts of
complex biological systems through isotopic substitution. This workshop will
educate participants in state-of-the-art neutron scattering techniques,
instrumentation, data analysis and interpretation while exposing the
participants to actual experiments. Techniques included will cover a broad range
of time and length scales encountered in structural biology (from atoms to
cells) rather than focusing on a single type of experimentation. This workshop
is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.