* 1915165
* Toolkit for Characterizing Noisy Quantum Processors and Windows of Quantum Advantage
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Tzu-Chieh Wei, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

Quantum computers offer potential advantages and possibly exponential speedup
over existing classical computers for certain computational tasks. Success in
building large-scale functioning quantum computers will undoubtedly be a
revolution in computer technology. However, many of these applications will
require quantum computers with very small error rates and which use quantum
error corrections for tolerating faults - a technology that is still out of
reach for near-term noisy devices. Nevertheless, there are certain tasks that
near-term quantum processors can perform but are still difficult for the current
best classical computers. The demonstration of a quantum advantage will first
require development of tools characterizing the operation of quantum gates,
state preparation and measurement, as well as the corresponding errors. This
project will integrate these tools to streamline their use in cloud quantum
computers. Understanding the noise and errors also helps to devise mitigation
strategies so as to extract as much as possible the correct computation. This
project will also employ classical simulations to compare the expected outcomes
with runs on quantum computers and analyze schemes for demonstrating potential
quantum advantages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
and assemble a toolkit for near-term quantum information processing that may
yield quantum advantage. In particular, the PI will design and integrate tools
for (1) noisy-gate characterization of tomographic tools, (2) randomized
benchmarking, (3) error mitigation methods. These will be tested in actual runs
on cloud quantum computers. Furthermore, (4) classical simulations will be
developed, such as tensor-network methods, for noisy quantum circuits, and (5)
schemes for quantum supremacy via short-depth quantum circuits will be assessed.
Other new schemes will also be explored that will provide alternative
playgrounds for showing the advantages of quantum devices over classical ones.
Developing a toolkit that consists of technical approaches and software building
will help to verify intermediate-scale noisy quantum information processing and
identify windows of parameters guiding towards demonstrating quantum advantage.
This project will also involve training of graduate students in research
activities, presentation and writing skills, and mentoring in career planning.
It will provide undergraduates and high-school students some first-hand
experience in quantum information science (QIS) research. The PI will work with
his colleagues to develop a quantum information science/quantum technology track
in the Master's program in the Department of Physics and Astronomy. Creation of
such a QIS track/program will help steadily train a quantum-smart workforce that
is projected to be of high demand in the United States in the next few
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.