* 1915829
* Dynamic Modeling of Recurrent Events and Its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yanqing Sun, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 139,868.00

This project will develop some novel statistical methods for the recurrent
events. The proposed research is motivated by the need to develop new
statistical methodology for the malaria vaccine trial and other biometrical
researches. The proposed statistical methods can be used to assess the risk
factors of event occurrences, how the occurrences of events and event types are
affected by concomitant variables, intervention, the past history, as well as
the associations among different types of events. The proposed research is
challenging in theoretical development and in statistical computation. The
proposed statistical methods can facilitate the analysis of the malaria vaccine
trial and contribute to develop efficacious malaria vaccines toward control and
elimination of malaria. The development of the outlined research would enrich a
collection of statistical tools for understanding the event histories and
contribute to the efforts to overcome the medical and public health challenges
and beyond. The graduate student support will be used for research on the theory
of malaria control. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research aims to develop
nonparametric and semiparametric dynamic models for the recurrent events that
will advance the existing statistical methods for recurrent events. The
statistical methods are proposed to model and assess the risk factors of event
occurrences, how the occurrences of events and event types are affected by
concomitant variables, interventions, and the event history. New statistical
methods also proposed to investigate the associations among different types of
events. The proposed research is motivated by the challenges arising from
analyzing the malaria vaccine efficacy trialand has broach applications in other
fields such as biomedical, reliability and economics. The proposed research
includes two parts. The research for the dynamic varying-coefficient intensity
models of event occurrences is described in Part I which introduces three
models: the nonparametric dynamic varying-coefficient intensity model, the
semiparametric dynamic varying-coefficient intensity model, and the dynamic
models for multiple type of recurrent events. Research for modeling and
assessing the associations among different types of recurrent events is proposed
in Part II. The nonparametric dynamic varying-coefficient intensity models will
be estimated based on the likelihood principle and the local linear smoothing
technique. The profile estimation approach will be utilized for the
semiparametric dynamic varying-coefficient intensity models. The inference
procedures that are of scientific interest will be investigated. Large sample
theory will be developed for the proposed estimation and hypothesis testing
procedures. A two-stage estimating procedure is proposed to estimate the models
for the conditional rate function of the recurrent event processes where the
marginal semiparametric models are estimated in the first stage and the models
for the rate ratio are estimated in the second stage. Studies are proposed to
investigate a variety of models for the conditional rate ratio. New statistical
methods, theory and computational algorithms will be developed. The proposed
statistical methods can facilitate the analysis of the malaria vaccine trial and
contribute to develop efficacious malaria vaccines toward control and
elimination of malaria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.