* 1915894
* Learning Latent Graphs from Stationary Signals
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Debashis Paul, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

In recent years, data with many features and complicated interactions among
these features and/or across time and space have become ubiquitous. How to
extract meaningful information from such large complex data is one of the most
pressing questions with significant scientific and societal implications. This
research will generate new tools for modeling and analyzing such data through
graph- or network-based representations of the data. The analytical and
computational tools derived from this research can be applied to many fields
including economics, finance, neuroscience, and various sub-fields within the
social and biological sciences. This project will also provide training
opportunities for a new generation of researchers empowering them to contribute
to the rapid development of statistics, data science and related fields. Results
of this research will be disseminated through publications, conference
presentations, lectures, and open source software.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a novel Spectral Graph Models (SGM) framework which models
multivariate data as graph-referenced stationary signals. The SGM framework
provides new tools for network inference from a signal processing perspective
and for modeling multivariate observations with complicated dependencies,
including possible temporal or spatial dependence. It also provides new tools
for covariance estimation through efficient graph-based representations. The SGM
framework combines four key aspects - spectral representation of covariances,
spectral graph theory, semiparametric modeling, and sparse parameterization. It
allows for temporal dependency in graphs or parameters and can be used to model
both independent and dependent multivariate observations. The SGM framework has
a wide range of applications, and methods developed through this research will
be applied to various types of data including brain activity and international
trade data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.