* 1915487
* Collaborative Research: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Prepare Undergraduates for Data Science Using Real-World Data from High Frequency Monitoring Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Gautam Biswas, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 631,435.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving undergraduate understanding of data science. It
will accomplish this goal by incorporating data science concepts and skill
development in undergraduate courses in biology, computer science, engineering,
and environmental science. Through a collaboration between Virginia Tech,
Vanderbilt University, and North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State
University, the project will develop interdisciplinary learning modules based on
high frequency, real-time data from water and traffic monitoring systems. The
project intends to develop a common approach for introducing data science
concepts in STEM disciplinary courses. By embedding data science into a variety
of undergraduate STEM courses and creating a partnership that includes a
Historically Black College/University, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in data science, including participation of students from
populations that are underrepresented in data science and/or STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop data science learning modules to
implement in eight existing STEM courses at the collaborating institutions. The
learning modules will be motivated by real-world problems and high-frequency
datasets, including a water monitoring dataset from Virginia Tech, and
transportation and building monitoring datasets from Vanderbilt. The learning
module topics will include: Interdisciplinary Learning, Data Analytics, and
Industry Partnerships. These topics will facilitate incorporation of real-world
data sets to enhance the student learning experience and they are broad enough
that they can incorporate other data sets in the future. The project aims to
develop and implement an interdisciplinary collaborative approach to support
undergraduate students in developing data science expertise through their
disciplinary course work. Such expertise will better prepare students to enter
the STEM workforce, especially those STEM professions that focus on smart and
connected computing. The project will investigate how and in what ways the
modules support student learning of data science. The project will also
investigate how implementation of the modules varies across the collaborating
institutions. It is expected that the project will define key considerations for
integrating data science concepts into STEM courses and will host workshops to
introduce faculty to these considerations and strategies so they can incorporate
the learning modules into the STEM courses that they teach. The project
collaborators will provide the framework for generalizing and transferring the
learning modules to other STEM education communities, thus broadening the scope
and the impact of this project beyond the three collaborating institutions. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.