* 1915209
* Student support for 2019 GSA Thompson Field Forum in Grand Canyon; September 14-21, 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Karl Karlstrom, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 8,500.00

The proposal provides support for the participation of five students and two
early career professionals in the 17th Geological Society of America Thompson
Field Forum on the "Age and carving of the Grand Canyon: Towards a resolution of
140 years of debate." The forum will bring together 28 researchers and
scientists to discuss evidence for the age and incision history of the Grand
Canyon in the context of recent advances and ongoing debates. The goal to
promote the next generation of research on this subject, which is of broad
interest both to the scientific community and the general public. There has been
considerable interest in what seems to be like an old subject, but recent
scientific advances have provoked controversy and new ideas regarding the age
and formation of the canyon with high-profile publications in the journals,
Science and Nature. Controversial ideas to be discussed include: 1) evidence for
mantle-to surface hydrologic connections; 2) ongoing mantle-driven uplift of the
Colorado Plateau; 3) the contested "bulls-eye" of erosion of the Colorado
Plateau; and 4) Causes of major knickpoints as due to incision transients and/or
variable strength rock layers. The conference is timely in that the community
needs to examine and evaluate the evidence first hand and develop better
integrated methodologies to test these and other debates. The students and early
career professionals (including four women) will be supported by this activity
are actively involved in Grand Canyon research and hence will be knowledgeable
and receptive to the nuances of the discussions. They will also get a chance to
present their new work for the general discussions. The exposure they will get
to high level integrative science will be potentially transformative for their
careers. A unique opportunity associated with the Field Forum will be a river
trip down the Colorado River through the Grand Canyon with opportunities to
discuss scientific questions on the outcrop and at evening seminars. Society
benefits from this activity include contributions to STEM education and educator
development; development of a diverse, globally competitive workforce; and
contributions to the broadening of participation of underrepresented groups in
STEM.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.