* 1915611
* Dissipative Phenomena in Effective Field Theories
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Riccardo Penco, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Riccardo Penco at Carnegie
Mellon University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissipation gives rise to many
interesting phenomena in Nature. It can also be a frustrating barrier to
overcome on the path towards technological applications. Despite the important
role that dissipation plays in many physical systems, it is often modeled
phenomenologically rather than by following a systematic procedure based on
fundamental principles. The overarching goal of this project is to develop a
more systematic understanding of dissipation by exploiting modern theoretical
techniques known as effective field theories. To this end, Professor Penco will
tackle a variety of conceptual problems and concrete applications in two
distinct areas: hydrodynamics and gravitational systems. This project is also
expected to have broader societal impacts. An important outcome will be the
advanced training of a postdoctoral researcher. This advances the national
interest by directly contributing to the quality of the STEM workforce in the
US. Professor Penco will also engage in outreach activities aimed at
communicating scientific knowledge outside the typical classroom setting and
promoting work in STEM fields as a viable career option.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Penco's work will build upon
recent progress in dissipative hydrodynamics and explore how the recently
uncovered symmetries of thermal states (BRST, KMS, supersymmetry) constrain the
effective action of Goldstone modes of spontaneously broken spacetime
symmetries. The spectrum of topics he plans to explore ranges from applied
(e.g., fluids and superfluids) to formal (e.g., the Goldstone theorem at finite
density and temperature). In the context of gravitational physics, Professor
Penco will explore a variety of dissipative aspects in black-hole physics (e.g.,
quasi-normal modes, superradiance) which can play an important role both in
astrophysics as well as in high-energy physics, particularly in the context of
modified gravity and holography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.