* 1915491
* Collective Gradient Sensing and Cell-to-Cell Variability - Theory and Experiment
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Andrew Ewald, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 05/31/2024
* USD 479,962.00

This project will help understand how cells can work together to interpret
external signals and collectively make decisions. Earlier work from the Ewald
group showed that cells in tissues cooperate to make decisions, such as choosing
when and where to move. This cooperation can help make more reliable decisions.
One example of this is that when many cells work together to follow a chemical
signal, they are more precise and reliable than a single cell on its own. This
project studies how this happens, and how cells can work together even when each
cell can have highly variable responses to a signal – when cells are
individually unreliable. This project has two critical types of experiments –
both of which supplemented by computational modeling and mathematical theory. In
the first experiment type, a highly variable collection of cells will be
created, combined of cells that think they see a signal telling them to move or
grow (active cells), and those that don’t (inactive cells). To understand how
these cells work together to make decisions, mathematical models will be used to
predict the final decision the cells make – the direction of tissue growth –
from the initial location of the active cells. In the second experiment type,
the cells will be exposed to an external signal. How precisely will branch
locations follow this signal? Is this affected by cell variation (different
fractions of active cells)? These experimental results and others will be
described with computational models that include both the physical forces
between cells and the motion of the molecules that the cells are sensing.
Understanding how cells cooperate in this way will help us understand how
developing embryos are reliably formed – when cells end up in the wrong place,
this can lead to birth defects. This project will also support the training of
students from the high school level to graduate students. High school students
will be recruited from Baltimore schools through the Women in Science and
Engineering (WISE) program to participate in research. In addition, students
trained through this project will be trained in collaborative writing and
outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells within tissues and organs cooperate in
order to move and sense signals; this cooperation allows them to perform tasks
that single cells cannot. A dramatic example, and the major focus of this
project, is collective gradient sensing, where groups of cells measure a signal
gradient, even when a single cell cannot. Collective gradient sensing involves
comparisons between cells, and will be strongly affected by cell-to-cell
variability, as even genetically identical cells can have highly variable
motilities and responses to signal. Understanding collective gradient sensing
will require quantifying these cell-to-cell variations and modeling their
consequences. This project is a combined experiment and theory approach to
understanding collective gradient sensing and cell-to-cell variation by 1)
testing existing hypotheses in mammary organoids where variability can be
induced, and 2) developing improved models that address variability in cell
motility, cell cycle, and cell division. Collective gradient sensing accuracy
should – in theory – depend on a balance of cell variability and the ability of
a tissue to re-arrange. Variability and fluidity will be controlled and measured
in experiments on branching mammary organoids, which undergo collective gradient
sensing. Experiments on organoids will be performed to simultaneously
characterize sensing and fluidity to test this idea. In addition, artificial
variability will be induced by studying mosaic organoids. These experiments will
be analyzed with simple stochastic models previously developed by the Camley
group. Motivated by the results of these experiments, new computational models
of organoids with cell-to-cell variation in signaling, mechanical, and motility
properties will be created using both self-propelled particle and
biochemical/mechanical cell models. Estimation theory will be used to find
fundamental limits to accurate group decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.