* 1915814
* 1D Edge Contacts to 2D Devices for Scalability and 3D Integration with Via-formed Junctions
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Aaron Franklin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 12/31/2022
* USD 390,657.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors have the potential
to be scaled to small dimensions and integrated in versatile ways. There are,
however, significant challenges to realize reproducible, scalable, and high-
performance electronics based on 2D materials. This project will explore a new
approach by fabricating one-dimensional (1D) edge contacts to 2D materials to
improve scalability. All electrical current passes between the contact and the
2D material along a 1D edge. This will boost performance over devices with top
contacts. 1D edge contacts have an advantage in that they will enable three-
dimensional (3D) integration of 2D devices into integrated circuits. An
advantage of this approach is that 3D circuits can be realized with fewer
fabrication steps than traditionally required. 3D integration of devices has the
potential to impact energy efficient computing. Research into electrical
transport at 1D edge contacts will also be of widespread value to the
electronics community. This project will actively engage women and
underrepresented minorities in research activities. Outreach will continue
throughout the project through existing and new activities that will engage K-12
and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Integration of 2D materials
into future electronics requires understanding of carrier transport,
scalability, and integration. Edge contacts offer improved transport over top
contacts, yet they lack rigorous study for 2D devices and the mechanism of
carrier injection at the metal-2D edge interface remains unclear. While 2D
materials have no surface states for interfacial bonding, they do have abundant
dangling bonds at the edge, which could be harnessed to improve interfacial
electron transport. Building on the PI's preliminary results of the first pure
edge contacts to a 2D semiconductor, the carrier transport of 1D edge contacts
to 2D devices will be studied in this project, from material preparation and
device fabrication, to performance characterization and 3D integration.
Uncovering the mechanisms of carrier transport at 1D metal to 2D semiconductor
junctions will be done by studying pure edge interfaces realized with an in situ
ion beam / evaporator for generating the 2D edge and establishing the 1D contact
without breaking high vacuum. Two distinct uses of edge contacts will be
demonstrated: 1) Scalability of contacts to the sub-10 nm dimensions without
compromising performance, and 2) 3D integration of 2D devices made more feasible
with via-formed junctions that double as 1D edge contacts. Large sets of top-
and edge-contacted devices will be studied across a range of contact lengths and
for three different 2D materials. For 3D integration of 2D devices in the back-
end of the line (BEOL), no viable contact strategy is available that will not
significantly increase mask layers and thus production cost. This demonstration
of edge contacts to 2D devices established in the same processing step as
contact via formation, will be achieved using a single mask layer. This strategy
for 3D-integrated 2D devices with via-formed edge contacts will be of
significant benefit to the growing area of BEOL nanodevice
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.