* 1915644
* Collaborative Research: Bridging the Writing Transfer Gap in Early Engineering Laboratory Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Brenda Barrio, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 424,671.00

This multi-institutional project aims to serve the national interest by
improving college writing instruction and the technical writing abilities of
engineering students. Although writing is a critical skill for engineers,
employers frequently complain that engineering graduates need better writing
skills. Undergraduate engineering curricula typically require various general
education writing courses early in the program of study. However, engineering
educators often do not have the tools to connect students' learning from early
writing courses to their writing in engineering courses. The goal of this
project is to improve the transfer of writing skills from college writing
courses into engineering courses. To accomplish this goal, the project will
develop an instructional module to facilitate transfer of writing skills from
writing courses into the laboratory component of engineering courses. It will
also evaluate whether the instructional module enhances student writing of
engineering lab reports. This project expands on a previous project that
demonstrated success in this approach at one institution. In this follow-on
study, the writing module will be further refined and implemented at multiple
institutions. The partnering institutions were chosen because of differences in
the general education writing course requirements for their engineering
students. Thus, this research study could identify writing instruction
strategies that are transferable across different types of institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engaged Student Learning project will identify what
transferable knowledge students bring from three far-transfer models: concurrent
transfer in which students build on first year composition and technical writing
courses; vertical transfer in which students have only completed first year
composition; and absent transfer in which students have completed a literary
course but lack both technical writing and the preparation in composition that
is characteristic of first year composition. The collaboration includes at least
one institution representing each of the three models, enabling exploration of
two key research questions: "How can writing transfer be adapted across the US
to a wide range of writing curricula in lower-division courses?" and "How can a
transfer-focused writing module be implemented effectively in diverse
engineering lab classrooms taught by any instructor?" Informed by a mapping of
students' collective zone of proximal development, a lab report instructional
module will be refined by adapting multiple scaffolds to support students'
incremental engagement with lab report writing as engaged disciplinary learning.
The module will include direct instructional materials and reference materials
as supports for writing lab reports. The project will conduct quantitative and
qualitative assessment of students' lab report writing as disciplinary meaning
making, as well as students' development of technical communication skills.
Results from this integrated mixed methods approach has the potential to advance
knowledge about the impact of transfer-focused writing pedagogies on students'
lab report writing competencies. This project is based on results from an
exploratory project that showed statistically significant improvements in
engineering students' lab report quality after implementing a writing transfer-
focused lab report module at two institutions utilizing a vertical transfer
model. These results suggest that a student-centered pedagogical approach that
explicitly reinforces writing knowledge and skills from prior post-secondary
writing experiences can be more productive than the traditional case study
approach often employed in engineering writing instruction. With these
encouraging prior results, the results of this project have the potential to be
applicable to diverse engineering laboratory course settings across diverse
engineering curricula. This project is supported by the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources. This
program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.