* 1915534
* Investigating How Active Fluctuations Drive Immune Receptor Dynamics and Signaling
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2020,07/31/2024
* Arpita Upadhyaya, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,252.00

Forces are important in driving many cellular functions from cell motion, cell
division and cell growth to the proper functioning of the immune response. Cell
generated forces have been implicated in playing a role both at the molecular
scale for changing the conformation of key signaling molecules to initiate
signal transduction pathways to the cellular and tissue scale for large scale
morphological deformations and collective motion. In particular, it is becoming
increasingly clear that forces in cells are not static, rather they show strong
fluctuations driven by the collective dynamics of actin and microtubules
cytoskeleton and molecular motors which are highly non-equilibrium in nature.
Most experimental and theoretical work has focused on demonstrating the
existence of active fluctuations in living systems and characterizing the
physical implications. However, little is known about how active fluctuations
regulate cell function in a physiological context. In this project the PI will
determine the role of active cytoskeletal and force fluctuations in the context
of the immune response for B cell receptor and T cell receptor mediated
signaling. The PI's results will have broad implications in the field of force
mediated molecular transduction processes in biology such as during cell
adhesion, migration and development. The interdisciplinary nature of the
proposed work will enhance our understanding of the fundamental physics
underlying the function of living systems and have significant impact both in
the fields of active matter and cell biology. The PI will work to integrate key
aspects of the research with teaching and outreach activities. The PI will offer
an undergraduate course on critical thinking and research practice using hands
on research modules on relevant themes such as cellular force generation. The PI
will introduce concepts from soft matter and cell biology into a course for
education majors, to instill in them an appreciation for physics and its
connection to biology, which they can take to elementary school classrooms: a
potentially powerful way to inspire children to STEM careers. The PI will give
talks focused on the physical aspects of cells and soft matter in local
elementary schools as part of Science Day programs. The PI will actively recruit
a diverse group of undergraduate students and participate in programs for
attracting high school students to biological physics research as part of the
established Summer Girls program and a newly proposed Biophysics Day on campus.
The PI also proposes to enhance outreach by working on the intersection of
Science and Art with an exhibition of science-inspired photographs by scientists
and paintings by artists to disseminate these ideas to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a first step in elucidating the
biological relevance of non-equilibrium fluctuations for functional aspects of
living systems. In this project the PI will use state of the art imaging and
computational analyses to explore the role of force fluctuations in the immune
response using two examples. In Objective 1, the PI will examine receptor
clustering in B cells, which is an essential first step in antigen gathering. A
current model posits that the actin cytoskeleton acts as diffusive barriers to
BCR movement. Antigen binding and signaling leads to dissolution of these
barriers and diffusion-limited growth of the clusters. However, the PI's
preliminary studies suggest that actin dynamics may have an active role in this
process. Theoretical models of active membrane-actin interactions have been
shown to be able to form non-equilibrium structures that can support the
formation of macromolecular assemblies of receptors. The PI will use single
molecule imaging, analysis and modeling to test whether BCR clustering requires
active stirring by actin dynamics. In Objective 2, the PI will study how force
fluctuations originating from cytoskeletal and motor dynamics inside cells are
transmitted to the extracellular environment and drive signal transduction.
Experimental studies and theoretical work have shown that the non-equilibrium
cytoskeletal fluctuations are clearly athermal in character with a Lorentzian
power spectrum. On the other hand, most studies of TCR signaling consider the
dynamics of TCR-antigen bonds under static loads. The PI hypothesizes that force
fluctuations arising from stochastic motor activity and actin dynamics
facilitate antigen discrimination and amplify signaling and will use traction
force microscopy, optogenetics and biophysical studies to map the spatial
structure of force fluctuations and correlate it with the kinetics of signaling,
enabling her to elucidate the role of these non- equilibrium fluctuations for
immune cell activation. More generally the work will have implications in
understanding the fundamental principles underlying how active living systems
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.