* 1915976
* Collaborative Research: Subject-level Prediction and Application
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jonnagadda Rao, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

Many practical problems are related to prediction, where the main interest is at
the subject (for example personalized or precision medicine) or (small) sub-
population (for example small community) level. In recent years, new and
challenging problems have emerged from diverse fields such as business, social
sciences, and health sciences. Examples may involve prediction of a health
outcome for a new patient or perhaps prediction of a new school's response to
efforts to educate children about smoking prevention. The investigators have
shown in previous work called classified mixed model prediction (CMMP) that in
such cases, it is possible to make substantial gains in prediction accuracy by
identifying a class that a new subject belongs to. However, the scenarios under
which CMMP currently operates are somewhat constrained and many real-life
situations fall outside its scope. Given the tremendous gains in accuracy that
are possible, it would be very valuable to develop further methodology and
computational advances to deepen knowledge in this area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to make methodological advances of the
classified mixed model prediction method into other types of subject-level
prediction problems as well as to develop new inferential methods along the CMMP
idea, by making the latter truly useful in practical situations. The basic idea
of CMMP is to create a "match" between a group or cluster in the population for
which one wishes to make prediction and a (massive) training dataset, with known
groups or clusters. Once such a match is built, the traditional mixed model
prediction method can be utilized to make accurate predictions. The practical
challenges that will be solved in this project include i) how to deal with
training data with unknown grouping; ii) how to deal with sparse, high
dimensional covariates; iii) how to make better use of covariate information to
improve accuracy of CMMP; and iv) how to provide accurate measures of
uncertainty for CMMP-type predictions. Two important areas of application will
be investigated. One is in precision medicine and health disparities focusing on
the prediction of epigenetic markers using high dimensional genotype profiles.
The other comes from the area of family economics using a large survey of data
from China where predictions at finer levels of resolution (e.g., households)
are of primary interest. Both applications will leverage important
collaborations with practitioners and thus increase the impact of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.