* 1915071
* Fundamental Physics from Astronomy and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lisa Randall, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Lisa Randall at Harvard
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Randall will conduct research on
dark-matter physics and more generally on physics beyond the so-called Standard
Model which explains the behavior of the elementary particles down to the
smallest length scales ever probed in collider experiments. Professor Randall's
research will include studies of partially interacting dark matter, a
theoretical framework which posits the existence of certain components of dark
matter which interact under the influence of dark forces beyond those in the
Standard Model. Such dark-matter components, if they exist, could potentially
give rise to galactic shapes and structures which might be detectable through
detailed dynamical measurements. Professor Randall will also pursue alternative
ideas for addressing the long-standing hierarchy problem of particle physics.
This is the problem of explaining why the recently discovered Higgs particle is
so much lighter than our current understanding of fundamental physics would
suggest. Such questions have broad scientific impact in that they attempt to
address basic questions about the nature of matter and the symmetries and
structure of space and time. This science has traditionally been very strong
within the United States, and this project will further advance the national
interest by reinforcing research in these directions. Professor Randall will
also conduct this research in collaboration with postdoctoral researchers and
graduate students, thereby helping to produce a scientifically educated and
technically advanced workforce. Professor Randall will also give public lectures
about this work which will be seen by the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Professor Randall will work with
a student and a postdoctoral fellow to determine how well the ideas described
above can be advanced with available and future statistics. In the case of dwarf
galaxies, the questions apply both to the data and to the simulations that will
be available. In the case of partially interacting dark matter there are probes
within our galaxy (such as GAIA) and outside our galaxy (such as the vast plane
of satellites in Andromeda, for example) that can address these questions. For
the hierarchy problem, Professor Randall will investigate extensions of the
ideas and methods involving extra dimensions and dynamical theories to see if
improved solutions can be found, particularly those that can be tested at future
colliders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.