* 1915849
* Spin Current Phenomena in Non-Collinear Antiferromagnets:From Fundamental Physics to Device Concepts
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Mingzhong Wu, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 368,040.00

Recent years have witnessed a rapidly growing interest in antiferromagnetic
spintronics. Up to now, however, most of the research has focused on collinear
antiferromagnetic systems. Spin current phenomena in non-collinear
antiferromagnetic systems remain largely unexplored. Very recent theoretical
work has uncovered new phenomena in non-collinear antiferromagnets Mn3X, where X
is Sn, Ga, or Ge. These include an unusual spin Hall effect, a strong spin
Nernst effect, and electric manipulation of antiferromagnetic ordering. The
heart of this program is the timely experimental elucidation of these phenomena
and their use in prototype devices. The studies will largely promote the
understanding of spin-related phenomena in non-colinear antiferromagnets and
will thereby significantly advance the research field of antiferromagnetic
spintronics. From a technological perspective, the proposed research will have
significant implications for the future development of magnetic memory, spin-
torque nano-oscillators, and spin-wave logic and will therefore have a major
impact on future advanced electronic systems. Two undergraduate students and two
graduate students per year will participate in film growth, nanofabrication,
electrical transport and high-frequency measurements, and data analysis.
Outreach to high schools will be accomplished through the Colorado State
University 'Little Shop of Physics' and the 'summer Research and Engineering
Apprenticeship" Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program consists of three
main research thrusts. Thrust I will focus on a rather unusual spin Hall effect
in Mn3Sn. A normal spin Hall effect can convert a longitudinal charge current to
a transverse spin current whose polarization is orthogonal to the spin flow
direction. In stark contrast, the transverse spin current produced by the
unusual spin Hall effect has a polarization that is along the spin flow
direction. This unusual phenomenon will be demonstrated through two distinct
approaches. Further, the effect will be used to induce magnetization switching,
drive magnetization precession, and excite spin waves in ferromagnetic thin
films with perpendicular anisotropy. None of these effects can be achieved, in
principle, with spin currents produced by the normal spin Hall effect, the
Rashba effect, or topological surface states. Thrust II will focus on the spin
Nernst effect, a process in which one uses a thermal gradient to produce pure
spin currents. Recent experiments have revealed this effect in Pt. Very recent
theoretical work indicates that the effect can also occur in Mn3X and can be
significantly stronger than in Pt. Thrust II will elucidate these predicted
strong spin Nernst effect for Mn3X films. It is also planned to use this effect
for spin-orbit torque-induced magnetization switching in ferromagnetic films
with perpendicular anisotropy. Thrust III will focus on the control of
antiferromagnetic ordering in Mn3X. Work is planned to manipulate
antiferromagnetic states using damping-like and field-like spin-orbit torques
and move domain walls through spin transfer torque. While theory suggests that
such ordering control is feasible, this has not yet been demonstrated
experimentally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.