* 1916440
* 2019 Applied and Environmental Microbiology GRC/GRS
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Joel Kostka, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

Microorganisms are present virtually everywhere on Earth. Microbes carry out
processes that make Earth habitable and help to maintain plant, human, and
animal health. In other words, an understanding of microorganisms and their
activities is critical to sustain clean air and water, to maintain food security
and to prevent human disease. This grant will support the participation of
early-career scientists in the Gordon Conference on Applied and Environmental
Microbiology (GRC-AEM)at Mount Holyoke College, July 14 - 19, 2019. Established
in 1950, the GRC-AEM brings together scientists to address research on the
importance of microbes in human health, interactions of microbes with animals
and plants, terrestrial and aquatic biogeochemical cycles, bioremediation of
contaminated land and water, production of biofuels, and use of microbes as
biocatalysts in industry. Areas of microbiological research covered by the GRC-
AEM have an immense societal impact on the environment and mankind and thus this
GRC remains highly topical and a very vibrant research field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the GRC-AEM are to provide an open forum
for the presentation and discussion of the latest research findings on
environmental and applied applications of microorganisms from the single cell to
the ecosystem level. The GRC AEM will address critical or even controversial
issues for the development of new technologies. The 2019 Conference subtitled
"Shaping the Earth's Microverse" will address one of the most urgent questions
in microbiology: How can we employ what we have learned from the co-evolution of
Earth with microbial life to address current challenges of the Anthropocene? The
Conference has a great track record of stimulating cutting edge and innovative
research by scientists in academia, research institutes/foundations and
government and industrial laboratories. There will be a Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS-AEM) associated with the GRC-AEM entitled, "Microbial Language: Microbes,
Molecules, and Metabolites", which will be exclusively for PhD students and
postdoctoral researchers. The GRC-AEM program will also have several poster
talks by early-career researchers chosen from poster abstract submissions. The
grant will ensure broadening participation of a diverse group of individuals who
can attend both the GRS and the GRC, assisting with costs for PhD students,
postdocs and early-career faculty members to participate in the GRS and GRC,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.