* 1916726
* Planning IUCRC University of Minnesota: Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and IoT (CHASSI)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Kangjie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 15,000.00

This IUCRC planning project will establish the feasibility of a multi-site
Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and Internet-of-Things (CHASSI) that
will focus on areas where both security and high assurance are necessary to
support operations of high mission criticality, due to safety or economic
impact. Examples include medical devices, manufacturing, the energy grid, real-
time financial markets, construction, and defense. Combining security and high-
assurance is hard, however, intentionally combining them will lead to new
models, techniques, designs, architectures, and systems that will be applicable
across of range of important U.S. industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHASSI has
five sites: University of Kansas (KU), University of Minnesota, Syracuse
University, Case Western Reserve University, and Indiana University. CHASSI
research falls into four main thrusts: (1) Architectures, design and formal
modeling for systems-level security, privacy, stability, and performance; (2)
Secure communication, sensing, and devices; (3) Scalable trust and privacy; and
(4) Human behavior for privacy and security. In addition to expertise in
security and cyber-physical systems, Minnesota brings considerable expertise and
experience in safety critical systems, high assurance, and medical devices,
areas nicely complementing the expertise at the partner institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant will generate significant impacts on
both research and education; researchers will understand the interests and
needs/barriers in industry, industrial members will understand the research
capabilities of faculty member at each Site, and companies will benefit from
exposure to cutting-edge university research across all Sites. Minnesota will
continue its engagement of student groups in organizing the various events
associated with center activities and maintain the established close connection
with the Bakken Medical Device center to enable translational research efforts
and sustained continuous-education and tech-transfer events. Educational program
offerings are also planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators from this
multi-university-industry Center will host a single Center-wide repository at:
https://chassi.ku.edu. This shared repository will include meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc., and will be made available for a
minimum of 5 years after conclusion of the award or until the Center transitions
to the next phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.