* 1916780
* Incorporating Floodplain Functions into River Restoration Engineering: The Role of Floodplain Vegetation on Channel-Floodplain Hydrodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Peter Nelson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 309,553.00

Because of their distinct role in linking riverine and terrestrial ecosystems,
floodplains provide numerous benefits or services to natural and human systems,
such as floodwave attenuation, biogeochemical reduction of pollutants, and
transfer of nutrients. These services rely on the transfer of water between a
river channel and floodplain surface during flooding events, also known as
hydrologic exchange flows. Floodplain vegetation plays a particularly important
role in controlling river-floodplain hydraulics and hydrologic exchange flows,
and therefore can influence many floodplain services and channel stability.
However, most river restoration efforts rarely consider the influences of
floodplain vegetation because we do not adequately understand the hydraulic
controls of vegetation on stable restoration designs nor the degree to which
vegetation influences exchange flows and floodplain services. Therefore, the
goal for this research is to improve our understanding of the coupled effects of
floodplain vegetation on hydrodynamics in restored meandering channels and on
hydrologic exchange flows that are important for floodplain services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To meet the above stated goal, this research targets
accomplishing the following core objectives: (1) advance conceptual knowledge of
the vegetation-flow hydrodynamics related to momentum exchange in meandering
channels with natural bed topography; (2) investigate the influence of
floodplain vegetation on hydrologic exchange flows on floodplain surfaces; and
(3) evaluate relationships between channel hydrodynamics and hydrologic exchange
flows on floodplain surfaces pertaining to river-floodplain restoration design.
This research will address these objectives using a combination of flume
experiments and numerical modeling that are linked to characteristics of local
river restoration projects. Flume experiments will be conducted to explore the
hydrodynamics of overbank flows in meandering channels while systematically
varying floodplain vegetation characteristics. Hydraulic measurements collected
during the flume experiments will be used to better understand the influence of
floodplain vegetation and channel bedform on in-channel and floodplain hydraulic
conditions during overbank flows, including distributions of secondary currents,
turbulence characteristics, and hydrologic exchange flows. Results from the
flume experiments will be used to inform numerical modeling. The numerical and
physical experiments will be complemented by the collection and analysis of
field data from local restoration sites on the Cache la Poudre River, Colorado.
Work conducted in this research will closely involve the City of Fort Collins,
which has already spent nearly $10 million on restoration investments on the
local Poudre River and has large goals for transforming the Poudre to provide a
greater connection between natural and human systems along the river. This
research will engage with stakeholders by participating in numerous local
outreach events, including the Poudre River Fest and the City's "The Science
Behind the Scenery" program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.