* 1916246
* Collaborative Research: Stochastic Models for Gene-based Association Analysis of Longitudinal Phenotypes with Sequence Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Zuoheng Wang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

Longitudinal genetic studies provide a valuable resource for exploring key
genetic and environmental factors that affect complex traits over time. Genetic
analysis of longitudinal data that incorporates trait variation over time is
critical to understanding genetic influence and biological variations of complex
diseases. In recent years, many genetic studies have been conducted in cohorts
in which multiple measures on a trait of interest are collected on each subject
over a period of time in addition to genome sequence data. These studies not
only provide a more accurate assessment of disease condition but enable
researchers to investigate the influence of genes on the trajectory of a trait
and disease progression. This project focuses on the development of novel
association testing methods to analyze sequencing genomic data at gene levels.
The research will help provide insights into the underlying biology and
progression of complex diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In longitudinal genetic
studies and data from the Electronic Medical Records and Genomics (eMERGE)
network, phenotypic traits and genetic variants may be viewed as functional
data. Functional data analysis (FDA) can serve as a valuable tool for exploring
key genetic and environmental factors that affect complex traits over time. In
the presence of a large number of rare variants, gene-based analysis is a more
powerful tool for gene mapping than testing of individual genetic variants. This
project seeks to develop stochastic functional regression models and
longitudinal sequence kernel association tests (LSKAT) to analyze longitudinal
traits of population samples and pedigree or cryptically related samples, and to
analyze pleiotropic traits. FDA techniques and kernel-based approaches are
utilized to reduce the high dimensionality of sequencing data and draw useful
information. A variance-covariance structure is constructed to model the
measurement variation and correlations of an individual's trait based on the
theory of stochastic processes and novel penalized spline models are used to
estimate the trajectory mean function. The proposed methods and software will be
tested and refined using real data sets and simulation studies. User-friendly
software will be developed to implement the proposed methods and will be made
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.