* 1916809
* Collaborative Research: Correlating Molecular Structure and Activity in Boron-containing ODH Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Aaron Rossini, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 224,570.00

As the world population grows, the demand for consumer goods, which are made
from building-block chemicals such as ethylene and propylene, increases. The
project focuses on discovery of energy-efficient catalysts for the production of
these chemical building-blocks from natural gas with minimal generation of
undesired by-products such as carbon dioxide. Preliminary studies by the
investigators have shown exceptional promise of boron-containing catalysts, but
deeper, atomic-level understanding is needed to further improve the catalyst
performance and durability. The project will utilize a combination of new
catalyst synthesis protocols, state-of-the-art solid-state nuclear magnetic
resonance imaging, and computational methods to obtain the needed atomic-level
understanding, and use that insight to design improved catalysts. The research
will support U.S. clean-energy security through its potential for the efficient
conversion of our nation's vast shale gas resources to value-added fuels and
chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidative Dehydrogenation (ODH) of light
alkanes is a promising alternative for the production of important chemical
building blocks. However, despite decades of research, a highly selective
catalyst has remained elusive, as over-oxidation is a facile and
thermodynamically favored process. Recent studies by the lead investigator's
group has demonstrated that boron-containing catalysts (hBN, BNNT, WB, among
others) are highly selective catalysts for the ODH of light alkanes. For propane
ODH, propylene selectivity as high as 80% can be obtained up to 20% conversion,
compared to 60% propylene selectivity at 10% propane conversion for the state-
of-the-art vanadium oxide-based catalyst. Given the recent discovery of this
class of materials as ODH catalysts, there are many fundamental questions that
need to be answered regarding the active sites and their formation. Controlled
synthesis, state-of-the-art solid-state NMR (SSNMR) spectroscopy, and
computational modelling will be utilized to gain insights into the catalytically
active site(s) and build up a structure-performance relationship for boron-
containing ODH catalysts. The work will contribute to a molecular-level
understanding of a complex problem that is of industrial importance. Our
multidisciplinary approach comprised of synthesis, SSNMR characterization,
catalytic testing, and computational modelling will train the participating
students to use information from a variety of fields to develop a detailed
picture of a complex system. Additionally, the collaborative nature of this work
will help the students grow as productive members of a research team. Beyond the
targeted reactions, the study will be of value to the broader catalysis
community because of the generalized catalytic insights and the methods
developed for characterization of heterogeneous
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.