* 1916656
* Planning IUCRC Case Western Reserve University: Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and IoT (CHASSI)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Kenneth Loparo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 15,000.00

This planning grant award will be used to study the feasibility of establishing
a multi-university-industry Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and
Internet-of-Things (CHASSI) that will focus on areas where both security and
high assurance are necessary to support operations of high mission criticality,
due to safety or economic impact. Examples include medical devices,
manufacturing, the energy grid, real-time financial markets, construction, and
defense. Combining security and high-assurance is hard, however, intentionally
combining them will lead to new models, techniques, designs, architectures, and
systems that will be applicable across a range of important U.S. industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHASSI has five sites: University of Kansas, University of
Minnesota, Syracuse University, Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), and
Indiana University. CHASSI research falls into four main thrusts: (1)
Architectures, design and formal modeling for systems-level security, privacy,
stability, and performance; (2) Secure communication, sensing, and devices; (3)
Scalable trust and privacy; and (4) Human behavior for privacy and security.
CWRU brings expertise in industrial controls, Internet-of-Things (IoT),
Industrial Internet-of-Things (IIoT), and manufacturing and energy applications.
Complementary expertise at the other sites includes mission assurance and
systems security, assurance of medical devices, networking, cyber-physical
systems, mobile security, and human factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHASSI faculty
members will gain an understanding of the specific interests and actual
needs/barriers of industrial companies. Likewise, companies will benefit from
exposure to: cutting-edge university research across all sites; networking with
and learning best practices from other industry colleagues in and out of their
sector; students who may be potential hires; and faculty that might perform
center projects or proprietary research. During the planning period, CWRU will
explore ways to advance diversity and outreach with the Women in Science and
Engineering Roundtable (WISER) and Women in Technology initiatives through
recruiting prospective students, educating current students, and identifying
student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators from this multi-
university-industry Center will host a single Center-wide repository at:
http://chassi.ku.edu. This shared repository will include meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc., and will be made available for a
minimum of five years after the conclusion of the award or until the Center
transitions to the next phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.