* 1916715
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Massachusetts Lowell:  Center for Wind Energy Science, Technology and Research (WindSTAR)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Christopher Niezrecki, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 11/30/2024
* USD 465,638.00

The objective of this project is to establish a multi-university, Phase II
I-UCRC for wind energy research, education, and outreach. The effort is based on
the successful operation during Phase I that was led by two university sites
(UMass Lowell and the University of Texas at Dallas). Together these two
universities have conducted wind energy research, established long-term
partnerships within the wind industry, trained undergraduate and graduate
students to perform state-of-the-art industry relevant research, and engaged in
outreach to K-12 students. The Center will contribute to the nationâ€™s research
infrastructure and enhance the intellectual capacity of the renewable energy
workforce. A diverse group of scientists, engineers, and practitioners will
execute a program of research and education focused on the design, operation,
and maintenance of land-based and offshore wind energy systems for electricity
production. The Center will be aimed at: (a) enhancing national excellence in
wind energy research and development that has direct relevance to industry, and
(b) developing a cadre of diverse undergraduate and graduate students with
world-class training who will support and eventually lead in the analysis,
design, manufacture, and successful operation of wind energy
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Phase II I-UCRC will integrate
engineering with fundamental research to support the development of low-cost
energy and high availability wind energy systems. The partners will engage in
cooperative research and education in the following key thrust areas: (a)
Composites Blade and Rotor Design &amp; Manufacturing, (b) Structural Health
Monitoring and Non-Destructive Inspection, (c) Wind Plant Modeling and
Measurements, (d) Control Systems Wind Turbines and Wind Plants, (e) Energy
Storage and Grid Integration, (f) Foundation and Towers, and (g) Environmental
Impacts. Examples of industrially relevant research led by the UML site are
expected to result in: (1) a better understanding of how wind turbine blade
acoustic transmission loss is affected by structural damage and environmental
operating conditions; (2) identification of the correlation between composites
resin degree of cure at the microscale and blade stiffness/strength at the
macroscale; and (3) the improvement of soil-foundation models to better
understand how wind turbine motion is directly correlated to degradation of
foundations. Other topics will serve as the basis for conducting fundamental
research including: offshore wind energy systems, electrical grid integration,
energy storage, manufacturing of larger blades/towers, advancements in material
technologies, understanding how wind turbines impact wildlife, and improving
coupled turbine-turbine performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.