* 1916263
* Collaborative Research:  Litter Arthropods of High Appalachia
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Michael Caterino, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 10/31/2023
* USD 706,094.00

Appalachian peaks are home to many animal species found nowhere else on Earth,
including many new species of arthropods (insects, millipedes, and relatives)
that await discovery and description. The highest Appalachian mountains
(&gt;5000 feet) harbor spruce-fir forests that are relicts of Pleistocene times.
These unique communities are threatened by invasive species and habitat loss.
However, a lack of information about native species diversity hinders their
conservation. This project, a collaboration between Clemson University and
Virginia Tech, will fill in large biodiversity knowledge gaps for the arthropods
in these unique forests, and will share this information with federal and state
land managers responsible for conservation. The project team, with student
trainees, will visit each of these spruce-fir 'islands' to survey the
arthropods, and will then make a biological library of the species using genomic
tools. These tools will allow rapid identification of the hundreds of distinct
species, and comparison will reveal the uniqueness of each mountain's
inhabitants, as well as their evolutionary histories. The research team,
composed of graduate and undergraduate students, postdoctoral trainees and
senior personnel, will work together on data collection and analysis,
publishing, and outreach phases of the project. Public events such as lectures
and workshops with state and national parks in the region and short videos will
share the activities and findings of the project with the widest possible
audience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the project are to: (1)
assess diversity at 22 of the highest points in the southern Appalachian
Mountains; (2) establish a high throughput sequencing approach to efficiently
document leaf litter arthropods; (3) assess the magnitude and geographic scale
of endemism and cryptic species diversity; and (4) increase appreciation for the
diversity and uniqueness of high elevation faunas, and highlight the urgency to
protect them. A voucher-based metabarcoding workflow, utilizing COI and 16S
amplicons, will be used as the basis for comparison among communities. This will
establish a database of barcode sequences for many novel taxa and yield a rich
data set for resolving species boundaries and population relationships. Data
analyses will employ phylogenetic, population genetic, and other statistical
methods to address questions of evolutionary relationships, historical
connectivity and environmental determinants of diversity. Anticipated results
include dozens of newly discovered species, thousands of barcode sequences for
species as-yet-unrepresented in public databases, and a deep understanding of
biogeographic histories for a great swath of diversity across an area of high
conservation value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.