* 1916226
* The Argo Data and Functional Spatial Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Tailen Hsing, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 297,484.00

The project focuses on research problems inspired and motivated by the Argo data
set. The data is the product of the multi-national Argo project that has been
monitoring the temperature and salinity of the open oceans (Atlantic, Indian,
and Pacific) since 2007. It consists of temperature/salinity profiles --
measurements over a dense grid of pressure levels -- of the upper ocean layer
from 0 through 2,000 meters below the surface. Currently, the Argo project
operates around 4,000 autonomous floats, which continuously sample such type of
functional data profiles over a spatial grid covering all open oceans. The
resulting rich collection of function-valued data indexed by space and time has
been a major resource for basic scientific research in oceanography and climate
science. In this project, the co-PIs and their research team, along with
collaborating oceanographers, will focus on producing state-of-the-art
statistical theory and methodology along with full-fledged algorithmic
implementations to help address the scientific challenges of the Argo project.
The research will also have an impact on fundamental statistical theory and
methodology as well as, more broadly, on modeling and analysis of complex space-
time data in other scientific domains. The graduate student support will be used
for research on extreme value theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing theory
and methodology of spatial statistics has largely focused on scalar data with
stationary structure. Function-valued data with non-trivial dependence structure
that varies in space and time pose novel theoretical and methodological
challenges. Recently, the field of functional spatial data has seen a steady
development but there remains a huge gap between theory and applications. For
example, the existing analysis of the Argo data in the scientific literature is
still focused on treating one pressure-level at a time using conventional
spatial statistics methods. The co-PIs plan to develop a comprehensive framework
of function-valued random field models that is suitable for the analysis of the
Argo data. This framework will provide a principled approach to the problem by
treating ocean temperature and salinity as functions of a continuous range of
pressure levels. Estimators for the functional mean and covariance will be
developed along with their uncertainties. Important practical challenges on
computing the estimators and optimal smoothing parameters through cross-
validation will be addressed using novel algorithms and scalable
implementations. The research will also address the fundamental functional
kriging problem, i.e., the optimal prediction of function-valued data indexed by
space and time. This will involve the development of a new statistical paradigm
that bridges the two fields: functional data analysis and spatial statistics. A
core issue is the introduction of new models that are amenable to the objective,
for which a good starting point is extending the theory of intrinsically
stationary models in spatial statistics to the context of functional spatial
processes. This program will involve research on the structure and
representation of such type of processes required to build adequate and flexible
models. This will be followed by studying functional spatial processes that are
locally intrinsically stationary through a generalization of the notion of
tangent field. Concrete models, estimators and their applications to the Argo
project will be developed, resulting in new tools and data products for the
broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.