* 1916133
* Kinetics, Mechanism, and Active Site Requirements for Hydrodeoxygenation over Reducible Metal Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Praveen Bollini, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,894.00

Bio-oils are obtained from the fast pyrolysis of biomass, and their conversion
into fuels and chemicals represents a sustainable alternative to coal, natural
gas, and petroleum sources. The critical step in upgrading bio-oil is the
selective removal of oxygen atoms from the lignin-derived fraction under ambient
pressures of hydrogen and in the presence of a catalyst (otherwise known as
"hydrodeoxygenation"). The ideal catalyst for hydrodeoxygenation would be
abundant, inexpensive and easy to handle, while also being active, selective,
hydrogen efficient, stable, and regenerable. The goal of this research project
is to develop a molecular-level understanding of the chemical and physical
processes occurring during the hydrodeoxygenation of biomass-derived model
compounds over a class of catalysts called reducible metal oxides. Primarily,
the studies will focus on cerium oxide (ceria), a material widely used
commercially as an oxygen storage component in automotive exhaust systems. The
research project serves as a training ground for graduate and undergraduate
students to perform cutting edge research. The researchers also will participate
in outreach activities in the Houston area, including Energy Day and Chevron
Girls Engineering the Future Day, and they will host high school students in the
laboratory and provide them with hands-on research experience as part of Project
ACS SEED.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fact that bulk ceria selectively cleaves
carbon-oxygen bonds in biomass-derived model compounds raises interesting
fundamental questions regarding the nature and density of oxygen vacancies in
reducible metal oxides. The precise mechanism through which carbon-oxygen bond
cleavage over ceria occurs will be studied via four experimental steps: (1)
demonstration of the potential of bulk ceria as a hydrodeoxygenation catalyst;
(2) elucidation of the mechanism of anisole hydrodeoxygenation over bulk ceria;
(3) establishing the active site requirements for hydrodeoxygenation over cerium
oxide; and (4) understanding the effect of doping on active site identity,
density, and efficacy. This research project aims to optimize energy, cost, and
atom-efficiency of biomass conversion processes by guiding the design of
hydrodeoxygenation catalysts and clarifying the identity of the mechanistic
steps involved in Mars-van Krevelen/reverse Mars-van Krevelen redox cycles,
ubiquitous in the realm of bulk oxide catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.