* 1916566
* RAPID: Ocean Forcing for Ice Sheet Models for the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Fiammetta Straneo, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2020
* USD 64,695.00

This research will facilitate better connections between models of ice sheets
and the ocean-atmosphere system and improve sea level rise projections for the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)'s upcoming sixth Assessment
Report (AR6). During the latest meeting of the international consortium of
scientists participating in the Ice Sheet Modeling Intercomparison Project
(ISMIP6), attendees agreed upon new information that will be needed to
understand how ocean conditions may interact with the ice sheet models of
Greenland and Antarctica. Because this information is required within the next
several months to meet deadlines for the next Assessment Report, this Rapid
Response (RAPID) project is both timely and urgent to help society plan for and
respond to sea level rise. It will support two junior scientists, a postdoctoral
researcher and a research associate, and they will benefit from interaction with
and exposure to the international ice sheet modeling community.

This project will support a community effort to derive ocean forcings for ice
sheet models for climate projections. It is time sensitive because of the need
to run ice sheet model simulations and publish results by the end of 2019 for
the IPCC sixth Assessment Report. At the same time, developments in ice sheet-
wide model dynamics that incorporate ocean forcing have only recently become
available. This study will lead to a synthesis of the state of knowledge of
ocean forcing on Greenland's glaciers and Antarctica's ice shelves and optimal
parameterizations that can be implemented given model constraints. In addition
to immediate application in the sixth Assessment Report, it is expected that
this work will lay the foundation for a similar approach in the future when full
coupling of ocean-atmosphere and ice sheet models are possible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.