* 1916511
* Collaborative Research: Energy Release and Transport in Impulsive Phase of Solar Flares
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Adam Kowalski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 276,633.00

As we continue to spread our technological reach into space, we are beginning to
grasp how dangerous and inhospitable it can be. An often overlooked danger comes
from the source of energy in our solar system: the Sun. The seemingly static and
abiding facet of our cosmic neighborhood provides a constant and reliable stream
of heat and light, but this can change in an instant and without warning.
Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs) are violent eruptions that see plasma structures
hundreds of times the size of the Earth reach out of the sun and blast into
space. This large concentration of unstable magnetic energy on the surface of
the Sun can often be characterized by bright flashes of light, X-rays,
ultraviolet and gamma rays commonly known as Solar Flares. These events are an
almost daily occurrence during solar activity maxima and are a source of
energetic particles and radiation which can be very harmful to space missions,
communications and GPS satellites, and especially to manned space operations
such as the ISS. In rare cases, these high energy phenomena may even threaten
our safety on Earth: a massive solar event was felt around the world in 1859 as
highly energetic solar particles rained down on our planet, creating dancing
lights in the atmosphere; an aurora that stretched from the North Pole all the
way to New York City. A key aspect of our Nation's continued foray into space
along with well thought out plans of defense lie in the scientific
characterization and understanding of such powerful and seemingly unpredictable
phenomena. Safety in space is one of our most important priorities, and the key
to venturing outside of our planet lies in the understanding of the energetic
heart of our solar system. This three-year project addresses the fundamental
problem of how the energy is produced, released and transported on the Sun
during most extreme flare events. The study leads to better understanding of
mechanisms of solar energetic particles and their impacts, as well as to
development of advanced predictive capabilities. The project involves students
at NJIT and University of Colorado who will answer outstanding questions about
the fundamental physics of solar flare energy production and release. The
student's results will be presented at professional conferences and summer
programs, as well as also at the University student events, thus, promoting STEM
education, as well as environmental and space
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent observational and modeling results showed
that the standard model of solar flares, which consider that the primary energy
release in the impulsive phase is in the form of high-energy electron beams, are
not capable to explain the observed impacts in the solar atmosphere and the
flare dynamics. Thus, it is necessary to consider other mechanisms of the energy
release and transport, such as proton beams and mixed electron-proton (neutral)
beams. Using currently available computational models and multi-instrument data,
the team performs a comprehensive investigation and derives properties of the
flaring plasma and accelerated particles during the impulsive phase. The project
specific tasks are: (i) perform quantitative multi-instrument analysis of the
flare emission, spectroscopic and magnetic field data; (ii) model the dynamic
response of the solar atmosphere to various energy release channels (including
electron, proton and neutral beams of different energy fluxes, and heat flux) by
performing radiative hydrodynamics simulations; (iii) using the flare dynamical
models and radiation codes, analyze the emission and spectral characteristics
for the various energy release channels; and, (iv) by comparing the model
characteristics with the data analysis results deduce properties of flare energy
release in the impulsive phase. The research and EPO agenda of this project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.