* 1916874
* Designing Elemental Devices for Molecular Electronics - Molecular Diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Enrique del Barco, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/2022
* USD 450,755.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Molecular electronics is based on the quantum properties
of nanoscale materials and offers unique potential for high density electronic
circuitry. This project seeks to advance the science and technology of a basic
building block of molecular electronics - the molecular tunnel junction. Tunnel
junction devices have a wide range of applications, including detectors, high
frequency circuits, and quantum computing. This project will develop molecular
charge rectifiers with functionality complementary to commercial silicon diodes.
The project encompasses fundamental studies in physics and chemistry as well as
device engineering in a broad range of experimental conditions. This project is
well-aligned with current national efforts on quantum technologies as well as
the Quantum Leap NSF Big Idea. The project will train graduate and undergraduate
students on the interface between inorganic chemistry and applied physics. They
will be involved with an interdisciplinary and international group of
collaborators developed by the principal investigator. The project will
integrate research with educational activities such as a Physics Summer Camp and
a Capstone Research Program for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
investigating the transport properties of metal-molecule-metal junctions, with
the goal to understand charge current rectification in molecular tunnel
junctions and pave the way towards developing molecular charge rectifiers with
functionalities complementary to commercial silicon-based diodes. The project
encompasses chemistry, physics, device engineering, as well as fundamental
studies in a broad range of experimental conditions. The proposed studies will
lead to a better understanding of molecular rectification and transport in
molecular junctions, in view of advancing knowledge enabling future
technological applications in molecular electronics. The specific objectives of
this project are to (1) investigate and quantify the conduction of charge
carriers through molecular junctions of the form metal-molecule-metal and (2)
elucidate the design of highly efficient molecular charge rectifying devices for
future use in molecular electronic applications. This project will advance the
fundamental understanding electrical charge and spin conduction in molecular
junctions. The projected studies will help elucidate the design of operative and
highly efficient molecular charge rectifying devices for future use in molecular
electronic applications. Several students will be trained at the interface
between inorganic chemistry and fundamen-tal and applied physics and exposed to
a highly interdisciplinary international net of collaborations that the PI has
established over many years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aligns well with
current national efforts on quantum technologies, as illustrated by the National
Quantum Initiative Act and the Quantum Leap NSF Big Idea. The PI will integrate
the proposed research with three main educational activities: (1) a Physics
Summer Camp offred at no cost to high-performing high-school students in the
Orlando metropolitan area, (2) a Service-Learning Nanoscience Minor, where
undergraduate students outreach to middle schools in the area to disseminate
research in nanoscience, and (3) a Collaborative Physical Science Capstone
Research Program, a one-of-a-kind multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary
junior/senior capstone research experience to facilitate transition into the
profession to physical science undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.