* 1916505
* CAREER: Querying Evolving Graphs
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Julia Stoyanovich, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 497,808.00

Graphs are used to represent a plethora of phenomena, including the Web, social
networks, biological pathways, transportation networks, and semantic knowledge
bases. Many interesting and important questions about graphs concern their
evolution rather than their static state: Which Web pages are showing an
increasing popularity trend? How does influence propagate in social networks?
How do the utilization of transportation options and the cost of ridership in a
city change during the day and throughout the week? How does knowledge evolve?
Formulating these questions as programs is currently beyond the skills of most
data scientists. Executing such programs poses tremendous efficiency challenges,
especially for graphs with billions of edges, and with non-trivial evolution
rates. Much research and engineering effort today goes into developing
sophisticated graph analytics and their efficient implementations, both stand-
alone and in scope of data processing platforms. Yet, systematic support for
querying and analysis of evolving graphs is still lacking. This support is
urgently needed, due both to the scalability challenges inherent in evolving
graph analysis, and to considerations of usability and ease of dissemination.
This project will fill this gap by establishing the fundamental principles of
effective modeling and efficient analysis of evolving graphs, and by making
results available to the community of use in an open-source platform called
Portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build on the state of the art in
temporal data management, making the principles and techniques that were
developed over decades of research and practice in that domain available to
evolving graph applications. The project will develop: (1) a data model for
evolving graphs and an expressive compositional algebra; (2) an efficient
implementation of the data structures and of the algebraic operations, together
with any necessary algebraic primitives and physical representations / access
methods, in scope of a distributed data-parallel framework; (3) a declarative
query language that supports concise specification of sophisticated graph
analysis tasks, and a query optimizer that generates efficient query execution
plans; (4) a principled evaluation methodology of usability and efficiency,
based on real and synthetic datasets and analysis tasks. This project will
impact research and practice in data management, by contributing novel
representation, analysis and benchmarking methods for evolving graph data.
Results of this project will help incorporate sophisticated evolving graph
analysis into larger applications, and will enable scaling up to modern volumes.
The Portal framework will support computational and data scientists who work
with evolving graphs in social network analysis, knowledge management and
network traffic analysis. A prominent set of use cases for this work will come
from data science for social-good applications, including urban homelessness and
analysis of transportation utilization and cost in cities. For further
information see the project web page:
portaldb.github.io.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.