* 1916175
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Building a Low-cost and State-of-the-art IoT Security Hands-on Laboratory
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Shuo Wang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) interconnects everything including physical and
virtual objects together through communication protocols. IoT has broad
applications in digital healthcare, smart cities, transportation, agriculture,
logistics and many other domains. The popularity of IoT has raised security and
privacy concerns. This project seeks to improve IoT and privacy education
through the development of laboratory module materials. This will include the
development of an IoT platform with an industrial grade microcontroller (MCU)
equipped with a crypto co-processor that is significantly lower-cost than
existing platforms. This platform will allow for the development of a full-
fledged IoT laboratory with hardware security modules at a cost that will make
it affordable for students and institutions. The proposed IoT platform, teaching
labs with both hardware and software, case studies and faculty development
summer workshop will help improve curricula, student learning, and faculty
collaboration and development at the participating institutes and partner
intuitions, including Hispanic Serving Institutions and Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the
first to use an industrial grade microcontroller and a crypto coprocessor to
systematically develop teaching materials including hands-on labs and case
studies on IoT security and privacy. The intellectual merit of the proposed
project lies in its development of effective, engaging and novel teaching
materials on IoT security. The deliverables include: a low-cost IoT development
kit; the integrated development environment (IDE) to use the kit; multiple
teaching labs covering the hardware security, secure key storage, secure boot,
data security, network security, secure firmware upgrade and crypto co-
processor; two case studies on building trustworthy air quality monitoring
systems. The investigators will build awareness and competence to respond to a
dynamic and rapidly developing array of cyber threats, especially those in the
emerging IoT applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.