* 1916271
* Integrative Analysis on Heterogeneous Datasets with High-Dimensional and Non-Standard Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yuekai Sun, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Advances in data collection technology in the past decade have enabled
practitioners to collect larger and more comprehensive datasets about many
natural and social phenomena. Although this trend has enabled practitioners to
gain new insights, it also comes with caveats that, if not addressed, may lead
to erroneous conclusions that lie at the core of the reproducibility crisis in
some areas of science. The caveats include: (i) Modern datasets are growing in
heterogeneity, not only as a consequence of the inherent diversity in the world,
but also the trend of combining data from multiple sources to create more
comprehensive datasets. Not properly accounting for this growing heterogeneity
may lead practitioners to systematically biased conclusions. (ii) The size of
modern datasets is a hindrance to drawing inferences from them. Fitting a
standard model to a massive dataset can be computationally intractable. (iii)
The comprehensive nature of modern datasets raises privacy and security
concerns. This is exacerbated by integrative analysis that may uncover
combinations of patterns in multiple sources that are individually innocuous,
but jointly identifying.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator aims to
address the heterogeneity, size, and privacy/security concerns that arise in
integrative analysis of heterogeneous datasets by designing communication
avoiding methods. At a high level, the general approach is to trade local
computation for communication: compute lossy summaries of each data source and
perform integrative analysis on the summaries. This way, only the summaries are
assembled, thereby reducing the communication costs and preserving the anonymity
and security of the separate data sources. The specific aims of the PI's work
include (i) effective computational strategies for distributed computing under
heterogeneity in popular high-dimensional models with provable statistical
guarantees, and (ii) new methodological and theoretical insights into data
integration for "non-differentiable" statistical problems in which estimators
are obtained by projecting either on the boundaries of a convex cone or via the
optimization of discontinuous criterion functions, and which arise increasingly
in modern domains of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.