* 1916001
* Dynamic Multivariate Normative Comparison and Risk Screening for Alzheimer's Disease Progression
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Yu Cheng, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 179,928.00

This project focuses on the development of statistical methods for analyzing
data from the Alzheimer Disease (AD) Research Center (ADRC). The first objective
is to develop robust procedures to classify cognitive impairment over repeated
visits. This has important clinical implications, as current diagnostic methods
tend to falsely flag healthy subjects as impaired. The second project focuses on
systematic evaluation of high-dimensional risk factors to select promising
features that can separate those subjects who will develop AD, from those who
might die, and those who will be alive and disease free by a certain time point.
The completion of this project will lead to the identification of important risk
factors that are predictive of both AD and survival. These newly identified
biological, clinical, and genetic markers will guide future studies developing
targeted intervention for AD. The proposed methods are relevant for disease
diagnosis and risk screening but may also be applied to other areas such as
economics, finance and engineering. The project will integrate research and
education through the mentoring of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first project concerns longitudinal measures of multiple domain scores of
cognitive functioning modeled using multivariate mixed-effect models. A
longitudinal multivariate normative comparison (MNC) statistic is then computed
to measure the distance between a subject's domain scores and the estimated norm
of healthy controls. Different thresholding methods are proposed for the
longitudinal MNC based on the Chi-square approximation and permutation to
identify cognitive impairment from retrospective data. Two familywise-error-rate
controlling procedures are developed to dynamically screen for cognitive
impairment at each ongoing visit, by comparing the p-values from the
longitudinal MNC with adaptive significance levels. In the second project, a
recently developed diagnostic measure of the volume under the ROC surface (VUS)
is adopted as a model-free screening metric for ordinal competing endpoints. The
VUS can be readily estimated as a concordance probability by some weighted
U-statistics. The proposed screening procedure based on the U-type estimator of
the VUS provides systematic and dynamic evaluation of markers' discriminatory
capacity without any model assumptions. As the first screening method developed
specifically for ordinal disease progression, the successful completion of the
second project will contribute to the broader field of high-dimensional risk
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.