* 1916764
* Report on the Nation's Undergraduate Mathematical Sciences Programs:  Year Fifty of a Longitudinal Survey of Two-year and Four-year Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ellen Kirkman, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 842,207.00

This project contributes to the national interest by increasing understanding of
undergraduate mathematical sciences programs across the United States. This
project will continue a cross-sectional, longitudinal survey of undergraduate
mathematical sciences programs that has been done every five years since 1965.
The comprehensive survey is endorsed by the Conference Board for the
Mathematical Sciences (CBMS), an organization whose members are the presidents
of the seventeen professional associations in the mathematical and statistical
sciences. Consistent with previous CBMS surveys, the CBMS 2020 Survey will track
changes in the curriculum, pedagogy, and enrollment levels by individual
courses, bachelor's degrees granted, and program faculty. A comprehensive report
will be developed to describe the survey results, thus providing current
national benchmarks about the Nation's mathematical sciences departments. The
CBMS 2020 Survey Report will be distributed in spring 2020 to science policy
leaders at the national level and to all U. S. mathematical sciences programs.
It will also be freely available online and in print. The findings of the survey
will be promoted to the mathematical sciences community at professional meetings
and in publications. Improving the Nation's undergraduate STEM efforts depends
on improving undergraduate mathematics and statistics, and planning future
reforms begins by knowing the present. The survey report will provide data on
crucial issues within the mathematical sciences community, catalyzing other
educational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The statistical design of the
stratified random sample survey and associated statistical analysis will be
conducted by statisticians at Westat, Inc., who will work in consultation with a
steering committee appointed by CBMS. The final report will be written by the
project's senior personnel and published by the American Mathematical Society.
The survey's evolving structure will contribute to educational survey research
methodology. In addition, the CBMS 2020 Survey will include topics of current
importance to leaders concerned with undergraduate education in the mathematical
sciences. Examples of topics include: (1) evidence-based teaching practices; (2)
practices in distance-learning courses; (3) instructional strategies in College
Algebra, Calculus I, and Elementary Statistics; (4) instructional strategies and
delivery methods in developmental mathematics; (5) assessment of mathematics and
statistics programs; (5) data on gender and under-represented groups; (6)
undergraduate research and internship opportunities in the mathematical
sciences; and (6) full-time faculty at four-year departments who not eligible
for tenure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.