* 1916625
* Mechanism of completing cellular DNA replication
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Justin Courcelle, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 747,006.00

The mechanism by which cells complete chromosome replication is not well
understood. Yet the process must be remarkably efficient, occurring thousands of
times per cell division in human cells, and is essential to maintain all
cellular life and genome stability. This project will identify the processive
molecular intermediates that occur during the completion of replication in
cells. Students trained as part of this project will be qualified for careers in
medicine, biotechnology, and research, and will include graduates and
undergraduates at Portland State University, an urban college with a student
body made up of more than 40% first generation college students. The project
will also enhance early science and math education in the Portland public school
system through a range of activities that include science fairs, science nights,
career days, mentoring high school student research, and school-initiated
science programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the bacterium Escherichia coli,
completing replication involves an enzymatic system that limits cellular
replication to its doubling point by allowing converging replication forks to
transiently bypass each other before the excess, over-replicated regions are
incised, resected, and joined. The reaction initiates through the combined
action of SbcCD-ExoI and requires RecBCD to join convergent strands of the
replication fork. In mutants where completing replication is impaired, cell
viability becomes dependent on an aberrant form of recombination that also
drives genetic instabilities. While these observations clearly establish the
importance of this fundamental process, the substrates and mechanism by which
these enzymes catalyze the reaction remain unknown. This research uses a bi-
directionally replicating plasmid mini-chromosome to identify the structural
intermediates that occur in wild type cells and mutants impaired for the
completion reaction, in vivo. The project will determine how chi and ter
sequences, which are known to regulate completion enzymes, affect the reaction
in vivo using genomic profiling and plasmid mini-chromosomes. The research
additionally employs a genetic screen designed to identify and characterize
additional enzymes involved in the completion process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.