* 1916696
* Development of a Vibration-based Acoustic Sound Power Measurement Method
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Scott Sommerfeldt, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2023
* USD 388,733.00

As many as 40 million adult Americans have hearing loss from loud noise and 30
million Americans are exposed to hazardous noise levels every day. As a society,
we are becoming more aware of excessive noise around us, and the discomfort and
health problems it creates. To address this problem, engineers and designers
need efficient methods to include noise test data in the product design process.
Current standards and methods for measuring sound power, which is the metric
used to quantify noise produced by a product, require specialized acoustic
chambers such that sound power testing is typically expensive and time
consuming. As a result, sound power testing may not even be done, which limits
the ability of designers to focus on and minimize noise in their products. This
research will focus on developing a new vibration-based sound power measurement
method that will allow engineers to efficiently acquire and use noise data to
improve their products. The new method is not limited by many of the
restrictions of current sound power measurement standards and can be used to
make truly in situ measurements saving companies significant time and providing
improved products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of standards exist for
measuring sound power. However, these typically have restrictions such as
requiring specific acoustic fields, reflective surfaces, and no varying
background noise. A new vibration-based method will be developed that is
designed to overcome a number of these restrictions. This new method treats the
structure as an array of small, individual radiators, and estimates the sound
power through the calculation of self- and mutual-impedances between the
radiators. Expressions for these impedances have been developed for simple ideal
structures. This research will utilize these expressions to validate the method
of obtaining the sound power from vibration measurements. It will then focus on
developing the theoretical and computational tools to account for arbitrarily
shaped structures, coupled built-up structures, and components of built-up
structures. Experimental verification of the new method will be carried out for
these more complex structures by comparing results using the extended
computational tools with results from existing standards. By overcoming some of
the restrictions of current standards, the new method will also be used for
truly in-situ testing. The new method is not meant to replace all other methods,
but it will provide a practical vibration-based
alternative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.