* 1916541
* Planning IUCRC Syracuse University: Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and IoT (CHASSI)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Shiu-Kai Chin, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 15,000.00

This IUCRC planning project will establish the feasibility of a multi-site
Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and Internet-of-Things (CHASSI) that
will focus on areas where both security and high assurance are necessary to
support operations of high mission criticality, due to safety or economic
impact. Examples include medical devices, manufacturing, the energy grid, real-
time financial markets, construction, and defense. Combining security and high-
assurance is hard. Intentionally combining them will lead to new models,
techniques, designs, architectures, and systems that will be applicable across
of range of important U.S. industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHASSI has five
sites: University of Kansas (KU), University of Minnesota, Syracuse University,
Case Western Reserve University, and Indiana University. CHASSI research has
four thrusts: (1) Architectures, design and formal modeling for systems-level
security, privacy, stability, and performance; (2) Secure communication,
sensing, and devices; (3) Scalable trust and privacy; and (4) Human behavior for
privacy and security. SU brings expertise in mission and systems assurance, and
certified security by design. Complementary expertise at other sites includes
attestation, networking, cyber-physical systems, hardware, software, database,
and mobile security, assurance of medical devices, industrial Internet-of-Things
(IIoT), manufacturing and energy applications, and human
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHASSI faculty members will gain an understanding
of the specific interests and actual needs/barriers of industrial companies.
Companies benefit from exposure to university research across all sites,
learning from other industry colleagues, students as potential hires, and
faculty that might perform center projects or proprietary research. SU will
advance diversity by recruiting and educating students with its Inclusive
Excellence programs Posse Scholars, McNair Scholars Program, Collegiate Science
and Technology Entry Program, Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation,
National Society of Black Engineers, Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers,
Society of Women Engineers, and Women in Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators from this multi-university-
industry Center will host a single Center-wide repository at
https://chassi.ku.edu. This shared repository will include meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc., and will be made available for a
minimum of five years after conclusion of the award or until the Center
transitions to the next phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.