* 1916239
* Offline and Online Change-point Analysis for Large-scale Time Series Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jun Li, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Offline or online time series data often involve change points due to the
dynamic behavior of the monitored systems. Identifying change points from
offline time series data makes parameter estimation and statistical inference
efficient by pooling homogeneous observations. Detection of change points from
online time series data provides timely snapshots of the monitored system and
allows for real-time anomaly detection. Despite its importance, methods
available for detecting change points in large-scale offline and online time
series data are scarce. This is because a large number of parameters cannot be
estimated accurately with a limited number of observations, and parametric
models do not fully capture multifarious aspects of data dependence. This
project will develop new non-parametric change-point detection methods that
incorporate both spatial and temporal dependence without imposing restrictive
structural assumptions on large-scale time series data. The proposed methods
will span a wide range of topics in applications, including identifying
significant genes associated with certain diseases, studying dynamic functional
connectivity in resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data, and
detecting abrupt events such as dissociation of communities, or formation of new
communities from social networking platforms. This project will integrate
research and education by involving students at different levels, including
those from underrepresented groups, and by training the pre-college and high
school teachers to improve their knowledge in statistics through new developed
courses. The developed methods will be disseminated to biomedical and social
scientists through interdisciplinary collaborations and the analysis of first-
hand datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a general factor
model framework for spatial and temporal dependence of large-scale time series
data. By integrating the framework, this project will provide hypothesis testing
and offline change-point estimation of specific parameters, including the
population mean and covariance matrix. The proposed methods can be readily
modified to incorporate the advantages of both sum-of-squares-norm and max-norm
statistics for hypothesis testing. They can be extended from regular binary
segmentation methods to other popular change-point estimation methods, such as
circular binary segmentation and wild binary segmentation. This project will
also provide new stopping rules for online change-point detection of large-scale
time series data. An explicit expression for the average run length (ARL) will
be derived, so that the level of threshold in stopping rules can be easily
obtained with no need to run time-consuming Monte Carlo simulations. The
proposed research will derive an upper bound for the expected detection delay
(EDD), the expression of which clearly demonstrates the impact of data
dimensionality and dependence. This project will extend the current knowledge
about change-point detection. For offline change-point detection, the PI will
study the possibility of estimating the change point near the boundary in high
dimensional settings. For online change-point detection, a comparison will be
made between the stopping rule based on the sum-of-squares-norm statistic and
the one based on the max-norm statistic, through the derived ARLs and
EDDs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.