* 1916497
* Phase III IUCRC at University of Texas at Arlington: Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Anand Puppala, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory Reed
* 03/31/2020
* USD 49,999.00

The Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI) is a NSF
I/UCRC that utilizes the expertise of West Virginia University, North Carolina
State University, the University of Miami, and Texas A &amp; M
University/University of Texas at Arlington with an objective of accelerating
the adoption of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) composites and geosynthetics into
infrastructure applications by utilizing industry wide cooperation. The American
Society of Civil Engineers gives U.S. infrastructure a grade of D+, with a 10
year funding gap of $1.44 trillion, leading to losses of $3.9 trillion to the
U.S. GDP and 2.5 million fewer jobs. FRP composites and geosythentics are
gaining acceptance for infrastructure due to their corrosion resistance, ease of
installation, and proof-of-concept from field demonstrations in service for up
to four decades. The biggest advantage to composite materials is durability, as
they do not corrode or rot allowing for an extended service life thus extending
taxpayer dollars. With the support of NSF, CICI currently consists of a
consortium of four universities and 31 industry members, bringing together
faculty, students, practitioners, manufacturers, trade organizations and
government agencies to overcome the obstacles to widespread deployment of
composites, forging lasting partnerships, and educating students, engineers and
contractors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CICI focuses on four research thrusts. First,
research on material development, manufacturing, and characterization allows for
the development of new composite materials and recycling of discarded polymer
composites with a clear understanding of the physico-chemical and mechanical
properties. Second, the durability and aging of composites is evaluated under
accelerated aging and by examining existing structures to ensure that composites
can have long service lives under harsh environmental conditions. Third, design,
implementation and evaluation of composites in new construction and
rehabilitation of existing structures.. Fourth, CICI contributes to the
development of standards, specifications, and guide documents required for the
deployment of new technologies into commercial practice. The University of Texas
at Arlington (UTA) will continue to examine the utilization of composites,
including geosynthetics, polymeric materials including geopolymers, and other
geocomposites in subsurface infrastructure including pavements, runways,
embankments, retaining structures, earth dams and levees. Both life cycle cost
analysis and sustainable utilization of composites will be addressed in these
studies. The UTA CICI site has a strong research background in soil-structure
interactions, and will work with the partner universities on materials,
structural retrofits and offshore soil treatment including
geosynthetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.