* 1916298
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Development of Trans-Asian Trade Route
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Pamela Vandiver, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2021
* USD 24,885.00

Through the examination of glazed ceramics, this project will investigate the
evolving nature of production, trade, and innovation resulting from increased
mobility and cultural contact facilitated by the Silk Road. Catherine Klesner, a
graduate student at the University of Arizona under the direction of Dr. Pamela
Vandiver, will characterize the provenience of finely decorated glazed pottery
from Central Asia to determine the scale of local production and technological
innovations and to understand the stylistic models for local development
provided by long distance trade during the Medieval Period. The ceramics in
study were excavated from archaeological sites which lie on the northern edge of
the Tien Shen Mountains. This narrow corridor occupies an important geographical
position on the Silk Road and for millennia facilitated the complex trade and
knowledge networks that transverse Eurasia. By examining the ceramics, the
researchers will better understand both the physical trade networks in place
during the 9th-15th centuries, but also how technologies were transmitted, and
local traditions adapted with the influx of nonlocal goods. The research will
shed light on how complex trade networks are developed and the role they play in
the development of social complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
examine the composition and isotope signatures of the lead-glazed pottery from
sites in southern Kazakhstan as well as the microstructure of the ceramic bodies
and glazes in an effort to reconstruct their production technology. The analyses
of the ceramic composition will be based on neutron activation analysis (NAA),
laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS), and
lead-isotope analysis, whereas the production technology will be determined by
petrographic thin section analysis, scanning electron microscopy-energy
dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS), and electron microprobe analysis (EMPA). This
research will address three main questions about ceramic production in Southern
Kazakhstan during the Medieval Period. [1] Did the ceramic workshops in Central
Asia produce fine decorated pottery in the style of ceramics from China and
Southwest Asia, or were the ceramics from these medieval cities imported into
the region through Silk Road trade? [2] How many centers in the region produced
glazed ceramics, and how homogeneous was the production technology for fine
glazed wares? [3] How do glazed ceramics that were produced in this region
differ technologically from the imported ceramics from Southwest Asia and China?
This project is one of the first systematic compositional and technological
analysis of Islamic ceramics from Central Asia and will better define the
ceramic technologies of the Medieval Period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.