* 1916564
* IUCRC Phase I at North Dakota State University:  Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites [CB2]
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* David Grewell, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 04/30/2022
* USD 307,500.00

The goal of the Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2) is to improve the
basic knowledge of the synthesis, processing, properties, and compounding of
bioplastic and biocomposite materials, as well as to develop reliable material
characteristics data for industrial partners and support large-scale industrial
implementation of renewable materials. Sustainability is a rapidly growing
aspect of technology, driven partially by social factors; however, many
industries are struggling to effectively incorporate sustainability-related
practices. CB2 creates new knowledge, materials, and processes for sustainable
biobased plastics and composites. The vision of the center is to develop
knowledge that will facilitate the production of an array of high-value
products, including plastics, coatings, adhesives, and composites, from
renewable feedstocks that are compatible with current industrial manufacturing
systems and thereby promoting rural development as well as national growth.
NDSU's specific expertise in areas such as coatings technology and thermosetting
polymers will be applied to the design of high performance biobased materials
for use in coatings, composites, and adhesives. NDSU will also provide life
cycle assessment and technoeconomic analysis to projects across CB2. The center
focusses on the development of jobs in the area of sustainable manufacturing,
focusing on conversion of agricultural and woody crops to energy and materials
which are crucial to lasting job creation in the United States. The center also
strives to support education and diversity through engagement of K-12 educators,
supporting a NSF Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) -- co-located at
ISU and WSU -- where students participate in research on sustainable
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Center for Bioplastics and
Biocomposites (CB2) is to develop fundamental knowledge related to bioplastics
and biocomposites, to disseminate research-based findings to industry to promote
sustainability and to educate future scientists and engineers. The team of
researchers includes experts from the fields of polymer processing, polymer
chemistry, materials science, and biomass utilization. It combines a wide area
of experience and expertise, allowing a well-rounded interdisciplinary approach.
In addition, all of the participating institutions (North Dakota State
University Iowa State University, Washington State University, University of
Georgia) have state-of-the-art facilities for polymer processing and
characterization to facilitate the development of a fundamental understanding of
the influence of processing on the properties of biopolymers and composites.
Research focus and priority areas are determined by industry partners through a
process developed by the industry partners to ensure the relevance to and
positive impact on sustainable future industry development. Individual projects
are based on seed concepts generated by the center?s industry partners and
ultimately defined through an interactive process between researchers and
industry partners. The projects are then mentored on a monthly basis by the
industry partners, which serves as a model for technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.