* 1916534
* Understanding Employment Trajectories of Racially Minoritized Engineering PhDs
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* William Robinson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 06/30/2023
* USD 593,957.00

Despite well-funded efforts to diversify engineering in the United States,
Americans who identify as Black, Latinx, and Indigenous (Native American,
Alaskan, or Hawaiian) remain underrepresented and marginalized throughout
engineering academic training and employment. Previous research has identified
that underrepresented PhD-degreed engineers of color are less likely to be
employed in engineering jobs compared to their overrepresented counterparts.
However, there is much less certainty on the reasons behind this disparity.
Moreover, the employment paths of White women in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) employment have been extensively explored along
with the career trajectories of graduate students of color in STEM, but there
has been very little attention to engineers of color with PhDs post-graduation.
The focus of this research is to understand the employment paths for two
populations: underrepresented engineers of color who have successfully navigated
the challenges of obtaining an engineering PhD, along with Asian engineering PhD
holders who are well-represented in the field. This research will investigate
two critical factors that can help explain disparities for underrepresented
engineers of color: (1) their experiences of racialization, and (2) their
interest in using engineering as a mechanism to decrease social inequities. This
research will address the gap in understanding the factors that drive these
disparities in engineering employment outcomes across racial groups and how to
decrease them, thereby aiding engineering education and industry communities in
becoming and remaining more diverse, innovative, and affirming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will answer these questions through a
mixed-methods design, including a longitudinal survey component and qualitative
in-depth interviews. Survey respondents will be engineers of color who are
working in industry and the academic workforce within a decade of graduating
with their PhD. Participants will be recruited through the professional
networking site LinkedIn as well as professional organizations for engineers of
color. In the first phase, survey data and analysis, using structural equation
modeling, will determine how respondents' experiences of racial inequity and
bias at work and their motivations and efforts to address social inequities
through engineering vis-a-vis their employers, predict their employment outcomes
(e.g., commitment, intentions to quit) by increasing their "job embeddedness."
The analyses will test this model across different race groups. Collecting
follow-up employment data one year later will provide a measure of actual
persistence. Survey findings will inform the content of the qualitative
interview protocol. Interview participants will be people of color with an
engineering PhD who are not directly using their engineering skillset because
they either switched from an engineering job into a non-engineering job or
transitioned into a leadership or administrative position. These findings will
help to identify why engineers of color with advanced doctoral training are
either: (a) dissatisfied and pushed away from this workforce or (b) persist in
their work to transition into different roles that allow them to diversify the
field. Insights from this research will inform workplace training webinars
promoting diversity and inclusion in engineering workplaces in both industry and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.