* 1916972
* RAPID: Performance of Reinforced Concrete Structures with Externally Bonded Fiber Reinforced Polymer Composite Retrofits in the 2018 Anchorage, Alaska Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Jovan Tatar, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2021
* USD 47,800.00

Externally bonded fiber reinforced polymer (EBFRP) composites can be used to
seismically retrofit structures in a simple and economical manner. However, lack
of documented evidence of their performance during an earthquake still limits
their widespread adoption. This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will
study the effects of the November 30, 2018, earthquake (magnitude 7.0) in
Anchorage, Alaska, on the performance of EBFRP composite retrofits in reinforced
concrete buildings. The 2018 earthquake, which impacted the same region that was
severely damaged by the 1964 Great Alaskan earthquake (magnitude 9.2) ground
shaking, provides an opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness of EBFRP
retrofits in a high-intensity earthquake and learn about their performance. This
study will, for the first time, provide information on the performance of EBFRP
retrofitted structures in an earthquake that occurred in the United States. The
collected data will contribute to improved building retrofit design standards
and construction practices, which will cultivate safe buildings and communities
resilient to earthquakes, thus promoting national welfare. The findings will
benefit practitioners and researchers by providing a unique data set to
benchmark the numerical models used to simulate the response of retrofitted
structures. The data will be archived and disseminated through the NSF-supported
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot and
Reconnaissance Integration Portal (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). The graduate
student participating in the project will gain valuable research raining in
field data collection and post-earthquake reconnaissance. This award supports
the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of this grant is to collect perishable data on EBFRP response
during the 2018 Alaskan earthquake to improve understanding of the performance
of EBFRP-retrofitted structures. The data collection activities in Anchorage,
Alaska, coordinated with the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST), will include the following: (1) a survey to identify reinforced concrete
structures that are retrofitted with EBFRP, (2) photographic documentation of
damage to EBFRP retrofit systems (e.g., delamination, rupture, and environmental
degradation), and (3) identification of in-situ characteristics of the EBFRP
utilizing non-destructive (e.g., acoustic sounding and infrared thermography)
and semi-destructive (e.g., bond pull-off test) methods. Where permissible,
small samples of EBFRP will be collected for chemical and thermal analysis to
determine the extent of environmental degradation in
EBFRP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.