* 1916610
* Developing, unifying, and empirically testing theory for inducible and evolving defenses
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Cortez, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 525,324.00

Throughout the world, prey species have a variety of defenses to avoid being
eaten by predators. Plastic defenses are those that can change over time based
on how many predators are present, for example prey may spend more time hiding
when there are more predators around. Evolving defenses (like shell thickness)
change over time based on which parents survive to reproduce and are able to
pass their traits to their offspring. These different types of defenses
influence the abundances of prey and their predators, as well as responses to
environmental change. However, it is unclear exactly what effects plastic and
evolving defenses have and whether plastic and evolving defenses have similar or
different effects on species abundances and their responses to environmental
change. Developing such an understanding is important because humans are
dramatically altering environments through nutrient enrichment and species
mortality. At present, it is not possible to predict how different types of
defense (plastic or evolving) determine how populations will respond. This
project uses laboratory experiments and mathematical models to determine how
different types of plastic and evolving defenses influence population abundances
and how populations respond to environmental change. This research program will
train undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of community ecology and
mathematical biology, engage underrepresented minorities in research, and engage
the public through community outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive
responses in prey to predation pressure can be plastic or evolutionary in
nature, and both can alter the dynamics and stability of ecological communities.
The goal of this project is to develop theory that explains how mechanistic
differences between different types of plastic defenses and evolving defenses
shape the dynamics of communities. To identify when plastic and evolving
defenses have similar versus different effects, mathematical models will be
developed to explain how plastic and evolving defenses influence system
stability and population responses to nutrient enrichment and species mortality.
The theory will be tested via laboratory based experiments involving populations
of a prey species (Paramecium) that do or do not have plastic defenses - changes
in behavior and body width - that alter the rate at which they are consumed by
predators. This work will both extend current theory for plastic defenses and
unify it with the theory for evolving defenses. The theory-data pairing approach
of this project is likely to generate important advances in the theory of
plastic defenses and community ecology. This work will also yield insight into
the connections between plastic and evolutionary
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.