* 1916174
* Collaborative Research: A Symphony of Smoothing and Change Point Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Pang Du, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2022
* USD 160,002.00

A sudden change in a real life process is often of particular interest since the
change may signal an anomaly, the onset of a disease, or an out-of-control
process. What has been ignored in the literature is the co-existence of a
slowly-changing component that also needs to be properly modeled to make valid
statistical inference. In traditional statistics, inferring a sudden change and
modeling a slowly-changing trend are often perceived as two seemingly
conflicting concepts since they emphasize respectively on continuity and
discontinuity of the true underlying process. Motivated by real-life
applications, this project aims to develop three sets of novel statistical
methods where simultaneous modeling of the sudden change and the slowly-changing
trend are properly introduced to accommodate the practical needs. The
statistical analysis tools developed in this project will benefit practitioners
in the fields of cybersecurity, environmental sciences, financial managements,
and medical studies. The results from the project will be integrated into
teaching and student training, and be disseminated through publications and the
distribution of R packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to the
development of statistical methods that are natural fusions of change point
analysis and nonparametric smoothing. The proposed method will combine recent
developments in functional data analysis and nonparametric smoothing inference,
such as functional time series and functional Bahadur representation, and change
point analysis tools to solve the challenging problems. The first aim of the
project focuses on change point detection in variance functions along with a
smoothly-changing mean trend. A novel subsampling approach will be designed to
incorporate the large sample size involved. The other two aims of the project
are to develop change point detection methods and derive corresponding optimal
theoretical properties for multivariate probability densities and functional
time series, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.