* 1916908
* Collaborative Research: A Flexible Framework for Radiation Parameterizations Traceable to Benchmarks
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,023,287.00

Earth's climate is set by the balance between the flow of radiant energy into
the atmosphere, largely as visible sunlight, and the return flow of infrared
radiation to space. Simulations of earth's climate thus require an approximate
representation of these flows which is fast enough to be practical and accurate
enough to capture phenomena of interest, such as the warming effect of carbon
dioxide (CO2). The development of such representations, referred to as radiative
transfer parameterizations or more simply as radiation schemes, is challenging
given that the transparency of the atmosphere to infrared radiation can vary
abruptly from one wavelength to another. Practical radiation schemes exist, but
they are challenging to develop and update and it is not generally feasible to
tailor them to specific applications. For example the version of the Community
Earth System Model (CESM) available in 2020 uses a radiation scheme published in
2008, despite the availability of new spectroscopic observations, and the same
version is used for full-complexity present-day simulations and for idealized
simulations that would benefit from a faster but less accurate
version.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the creation of a toolkit that
would greatly enhance the ability of climate researchers to create radiative
transfer parameterizations suitable for their needs. The user would supply a set
of benchmark atmospheres, specified as profiles of temperature and composition
(water vapor and CO2, for instance), that cover the range of conditions
anticipated in the particular application, and the toolbox would use a
sophisticated line-by-line radiative transfer model and a database of up-to-date
spectroscopic observations to create parameterization options with varying
degrees of accuracy and computational cost. Users would then be able to choose
the best trade-off between cost and accuracy for their application. In addition,
the project creates parameterizations for specific research goals: one for
simulations of paleoclimates with high CO2 concentrations and two for studies of
the interaction between radiation and convective clouds (one emphasizing speed,
which can be invoked more frequently, and one emphasizing accuracy). A third,
developed with collaborators at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
(funded through other sources), is optimized for simulations of present-day
climate and prediction of climate fluctuations including El Nino
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project also includes work on alternative
methods for parameterizing radiative transfer, one of which is a discrete
frequency approximation, in which an optimally chosen set of strictly
monochromatic spectral lines is used instead of a representation in terms of
frequency bands. The lines are determined from the spectral database using a
fast optimization technique such as simulated annealing. The second is a machine
learning approach designed to emulate the underlying exact solutions to the
radiative transfer equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts
through the development of a key piece of infrastructure for weather and climate
models. The work will thus have benefit for the worldwide community that relies
on these models as tools for basic science research. Workshops and tutorials are
supported to facilitate community engagement. The work also enhances the value
of model-based predictions and projections as guidance for decision makers
concerned with climate variability and change. The project supports a postdoc
and a graduate student, thus providing for the future workforce in climate model
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.