* 1916018
* The AGEP Data Engineering and Science Alliance Model: Training and Resources to Advance Minority Graduate Students and Postdoctoral Researchers into Faculty Careers
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Pradeep Sharma, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 315,772.00

This collaborative research project brings together Rice University, Texas
Southern University and the University of Houston, with the goal to develop,
implement, study, evaluate, disseminate, sustain and potentially reproduce an
AGEP Alliance Model to support and advance historically underrepresented
minority (URM) STEM doctoral candidates and postdoctoral researchers into
faculty positions in data engineering and science (DES) fields. The project
employs a three-pronged approach: Professional development opportunities for
faculty advisors and mentors; activities to address equity issues in
institutional policies and procedures; and training for URM graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers in key knowledge and skill areas that are essential
to DES faculty member success: research, teaching, entrepreneurship, leadership
and administration. The targeted outcomes of this AGEP DES Alliance Model
project include the career advancement of URM doctoral candidates and
postdoctoral scholars into faculty positions in DES fields; institutional
changes to improve the retention of URM doctoral students, improve the equity of
faculty hiring practices and remove systemic barriers to URM faculty and
postdoctoral scholar success; and interest by other universities and colleges to
reproduce the AGEP DES Alliance Model or specific
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP DES Alliance Model was created in
response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate
(AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance
knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and success of
URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM
disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP Alliances develop,
replicate or reproduce, implement, and study, via integrated educational and
social science research, AGEP Alliance Models to transform the dissertation
phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement,
and transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs in STEM and/or
STEM education research careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a
STEM achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate
students, our universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote
URM STEM faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM students
to learn from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM
associate and full professors occupy only 8% of these senior faculty positions
at all four-year colleges and universities, and only about 6% of these positions
at the nation's most research-intensive institutions. The AGEP DES Alliance
Model has the potential to advance a model to improve the success of URM
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers as they enter faculty careers.
Advancing the careers of URM faculty ultimately leads to improved academic
mentorship for URM undergraduate students in DES research
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education research being conducted
by the AGEP DES Alliance Model team investigates factors that help or hinder URM
STEM doctoral degree candidates' persistence to degree completion and success in
securing postdoctoral or faculty appointments upon graduation. The research team
is also investigating ways that hiring procedures might contain bias that
hinders the hiring of URM candidates. This research will provide valuable
insights to advance knowledge about the higher education contexts in which URM
STEM doctoral degree recipients and postdoctoral researchers compete for faculty
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP DES Alliance Model institutions are
working with a team of external evaluators who are conducting formative and
summative evaluations. This AGEP Alliance also engages four boards - an AGEP DES
Alliance Model Advisory Board, an institutional Executive Leadership Board, a
Research Advisory Board, and an Evaluation Advisory Board - that provide
feedback to the institutions and the project team, and that suggest adjustments
to the project management, to the integrated research project and to the model
development, implementation, testing, evaluation, dissemination, sustainability
and reproduction potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is
disseminating findings from research, and from their work on the AGEP DES
Alliance Model's development, implementation, self-study, evaluation,
dissemination, sustainability and reproduction potential, by presenting at
national conferences and publishing peer-reviewed articles in professional
journals. Additionally, the Alliance is creating video and on-line materials
about the AGEP DES Alliance Model and about the curricula used as part of the
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.