* 1916623
* National Workshop on Architectural Faculty in Environmental Sustainability Research (WAFES)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Simi Hoque, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 52,900.00

Buildings account for 52% of total energy use and contribute to 37% of
greenhouse gas emissions in the U.S., while modern people spend more than 90% of
their time indoors. Due to these significant environmental and human
physiological factors, environmental sustainability research has been actively
conducted for several decades in many academic fields, including engineering,
computer science, medicine, and the physical sciences, using buildings as a
major research framework. However, despite the role of architecture and
architectural design in a building's sustainability profile, most building
performance-related research has relied heavily on system and computational
process-centered approaches that do not integrate qualitative human and design
research parameters. In addition, many Architectural programs in the U.S., where
minorities (i.e., females) account for over 40% of the faculty and student
populations, have had a cultural preconception of "no-research-needed" in
professional schools and develop their curricula with little consideration of
the merits of fundamental or applied research. Such a skewed intellectual
atmosphere may isolate architectural scholars from "major" research initiatives,
and limits the advancement of architectural research and the development of
essential research infrastructure in architecture schools across the U.S. This
lack of research advancement delays an architectural faculty's research career
pathway and forecloses educational opportunities in architectural research among
their students. To address these challenges, a national workshop will be held to
engage Architectural researchers who are pursuing (or are interested in)
Architecture/building-related environmental sustainability research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will 1) provide a networking opportunity
that helps Architectural faculty have in-depth discussions on how to promote an
architectural research framework, with specific research parameters, across the
disciplines in Architecture; 2) identify the challenges and drawbacks that
affect a faculty's research career success in Architecture and that also create
a limited involvement of Architectural students in an art/design-integrated STEM
research activity; and 3) explore potential cutting-edge Architectural research
paradigms and topics in the environmental sustainability research field. The
technical discussion and program of the workshop are designed to impact numerous
Architectural research fields associated with environmental sustainability by 1)
providing mentorship- based networking opportunities for Architecture faculty,
who represent a diversity of underrepresented groups, compared to STEM domains,
especially for early career individuals and PhD-ready students; 2) discussing
how to develop a research platform where affiliated students have an opportunity
to become involved in emerging research; 3) establishing emerging research key
parameters to be integrated with other disciplines, as an innovative
environmental sustainability research paradigm; and 4) enhance the research
opportunity of Architectural schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.