* 1916958
* Correlated Electron Physics in Graphene and Other Novel Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Oskar Vafek, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2023
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education to further our understanding of how quantum mechanics
determines the state of matter of a large collection of interacting particles at
the atomic level. The stages on which such dynamics plays out are real quantum
materials, designed and studied within laboratories around the world using
modern experimental tools. The ultimate practical goal is to use the gained
understanding for designing new materials and structures with desired
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of superconductivity --flow of
electrical current without any resistance-- in a physical system composed of two
sheets of graphene, each one carbon atom thin and precisely stacked on top of
each other, has started a new frontier research field aligned with the above
goals. In addition, many such materials combine modern notions of topology with
basic concepts of solid-state physics describing the behavior of strongly
interacting electron systems, an intellectual frontier still largely unexplored.
The PI will study such systems using an arsenal of modern analytical and
numerical tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects will involve a graduate
student, who will be trained in analytical and computational methods, as well as
in scientific communication, via immersion in a collaborative environment
working on open problems at the frontier of condensed matter physics. It will
also allow the student to travel to and participate in conferences and schools,
and thus engage with the broader scientific community. The skills that will be
developed are essential for many successful careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research and
education aimed at understanding properties of correlated electrons in novel
quantum materials. The long-term goal is to use such understanding to design new
materials and structures with desired functionalities, as well as to advance
theoretical tools needed for predictive analysis. The PI's research and
educational activity is centered on the theoretical description of moire
materials, including twisted bilayer graphene. Such systems combine modern
notions of topologically nontrivial band structure and strong electron
correlations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadly, the main thrust of the project is
to understand the underlying mechanism responsible for -- and the nature of --
the correlated insulator phases observed at commensurate fillings of the narrow
bands, and the nearby superconductivity observed at generally incommensurate
fillings in various moire structures. The PI will study the problem using an
arsenal of analytical and numerical tools, including strong-coupling expansions,
variational mean-field theory, and density-matrix renormalization group. An
important part of the project is the simultaneous development of simplified
models capturing the physical essence of the findings obtained within more
numerically involved techniques. Such models will engender deeper understanding
of the physics playing out in existing materials, and will also allow greater
flexibility in further qualitative predictions not easily achieved
numerically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects will involve a graduate student,
who will be trained in analytical and computational methods, as well as in
scientific communication, via immersion in a collaborative environment working
on open problems at the frontier of condensed matter physics. It will also allow
the student to travel to and participate in conferences and schools, and thus
engage with the broader scientific community. The skills that will be developed
are essential for many successful careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.