* 1916701
* The Emergence of Material Wealth-Based Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Anna Prentiss, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 320,588.00

Dr. Anna Marie Prentiss, of the University of Montana, along with colleagues
from the United States, Canada, and England will engage in research into the
development of social inequality in village scale hunter-gatherer societies. The
origins of inequality in ancient societies is a central concern in
anthropological archaeology with significant implications for wider
understanding of inequality in today's world. Previous research has documented
conditions under which persistent institutionalized inequalities are likely to
develop. These include the presence of defensible subsistence resources and the
possibility for inter-generational transmission of wealth, access to wealth, and
rights to wealth. Debate continues regarding the historical processes that give
rise to material inequality with some reseachers asserting inequality to be an
inevitable outcome of inherent human striving for personal economic and
reproductive success under conditions of resource abundance versus others who
argue that inequality is an unintended byproduct of competitive conditions
during periods of resource shortfall. Archaeology is poised to offer significant
contributions to these discussions given the ability to reconstruct social
evolutionary process over lengthy time spans. The research is designed to
facilitate extensive public outreach regarding indigenous culture and history
along with STEM training opportunities for college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Prentiss and her research team will examine the
origins of material wealth-based inequality at the Bridge River village in the
Middle Fraser Canyon of interior British Columbia. The Bridge River site is an
ideal place to study the evolution of inequality given the excellent record of
human occupation spanning the past 2000 years. This archaeological excavation
project is designed to develop fine-grained tests of alternative hypotheses
concerning variation in the integrated roles of demographic change, subsistence
intensification, storage variability, social networking, and large scale cooking
and food-sharing ("feasting") events associated with the origins of inequality.
The interdisciplinary research team sets a new standard for excavation and
laboratory study of prehistoric cooking features in Northwestern North America
with analytical approaches including sediment micromorphology, ancient DNA
analysis, plant tissue identification from carbonized remains, sediment
geochemistry, and advanced approaches to stone artifact and animal bone
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.