* 1916866
* GOALI: Monitoring and Control of Roll-to-Roll Printing of Flexible Electronics through Multiscale In-Line Metrology
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* John Berg, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2023
* USD 590,993.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
supports research that contributes novel sensing and control technology for a
roll-to-roll printing process, promoting both the invention and manufacturing of
revolutionary new flexible electronics products, giving the U.S. a competitive
edge in the global economy. Roll-to-roll printing of flexible electronics
involves fabricating thin electronic structures ranging in feature size from
nanometer to millimeter along a continuously moving flexible substrate at speeds
of meters per minute. The roll-to-roll printing technique offers the potential
to radically shift the cost structure for large-area nanostructured devices and
enables versatile applications of flexible functional systems. However, a
limitation of present continuous printing processes is that in-line metrology is
unavailable for process monitoring and control. This research establishes a
technological base for the development of a multiscale in-line metrology
platform. In this study, ultra-thin print patterns along a continuously moving
flexible web are imaged, registered and measured in real-time. This process
control system can be adapted for different roll-to-roll printing processes for
a variety of applications such as industrial internet-of-things and
infrastructure health-monitoring. This project involves training students at the
industrial partner facility that has roll-to-roll nanomanufacturing
capabilities. It incorporates fundamental research results into undergraduate
and graduate courses to advance the students' interests and skills in solving
practical engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many lab-scale roll-to-roll
(R2R) printing processes have been shown to have the ability to print flexible
electronics with resolutions ranging from nanometers to millimeters. However,
numerous research gaps must be met for these printing processes to be scaled up
to industrial scale. The research gaps include invisibility of the ultra-thin
patterns in a normal optical imaging environment, loss of pattern registration,
optical limits on field-of-view and resolution, and inability of conventional
control methods to capture high-order dynamics and nonlinearity in R2R printing
processes. To meet these research gaps, this project develops in-line metrology
for print pattern quality monitoring of nano-thin monolayer print processes,
investigates high-resolution imaging and registration of large-area nano- and
micron-scale patterns, and explores the deep-learning-based predictive control
of R2R printing processes by integrating in-line multiscale metrology and
process modeling. The in-line monolayer pattern is imaged using real-time water
vapor condensation figures and synchronous image processing. The predictive
model is a recurrent conditional deep predictive neural network that
incorporates short-term and long-term nonlinearly dynamic print input-output
responses to optimize prediction errors. To address the broad and complex array
of problems that are involved in R2R print process control and its scale-up to
industrial applications, a close collaboration with the GOALI partner has been
established to guide the research efforts and test the in-line metrology
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.