* 1916358
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Subsistence in Developing Cities
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2021
* David Carballo, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2021
* USD 25,117.00

This doctoral dissertation project will examine the role of animals in the urban
economy of a large, pre-modern city in order to further understanding of how
urban food economies relate to social organization and wealth inequalities.
Systems of food production and distribution are closely tied to the economic
organization and social structure of a society, and can serve to reinforce
social inequalities, particularly in cities in which many households do not
directly produce their own food. Archaeology is ideally situated to investigate
the many ways in which food systems contributed to urban developments in the
world's earliest cities, providing a unique perspective that can inform on the
potential impacts of today's growing urban populations. This project will
provide a comparative data on one aspect of the food system from an important
pre-modern city, foster international and interdisciplinary collaboration, and
engage in public outreach within the research area.

This research examines the role of animals in the urban economy of a pre-modern
city that is a vital case study in understanding the relationships between food
production, urban economies and the development of social inequalities.
Teotihuacan (100-550/650 CE), located in central highland Mexico, was a large,
diverse city and is unique in the ancient world as a city that was provisioned
in the absence of large domesticates, and one that was able to do so in a way
that supported its everyday urban residents. The research will evaluate how
urban and rural residents of Teotihuacan acquired animals, and the role of
hunting and raising animals to the urban economy. To evaluate multiple
trajectories of change over time, this study presents an innovative integration
of zooarchaeological analysis, to identify the types of animals consumed by
residents, and carbon stable isotope analysis to distinguish animals from
natural environments, and those which lived in anthropogenic environments, such
as agricultural fields or animal pens. In addition, this research employs
zooarchaeology by mass spectrometry (ZooMS), a new technique for the
identification of faunal remains based on collagen peptide fingerprints, to
overcome limitations in the morphological identification of animal bones.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.