* 1916698
* Collaborative Research: Did the Formation of the Great Unconformity Trigger Oxygenation and the Cambrian Explosion?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Francis Macdonald, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 91,191.00

The Great Unconformity (GU) represents one of the largest gaps of time in the
rock record. Since it is followed by the Cambrian Radiation, one of life's most
significant increases in biodiversity and complexity, it has long been thought
that these phenomena are linked. Geoscientists have proposed that the GU was
caused by large-scale erosion of Earth's crust. As rocks weathered and
dissolved, an element critical to life, phosphorous, was released and carried to
the ocean by rivers. The increase in phosphorous is proposed to have spurred
photosynthesis among cyanobacteria, which then increased the oxygen content of
the ocean and atmosphere. This oxygenation was perhaps the fuse that led to the
Cambrian Radiation since complex life requires oxygen. Despite the GU's
potential role in one of life's most important transformations, very little is
known about when and where it occurred. Determining when the GU developed and
the size of the last erosion event that lead to its formation are critical for
identifying viable mechanisms for life and environmental change during this
pivotal interval of Earth history. This research project is making use of
advances in zircon and titanite (U-Th)/He methods to decipher GU development.
Results are directly testing hypotheses that relate continental erosion to
oxygenation and the explosion of life. The project is also advancing scientific
and technological understanding through the training of undergraduate and
graduate students and K-12 teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been proposed
that the erosion below the Great Unconformity occurred as the result of
supercontinental breakup, Snowball Earth glaciation, or global eustasy, and may
have delivered bio-limiting nutrients to the ocean that fueled the Cambrian
Radiation. However, the timing, proposed global synchroneity, and magnitude of
the Great Unconformity have not been previously tested or constrained. Recent
advances in (U-Th)/He thermochronology allow access to the thermal histories
required to unravel the history of this iconic feature. This project will
acquire zircon and titanite (U-Th)/He data for samples along two transects
across two different cratonic margins. Study sites will be targeted to fully
exploit Neoproterozoic and Cambrian geologic constraints, which will be vital
for narrowing the range of viable thermal histories to enable discrimination
between GU formation models. The results will dramatically improve constraints
on the Neoproterozoic cooling history of each margin, which will be used to test
competing models for GU development and significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.