* 1916152
* In Situ Characterization and Dynamic Response of Well-Graded Coarse-Grained Soils
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jason DeJong, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 695,745.00

The development and re-evaluation of infrastructure (e.g. dams, tunnels,
bridges) founded upon, penetrating through, or comprised of natural and/or man-
made gravelly (i.e. large particle) soils face a persistent challenge with
respect to determining their engineering properties, and how they will perform
under earthquake loading. These uncertainties lead engineers to make overly-
conservative design assumptions that can result in new designs or retrofits of
existing structures that can cost in excess of $100M for a single project (e.g.
dams). This project will use numerical simulations along with laboratory and
centrifuge model-scale experiments to improve our understanding of how these
soils behave as engineering materials when subjected to static and dynamic
loading, and to develop a new framework that enables engineers to account for
the effects of particle size and soil gradation in characterization and design.
The project results may also have impacts beyond the conventional geotechnical
engineering domain, with potential applications to characterization of other
particulate materials including mining waste materials, rock fills, foundry
sands, extraterrestrial soils (e.g. Mars), agricultural grains, and
pharmaceutical and food products. The integrated education, diversity, and
outreach activities are focused on increasing the participation and success of
underrepresented groups in geotechnical engineering and range from the
development of graduate students to outreach to middle school children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The characterization and performance prediction of
gravelly soils is a long-standing engineering challenge due to the soil's large
particle sizes rendering data from conventional sized in situ penetrometers and
samplers and laboratory devices highly uncertain. Thus, very few studies exist
where the effect of particle size and soil gradation on either penetration
resistance, monotonic and shearing behavior, or dynamic engineering response
have been examined, and no comprehensive, integrated study has been performed
where both effects are integrated. Field case histories show these materials to
be problematic and the geotechnical community lacks the design tools necessary
to perform design and analysis at a level on par with better-characterized sands
and clays. This project will systematically address the influence of soil
gradation on monotonic and cyclic behavior and on penetrometer characterization
at different spatial scales using a suite of laboratory, numerical, and
centrifuge modeling tools. The four research tasks address the effects of
gradation on the: (1) monotonic stress-dilatancy behavior within a critical
state framework, (2) cyclic behavior in terms of excess pore pressure
generation, strain accumulations, and liquefaction triggering, and (3)
penetrometer-to-particle size effects on CPT tip resistance measurements, and
(4) system response to dynamic loading under level- and sloping-ground
conditions. The careful selection of a natural alluvial soil deposit allows
preparation of a suite of poorly- to well-graded soil mixtures on which
laboratory and centrifuge experiments can be performed with systematic control
over D50 and CU while other variables (i.e. shape and mineralogy) are held
practically constant. The work plan is based on an extensive pilot study that
has verified the planned approach and produced initial
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.