* 1916550
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Doctor WHO: Investigation and Prevention of Online Content Management System Abuse
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Brendan Saltaformaggio, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,699.00

Over half of the world's 1.8 billion websites run on Content Management Systems
(CMS). Unfortunately, CMS deployments make easy targets for attackers, as they
are built from an amalgam of layered software and interpreters, with varying
degrees of network and system permissions, which execute on an Internet-facing
web server. This project develops program-analysis-centric techniques that
enable the investigation and remediation of ongoing infections as well as
hardening against future CMS compromises, with the goals of 1) understanding the
intent and strategy of a CMS infection and tracing their root-cause attack
vector for reliable remediation, 2) revealing dynamic and sophisticated attack
behaviors in malware samples in a CMS infection, 3) hardening of CMS deployments
against future attacks. This project benefits national security and economic
stability by creating cyber forensics and vulnerability detection techniques for
CMS websites and the financial, government, and private sector operations they
support. It provides server-side script code including malicious scripts and
vulnerable code to help train next-generation cybersecurity experts. Students
from underrepresented minority groups are involved in research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops Doctor WHO, a CMS
analysis framework which combines rapid evidence collection and advanced program
analysis techniques for the investigation and remediation of infections and
hardening against future CMS compromises. Specifically, the data-driven
prediction framework, called TARDIS, is developed to understand the temporal
correlation of attack evidence across a corpus of real-world websites. TARDIS
enables the automated discovery of the artifacts of a compromise, fingerprinting
of the attack's propagation, and rapid investigation of cyberattacks against CMS
deployments. The project also develops Torchwood, a cross-language and cross-
environment program analysis framework to effectively analyze highly dynamic and
sophisticated malware targeting CMSs. Torchwood can handle advanced obfuscation
and anti-analysis techniques applied to malware and reveal hidden malicious
behaviors and intentions of the malware effectively. Lastly, the project
develops UNIT that enables the hardening and securing of CMS deployments against
future attacks. UNIT accomplishes this by enabling automated dynamic testing of
CMS-backed websites without requiring any runtime environment resources. UNIT
eliminates false alerts and provide proof-of-concept exploits via a set of new
methods to identify and model dependencies of runtime resources and reconstruct
missing resources using instrumented script interpreter
engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.