* 1916206
* I-Corps: An AI-based Physician Advisory System for Disease Management
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Zhuo Chen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is its potential
to help the 5.7 million adult Americans who are living with heart failure every
year and potentially saving a significant fraction of the $30.7 billion dollars
spent each year on heart failure care. It also provides a quantitative measure
of the quality of heart failure care provided in hospitals and clinics. Optimal
management of heart failure requires adherence to evidence based clinical
guidelines. The Heart Failure Guidelines were created by a multi-disciplinary
committee of experts and is based on thorough review of best available clinical
evidence on management of heart failure. This guideline represents a consensus
among experts on the appropriate treatment and management of heart failure.
However, low adherence to the clinical guideline by physicians and cardiologists
is one of the major challenges in the management of heart failure. This proposal
seeks to overcome this challenge. The addressable market for this technology is
about $106 million yearly in the United States alone with an even larger global
market and the potential to develop additional extensions to manage similar
diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project automates the entire set of
rules in the current guideline for heart failure management. The system is based
on answer set programming, a form of declarative programming suited for
simulating human-style reasoning. Given a patient's information, the system
generates a set of guideline-compliant recommendations. We conducted a pilot
study of the system on 20 real and 10 simulated patients with heart failure. The
results show that the system recommends treatments that are compliant with the
guidelines for heart failure management. Out of 179 recommendations made by the
system, expert cardiologists agreed upon 168 of them. The 11 recommendations
that our system made not in agreement with cardiologists are due to
misunderstanding of the doctor's notes or guideline which will be fixed in the
future version of the software. Our research has established the foundation for
automating the generation of guideline-compliant recommendations. Our plan is to
develop the system into a point-of-care tool for clinic visits. The system would
give real-time feedback of guideline-appropriate care recommendations, and be a
quality assessment tool to measure the quality metrics of heart failure care of
institutions. The same method applies to the management of other diseases such
as Asthma and Cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.