* 1916788
* RoL: Collaborative Research: When a pathogen becomes a mutualist: discovery, evolution and rules that govern function and acquisition in wasp-viral symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Gaelen Burke, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 911,930.00

Recent discoveries have shown that symbiotic relationships of viruses with their
hosts are pervasive, confer major benefits to their hosts, and have played a
major role in the evolution of life on earth. Understanding how these viral
associations evolve is thus essential for a holistic view on the evolution of a
broad diversity of organisms. Parasitoid wasps (wasps that grow within and kill
other insects) are a natural laboratory for understanding the evolution of viral
symbiosis because they are highly diverse and have evolved repeated associations
with viruses. These viruses are able to suppress the immune defense mechanisms
of the insect hosts that are parasitized by the wasps, enabling the wasps to
survive and reproduce. Parasitoid wasps also provide substantial economic
benefits to society because they are natural enemies of insect pests that cause
damage to forests and agricultural crops. This project investigates the
evolution and interactions between one of the most astonishing radiations on
Earth (braconid parasitoid wasps, with 19,000 species) and the massive untapped
diversity of their symbiotic viruses. The long-term goal is to understand the
rules that govern the associations of the viruses, the wasps, and the hosts of
the wasps. This research project advances knowledge in several ways: (1)
discovery of new biodiversity in two poorly studied areas of the tree of life--
viruses and wasps; (2) resolution of the evolutionary history and age of wasp-
viral symbioses; (3) discovery of predictive genomic traits for viral symbiosis
to understand the rules that govern these interactions; (4) characterization of
the function of viruses; and (5) generating publicly available genome data. The
proposed work will substantially transform understanding of symbiotic viral
evolution, which will provide general information about virus evolution. The
researchers will integrate wasp and viral research with education and public
outreach by working closely with teachers in local schools and developing new
educational resources. Furthermore, the program will improve STEM education and
educator development and increase public literacy and engagement in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates phylogenetic, functional, and
genomics approaches to discover the rules that govern mutualistic associations
between viruses and wasps and, in turn, the interactions between these
parasitoid wasps and their hosts. The overall objectives are to resolve and date
the evolutionary relationships of the wasp family Braconidae using new methods
of DNA analysis, discover which wasp lineages are associated with mutualistic
viruses and the timing of their domestication, determine how viruses affect the
antagonistic interactions between the wasps and their hosts, and examine genome
features related to viral mutualism. The researchers aim to: (1) Resolve and
date deep and shallow nodes for one of the most diverse lineages (19,000
species) on Earth; (2) Discover and characterize the multiple origins of viral
symbiosis in Braconidae; and (3) decipher the roles of viral symbionts in the
biology of the parasitoid wasps and their hosts. The outreach plan has two main
components: 1) Providing research internships in the lab for local K-12 teachers
so that they may learn new research techniques that will improve their teaching;
and 2) using immersive virtual reality and animation experiences to engage the
public and enhance learning in undergraduate education. The researchers will
also provide integrated research and training opportunities to underrepresented
mentees (2 postdoctoral researchers, 7 undergraduate and 2 graduate students)
across the disciplines of phylogenetics, functional and comparative genomics,
and revisionary systematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.