* 1916741
* IUCRC Phase I University of California-Davis: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Houman Homayoun, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 592,334.00

The Center for Hardware and Embedded Systems Security and Trust (CHEST)
coordinates university-based research with needs of industry and government
partners to advance knowledge of security, assurance, and trust for electronic
hardware and embedded systems. Interests of CHEST include identification,
detection, monitoring, mitigation, and elimination of vulnerabilities that
affect hardware and embedded systems. The CHEST Center addresses a range of
attack vectors across design, operation, manufacturing, supply chains, and
integration of the hardware, software, and firmware to a variety of systems. The
Center is inventing and disseminating technologies, practices, and guidelines to
stakeholders and educating a next generation of
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF CHEST Center addresses security,
assurance, and trust across several levels: Large-scale systems, embedded
systems, design and operations, requirements, standards, manufacturing, supply
chains, and integrated circuits and boards. Among the universities, the
University of California Davis (UC Davis) will lead CHEST efforts for hardware
and embedded system security and trust at the system, architecture and circuit
levels. Topics include : (i) Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
design flow for security, digital logic reverse engineering, hardware trojan
detection and prevention, (ii) Detecting and preventing malicious and side-
channel attacks, preventing IoT malware epidemics, secure processor architecture
to prevent side-channel attacks and (iii) Security at the system/application
levels including secure deep learning and artificial intelligence, cryptography
and secure web browser for embedded system and hardware based
rootkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security, assurance, and trust of integrated
cyber-physical systems enable meeting fundamental human needs, along with
supporting broader social, environmental, and economic progress of the nation.
The ability of systems to absorb disruptive shocks and recover with minimal loss
is key to protecting human lives and property. The NSF CHEST Center influences
the practices of industry, government, and the military in design, protection,
and resilience to vulnerabilities associated with hardware and embedded systems.
Improving assurance and trust contributes to the reducing the frequencies and
severities of adverse events with attention to system missions, performance,
schedule, and cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF CHEST Center website,
www.nsfchest.org, is the repository for all publicly accessible data, code,
results, etc. These pages will be maintained for at least as long as the CHEST
Center is active. In addition, all CHEST projects that are led by UC Davis are
permanently archived in digital format on the UC Davis file servers with
sufficient provisions for backup and recovery in case of equipment failure. All
archival UC Davis computers and servers are backed up on a regular
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.