* 1916195
* I-Corps: Accessible Chemical Authentication of Counterfeit and Falsified Medicines
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2019
* John Blaho, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in providing
a more rapid and cost-effective alternative method to chemically authenticate
unknown substances in the field. By combining a portable chemical test card and
a companion mobile app, potential customers within law enforcement or
pharmaceuticals can readily test unknown substances on the job in real-time. In
addition, the technology makes it easier to mine massive amounts of data from
each chemical authentication. This allows for a more comprehensive understanding
of the spread of counterfeit products in affected regions, thereby protecting
whole communities from potentially harmful substances while enabling regulatory
and government agencies to take effective measures against counterfeiters.

This I-Corps project includes a patented chemical test card and a companion
mobile app that have gone through extensive preliminary trials. The Paper
Analytical Device (PAD) is an inexpensive chemical test card which enables fast
in-field screening of pharmaceuticals using colorimetric analysis. The device
currently detects up to 60 active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) commonly
found in a variety of medicines such as antimalarials, antibiotics, and
analgesics, along with excipients that are commonly found in counterfeit
products such as binders, fillers, and tablet coatings. The Veripad mobile
application enables instantaneous analysis of each PAD using a machine learning
algorithm. The app gives a probability of a reacted PAD card matching the API
using deep convolutional neural network models. Moreover, the app is able to
perform chemical composition analysis from the 'hand crafted' features of
chemical color changes generated using various image feature extraction and
clustering algorithms, such as ICA, PCA, and K-means. With ongoing research, the
PAD and mobile app has the potential to aid in the quality testing of a variety
of pharmaceuticals to ultimately combat the spread of counterfeits.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.