* 1916993
* Probing the Roles of the Surface versus the Bulk in Uptake of Gases Into Atmospherically Relevant Particles
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Lisa Wingen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2023
* USD 648,797.00

This research project involves an investigation into the role of the atmospheric
particle surface versus the particle bulk composition in determining the uptake
of organic gases and water into the particle. This information is critical for
the development of models to accurately predict the impacts of airborne
particles on air quality, visibility and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objectives of this research are to: (1) examine the surface and bulk
composition of a series of model solid organic particles both before and after
heterogeneous oxidation using cutting edge mass spectrometry techniques
implemented recently in this laboratory; (2) probe differences in surface vs
bulk composition when oxidation of the organic is initiated from the gas phase
("outside in"), or from in-situ photochemistry induced by nitrate or nitrite ion
photolysis ("inside out"); and (3) measure uptake of a range of organics as well
as water into the above particles, before and after oxidation, in order to
establish molecular relationships between gas-particle interactions and surface
and bulk composition, and the impacts on particle growth and hygroscopicity. A
series of laboratory experiments will be conducted to examine the uptake of a
range of organic vapors onto model particles before and after oxidation. The
data generated by this effort will provide critical insights to improve
predictions of particle impacts on climate, air quality, and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.