* 1916335
* SBIR Phase I:  Encrypted Databases: From Theory to Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Tarik Moataz, SIFR SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 224,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project consists of (1) preventing server-level data
breaches; and (2) increasing adoption of cloud computing; especially in sectors
that inherently deal with sensitive data and are subject to regulation. This
includes the healthcare and finance industries as well as government agencies.
Data breaches are occurring at an alarming rate and affecting every industry and
sector of government. This project enables customers to search and query data
without ever needing to decrypt it, effectively protecting data against server-
level breaches. Potential customers from the financial and healthcare industries
said in interviews that their adoption of cloud computing had been slowed due to
the sensitivity of some of their data. Their inability to use the cloud to store
and analyze highly sensitive data is very costly since they have to build and
maintain on-premise infrastructures to handle it. The outcome of this project
will enable customers to make use of and benefit from cloud computing even for
their most sensitive data. From a societal standpoint, this project increases
user security and privacy and helps achieve regulatory compliance while
investing less in cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to design, build and evaluate a
commercially viable encrypted relational database system. The project will
tackle a variety of technical challenges that need to be overcome before this
technology can see widespread adoption. The first is integration with existing
database management systems (DBMSs). Commercial database systems benefit from
over 40 years of research, optimization and engineering breakthroughs. While the
new cryptographic techniques proposed for this project have many advantages in
terms of security and efficiency, it is not a-priori clear how to integrate them
into a standard DBMS without a complete re-design. To address this challenge,
this project leverages a new algorithmic paradigm called emulation that
seamlessly integrates these new cryptographic techniques with standard
commercial DBMSs. The second challenge this project addresses is concrete real-
world efficiency. The theoretical analysis of the proposed solution shows that
it is asymptotically efficient. The proposed work, however, will show that it is
also efficient in practice on real data and against real database
benchmarks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.