* 1916751
* Revised Calculus Concept Inventory: Measuring the Learning Gains of First Year Calculus  Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Barbara Moskal, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing an improved set of questions for measuring
student knowledge of calculus concepts. As STEM disciplines become increasingly
critical areas of study, more students will be encouraged to complete a college-
level calculus course. Calculus instructors need an accurate measurement of
students' knowledge of calculus concepts to understand how student knowledge
changes in response to instruction. They can then use this information to refine
and improve their courses. This project, informed by prior related efforts, aims
to produce a current and informative calculus concept assessment based on
feedback from calculus course instructors. Calculus instructors who administer
the assessment to their students will have access to the results, which they can
use to improve their instructional approaches. The project will also collect
validity evidence for this instrument by piloting it in a subset of
undergraduate Calculus I classrooms. The resulting assessment will be accessible
to both high school and college instructors, thus helping to inform and improve
calculus instruction nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals include to:
i) update, redesign, and merge two existing calculus concept inventories into a
single instrument that captures students' conceptual knowledge and understanding
of calculus concepts from when students enter to when they exit their first
calculus course; and ii) examine and establish psychometric properties of the
resultant instrument. These goals will be reached using a systematic, formative
research approach, which will begin with a survey administered to high school
and college calculus instructors throughout the nation. Information from this
survey will inform a three-day meeting of experts in calculus education, who
will propose revisions of the prior instruments. Think-aloud protocols will be
used to establish the understandability of the resultant instrument by students,
followed by pilot testing of the instrument in calculus courses throughout the
nation. The psychometric properties of the instrument will be tracked and used
formatively throughout instrument development to improve these efforts and the
validity evidence supporting the final instrument. The major intellectual merit
of the project lies in the creation of a calculus concept inventory with
supporting validity evidence that can be used to measure the normalized gains of
calculus teaching interventions and to compare effectiveness of different
teaching methods. The assessment instrument and results of this research effort
will be broadly disseminated through collaboration with the National Council of
Teachers of Mathematics, the Mathematical Association of American, and the
American Mathematics Society. The adoption of improved calculus assessment and
resultant teaching interventions has potential to lead to a deeper student
understanding of mathematical concepts that are critical to progress across a
range of other courses in STEM disciplines, including engineering, physics,
biology, and chemistry. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. This project is in the IUSE: EHR Engaged Student Learning track,
through which the funding program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.