* 1916120
* PRIMES, MathROOTS, and CrowdMath: Expanding Opportunities for High School Students
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Pavel Etingof, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

PRIMES is a free, year-long after-school research and enrichment program for
high school students, based at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. It
includes three main sections: MIT PRIMES offers research projects in math and
computer science to students from Greater Boston; PRIMES-USA is a national math
research program for high school juniors; and PRIMES Circle is a math enrichment
section for urban public high school students from the Boston area. In
collaboration with MIT Admissions, PRIMES also runs MathROOTS, a free two-week
math enrichment residential summer program for high-potential high school
students from underrepresented backgrounds or underserved communities. PRIMES
has developed an innovative approach, based on the combination of learning and
research, which allows high school students to learn advanced areas of math and
science and to participate in cutting-edge research within a year-long
timeframe. Projects are formulated by university faculty and mentored by
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars. Every year, more than 90 students
participate in PRIMES. They present their projects at an annual conference at
MIT, open to the public; they write research and expository papers, posted
online for free access; and they submit original research for publication in
academic journals. PRIMES gives talented high school students a unique
opportunity to experience the joy and beauty of mathematical research, inspires
them to pursue careers in the mathematical sciences, and helps diversify the
mathematical community by providing additional opportunities for promising young
women and underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, PRIMES
students will work on research projects on a variety of pure and applied
mathematical topics, which include Branching types of rational functions;
Statistics and combinatorics of curves on surfaces; Jacobians of finite graphs;
Quasiinvariants; Representations of rational Cherednik algebras in positive
characteristic; Folding random walks; Multi-crossing number for knots; Traffic
modeling, multi-phase flow, and autonomous cars; Superalgebra in characteristic
2; Sets of permutations invariant under valley-hopping; and Pattern replacement
equivalences of permutations. Reading groups will study texts on abstract
algebra, the probabilistic method, Abel's Theorem, representation theory,
analytic number theory, and cryptography. Enrichment topics will include knot
theory, probability, game theory, graph theory, and
combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.