* 1916707
* Phase II IUCRC at The Pennsylvania State University:  Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Christopher Rahn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 380,000.00

Free, ambient energy is widely available in the environment and can be harnessed
to power mobile devices. The Pennsylvania State University (PSU) site of the
Center for Energy Harvesting Materials and Systems (CEHMS) develops energy
harvesting and storage technologies that can provide continuous power to a wide
range of wireless devices, including machinery diagnostic equipment,
environmental sensors, and health-monitoring wearables. Novel power management
electronics are proposed that dynamically route power to the load and maintain
battery charge. This site will invent new materials, structures, and systems
that dramatically increase the harvested power and the ability to store energy
efficiently, enabling a new generation of self-powered wireless devices with
smaller footprints and more capabilities. The PSU CEHMS site will also
investigate the scale up of energy producing devices and storage systems for
renewable energy support in the grid and electric vehicles. The site will also
participate in the organization of tutorial sessions for students, faculty, and
industry members during the annual Energy Harvesting Workshop run by the Energy
Harvesting Society based at the PSU Navy Yard. CEHMS includes a broad
international program with universities, government labs and industries from
Germany, South Korea, Canada, Taiwan, and India. PSU CEHMS faculty will
supervise senior design projects on energy harvesting and involve undergraduate
students in a variety of CEHMS activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PSU CEHMS
site has research thrusts in materials development, integration tools, and
modeling to optimize the performance of energy harvesting technologies and
systems. The research aims to increase the electromechanical coefficients of
active materials, exploit specific phenomena to increase power density, improve
the efficiency of rectifiers that transform translational motion into rotational
motion and electric circuits for conversion, regulation, rectification, and
storage. Research plans include the design of wireless battery management
systems, multi-modal energy harvesting for wearables, and new battery and
supercapacitor chemistries. Novel materials for energy storing batteries and
supercapacitors will be discovered and experimentally tested. Models that
predict the performance and degradation of energy storage and harvesting systems
will increase understanding of these complex multiphysics problems. Model-based
systems and control will provide robust and reliable performance of energy
harvesting and storage systems. The addition of the Penn State Site will allow
CEHMS to meet the intellectual challenges of developing hybrid power systems for
a wide range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.