* 1916538
* I-Corps: Pressure Ulcer Prevention Pad
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2019
* Guy German, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to minimize
the risk of pressure ulcer formation in wheelchair users. In addition, this
project will reduce the labor and cost associated with treating and preventing
ulcers. Pressure ulcers are serious injuries that afflict those who are may
already be suffering from other ailments such as paralysis and diabetes. They
are often overlooked until it is too late, posing serious morbidity and
mortality risk. Pressure ulcer prevention is a continuous job, and treatment of
established ulcers is costly. Caretakers must constantly check, adjust, and turn
at-risk wheelchair bound patients for the duration of the day. This is even more
problematic with the nationwide staffing shortage in nursing homes. The most
effective available cushions are cost prohibitive for most at-risk individuals
and care facilities. Moreover, cushions that are widely used are prone to
breaking, resulting in reoccurring costs and the need to reestablish constant
care. Aside from the facilities and individuals who are affected, insurance
companies in the US spend over $11 billion in treatment of ulcers every year and
ulcers are the 2nd largest cause of medical malpractice lawsuits in the US.

This I-Corps project will develop a new wheelchair cushion that can minimize
pressure ulcer onset. Prolonged sitting can lead to extreme discomfort, the
breakdown of skin tissue, and the development of pressure ulcers. Strategies to
mitigate this issue are based primarily on the principles of immersion and
offloading. Immersion is the process of distributing interfacial pressure evenly
across a surface. This is normally achieved with a foam or air cushion.
Offloading is the process of suspending a specific region of the body in the air
to remove and or redistribute pressure. To date, traditional strategies are
ineffective in managing pressure ulcers. Immersion techniques can only reduce
pressure magnitudes. Offloading cushions result in increased pressure and risk
of pressure ulcer formation at support sites. This project develops a cushion
that utilizes targeted offloading of high-risk areas to remove pressure
alongside cyclic alternating pressure to prevent prolonged tissue deformation in
non-offloaded sites. Furthermore, the rechargeable battery powered cushion is
compact and quiet, so it does not interfere with a user's daily life.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.