* 1916878
* Collaborative Research: A Sweeping Process Framework to Control the Dynamics of Elastoplastic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Yang Jiao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2022
* USD 134,077.00

Accurate and efficient prediction of the mechanical behavior of materials under
extreme conditions is becoming increasingly crucial for the design of novel
materials that address the grand challenges in security, energy and health. The
examples range from micron-sized solder joints in micro-chips to crucial
structural parts of airplanes. Localized plastic (i.e. irreversible)
deformations that the material develops under cyclic loading represent the most
typical route to the loss of performance and material's failure. Recently,
lattices of connected springs became widely used to model plastic deformations
of modern materials under cyclic loading. However, only elastic (i.e.
reversible) deformations of lattice spring models can be controlled within the
currently available theory. This award supports the development of a
mathematical theory with the capability to predict and influence the asymptotic
behavior of lattice spring models that are allowed to deform both elastically
and plastically (termed elastoplastically). The new mathematical framework will
provide a revolutionary tool to accelerate computation of the regions where the
plastic deformations concentrate (known to cause crack initialization) and will
make it computationally feasible to design materials with superior service
lifetime. The designed materials (e.g., super fatigue resistant alloys) can be
eventually manufactured to impact such industries as aerospace, automobile,
microelectronics and biomedical. Therefore, the results from this research will
benefit the U.S. society and national security. The multi-disciplinary
collaboration will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
research and positively impact mathematical and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differential equations with moving polyhedral
constraints (commonly known as sweeping processes) will be used to model the
lattices of elastoplastic springs under cyclic loading. By developing a theory
of stability and bifurcations for sweeping processes, this project will identify
the mechanical parameters of lattice spring models that ensure a unique periodic
response (finite-time stable or asymptotic) or co-existing periodic responses
(isolated or not) to a cyclic loading given. The dynamical behavior found will
be used to efficiently compute the asymptotic distribution of plastic
deformations. The performance of this tool will be demonstrated by applying it
to the design of such heterogeneous materials for which the distribution of
plastic deformations (in the response to cyclic loading) stays as uniform as
possible. In this design, the Volume-Compensated Lattice-Particle method will be
utilized to map the digital representation of the material microstructure to a
lattice spring model. The design will be experimentally validated using
3D-printed sample composite materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.