* 1916519
* NSFDEB-NERC: The origin of reproductive parasitism in the Amazon Molly
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ingo Schlupp, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 640,180.00

This project will examine how complex traits evolve by exploring an apparent
reproductive paradox. The vast majority of species have two sexes and both are
needed to reproduce. But one mode of reproduction, gynogenesis, seems to combine
a seemingly impossible combination of traits. In this mode, eggs have to be
fertilized by males of a different species, but the genes provided by males are
not incorporated into the offspring so that the resulting offspring are
genetically identical to their mothers. This reproductive mode requires the
evolution of several important evolutionary changes: rejection of the father's
DNA, the loss of males, and the formation of diploid eggs. Large transitions in
a single evolutionary step is highly unlikely, but this is the prevailing
explanation. In the proposed project, the researchers will form a synthetic
gynogenetic species by replicating the evolutionary pathway that led to the
origin of the fish, the Amazon molly. Mathematical models will guide experiments
that cross existing species and their hybrids. This research also will provide
outreach to the public via workshops and training opportunities for multiple
young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will artificially form a
gynogenetic species through hybridization of two existing species, determining
the most likely evolutionary pathway from one to the other. The existing species
are from Texas and Mexico, and the new species resulted from a natural
hybridization event. To retrace the evolution of this species, the research team
will use several mathematical techniques, including differential equations and
Monte-Carlo simulations to model the most likely pathway for the evolution of a
unique set of traits, including unisexuality, formation of unreduced eggs, and
clonality. Current thinking hypothesizes that all of these changes happened in
one evolutionary step, but this seems unlikely. Guided by the models, a large-
scale crossing experiment will be conducted to actually form a gynogenetic
species in the laboratory. This experiment will involve crossing sexual fishes,
the resulting F1 individuals amongst each other, and backcrosses. Every unique
cross will further be characterized genomically, genetically, and
morphologically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.