* 1916840
* Dynamics of Rolling Friction in Soft-rigid Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael Leamy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2024
* USD 447,801.00

This research project addresses the need for a comprehensive understanding of
the nonlinear dynamics of soft rolling contact to enable prediction of
instabilities arising from local frictional interference. The current state-of-
knowledge regarding the modeling of soft contact dynamics is still based on a
300-year-old concept of a coefficient of friction, which was developed to
represent global frictional behavior of hard rough surfaces. This concept
ignores local stick-slip instabilities that represent an important source of
excitation for any dynamic system involving friction. The effort will contribute
to the understanding of dynamics of rolling friction in soft-rigid interfaces by
abandoning the principles formulated by Amontons and Coulomb for rigid body
mechanics, and by introducing the modern perception of soft adhesive contact
behavior into dynamics analysis. Soft rolling motion is ubiquitous in countless
engineering applications ranging from vehicle tires to power transmission in
belt drives, to soft robotic grasping. If successful, the effort will
significantly increase the current understanding of these systems, leading to
analysis and design that will reduce energy losses, noise pollution, loss of
accuracy, wear, etc. associated with dynamic effects. Successful completion of
the research will also introduce an alternative way of addressing contact
problems in flexible dynamics simulation, which will significantly expand the
capabilities of the computational dynamics research community. The project
includes outreach activities to increase participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering through K-12 internship and training opportunities in the
investigators' labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will explore newly-
uncovered nonlinear dynamics and instabilities associated with soft rolling
contact, with the objective of posing new/incorporating appropriate first-
principle models based on intermolecular (adhesive) and interatomic (viscous)
interactions. Without employing the concept of a friction coefficient nor the
assumption of local sliding, which are both long-held and in direct conflict
with experimental observations, the approach will focus on introducing a
coupling of the deterministic dynamic response of the rolling system to relative
contact displacements associated with a local stochastic normal (adhesive)
separation and out-of-contact tangential motion. From this conceptual context
will emerge the observed nonlinear dynamics and global instabilities. Results
from the predictive approach will be compared to elaborated experiments
involving dynamic measurements of rolling friction, observation of contact area
evolutions, and examination of deformations in the near-contact zone, while
using materials having different adhesive and viscous
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.