* 1916303
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Manufacturing in a Traditional Society
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Mary Clarke, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2020
* USD 25,106.00

Under the direction of David M. Carballo, Mary Clarke of Boston University will
undertake research to study the socioeconomic relationships that comprised
ancient Maya economies, focusing specifically on labor relations and artisanal
production. Previous scholarship on ancient economies has focused on a number of
variables, including the organization of production, the level of
commercialization, and the organization of marketplaces and marketplace
exchange. While some contexts suggest that the work of producers was directly
supported by consumers (they may have provided materials, subsistence goods,
and, in some cases, housing for producers), others illustrate that producers
worked independently and could directly profit from the commercial exchange or
sale of the goods they produced. Commercial activities, however, can still be
managed by representatives of the state: the price of goods can be fixed,
entrepreneurial activities can be encouraged or prohibited, and financial
institutions may control the means of and opportunities for exchange. The
evaluation of commercialization in ancient societies requires knowledge of
political organization and its strategies, which are reflected in the material
records of marketplace exchange, such as marketplaces, household assemblages,
and workshops. Archaeology is particularly well placed to provide relevant
insight because it can evaluate the material evidence within these locations,
which can then be compared across a community, a site, a region as a means of
reconstructing ancient economies and economic transactions. Because this
research will be conducted by MS Clarke as part of her doctoral dissertation
research it will serve a valuable educational function.

Ms. Clarke will evaluate the ancient Maya economy through an investigation of
limestone workshops and producer households. Limestone is a ubiquitous material
in Mesoamerica that was used by the ancient Maya for a myriad of purposes,
including the construction of monumental art and architecture. Stelae, altars,
lintels, and temple stairways made of cut and carved limestone were inscribed
with narratives documenting real and mythological events, as well as with
depictions of key ritual performances and supernatural beings. At the site of
Xultun, Guatemala, a stone production district was found where domestic
architecture is integrated with quarry workshops wherein incomplete monuments
were found still attached to the limestone bedrock. The limestone producers in
this district were specifically producing materials for monumental state
expressions, implying a single consumer, the state. Using this district as a
case study, this project will assess multiple working hypotheses to address one
broader question: how was limestone production organized, both socially and
economically, at Xultun, and what does this tell us about labor and power in
early societies? Through the analysis of chipped, ground, and pecked stone from
Xultun, this project will establish the distribution and nucleation of limestone
production work across the site. Moving from social to economic organization,
this project will evaluate the systems of exchange visible in household
consumption patterns to determine the commercialization of limestone and the
extent of state involvement in its production and distribution. Results will be
contextualized within the broader, multi-scalar frames of non-renewable resource
management, commercialization and local exchange systems, and the production and
projection of state identity in ancient society.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.