* 1916126
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Safety and Security for Targets of Digital Violence
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Damon McCoy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 349,970.00

This research has a foundational, multi-disciplinary research agenda that
examines the role of technology in intimate partner violence and investigates
the development of new tools, techniques, and theories to combat technology-
enabled abuse. The work is important because digital technologies play an
increasingly prominent role in domestic violence, stalking, and surveillance by
abusive partners and others known to the victim. The research builds on prior
work detailing the ways in which abusers exploit technology to monitor, harass,
track, and control victims. This kind of abuse challenges common approaches to
computer security: although the attacks that abusers employ are often
technically unsophisticated, the social and relational contexts in which attacks
occur make them difficult to prevent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
weaves together research activities including building measurement platforms for
making sense of abuser communities that are found online, designing tools for
detecting spyware or apps usable as spyware on victim devices, developing a
theory of adversary-aware human computer interaction that will guide user
interface design in the face of adversaries that have a victim's login
credentials,analyzing the efficacy of general consumer privacy legislation for
abuse contexts, and seeking out pragmatic law and policy recommendations. The
research makes the safety of (potential) victims paramount, which is facilitated
by working closely with stakeholder organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.