* 1916537
* PI Meeting: The Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier: Advancing Cognitive and Physical Capabilities; Alexandria, Virginia; April 5, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Joseph Gabbard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2020
* USD 34,825.00

This award supports a one-day workshop convening an interdisciplinary group of
experts conducting research on the relationship between workers, emerging
technologies, and the social and economic landscape of jobs and work.
Participants will report on the first year of their NSF-supported projects, as
well as participate in structured and unstructured activities, including oral
presentations, poster sessions, and panel discussions, to facilitate the
exchange of ideas and experiences. The applications areas that will be covered
by the workshop participants range from power grid resiliency to medical
decision making to classroom education to factory work to firefighting. These
projects go beyond the introduction of new technology into the workplace, and
explicitly address the social and economic consequences of
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All twelve projects supported under the FY2018
solicitation NSF 18-548, "Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier:
Advancing Cognitive and Physical Capabilities (FW-HTF)," will be represented at
the workshop. Other participants will include representatives of previous NSF-
supported projects and researchers from academia, government, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.