* 1916766
* Phase II IUCRC North Carolina State University: Broadband Wireless Access and Applications Center (BWAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Alexandra Duel-Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project is Phase II of the Broadband Wireless Access Center (BWAC), a
multi-university multi-industry organization composed of five universities (the
University of Arizona, Virginia Tech, University of Mississippi, the Catholic
University of America, and North Carolina State University (NCSU)) and 20+
affiliates from industry and government. In the past decade, wireless
communications has made major technological leaps. Wireless connectivity is
pervasive in society, leading to a shortage in wireless spectrum, network
congestion, cyber-attacks and personal security issues. The mission of BWAC is
to address these challenges and offer creative
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase II, NCSU will join BWAC with a
comprehensive research agenda in support of BWAC's mission and vision. In
particular, research thrusts at NCSU will include unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV)
communications; millimeter-wave (mmWave) theory, experimentation, hardware
design, and measurements; wireless localization; visible light communications
(VLC); antenna/circuit design for broadband communications, among other areas.
NCSU site will collaborate closely with its industry, government, and academic
partners, as well as the other BWAC sites, to introduce breakthrough advances in
broadband wireless technologies and applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
results of this collaborative industry-university center will have a direct
effect on public welfare, enabling several applications such as remote health
and broadband access in rural areas. The partnering universities will broaden
their activities to include Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site
programs, Research Experiences for Teachers program, participation of under-
represented minority students and faculty in research projects, and involvement
of multidisciplinary projects. The researchers will continuously integrate the
research outcomes related to mmWave and UAV communications into NCSU's
curriculum at graduate as well as undergraduate levels. With its research,
established partnerships, and long history of collaboration between its members,
BWAC will seek to create intellectual property and spin-off companies, leading
to job growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lead site, University of Arizona manages
the central BWAC project website at www.bwac.arizona.edu. This website contains
various information about the center including the overview of the center,
mission, industry membership, projects, meeting announcements and technical
data. Center proprietary documents are managed through a secure internal web
portal requiring access credentials. The data repository will be managed at the
main website with links to the other university sites. The repository will
contain technical papers, project descriptions, relevant software, testbed
details, etc. The repository will be maintained during the project and for an
additional five years beyond its termination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.