* 1916255
* CSBR:  Natural History Collections: Integrating the Orphaned Southern Illinois University Fluid Vertebrate Collections into the Illinois Natural History Survey Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Christopher Phillips, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 280,976.00

Natural history collections are irreplaceable research resources for biological
information. Specimen-based data within them are used for basic and applied
research across multiple scientific disciplines. Data in collections are used to
detect changes in the health of our ecosystems, highlight species and ecosystems
in need of conservation, discover unknown biodiversity, and document the
evolutionary history of life on earth. When natural history collections are
neglected or abandoned, vast amounts of biological information are lost or made
unavailable to the scientific community. In 2015 the large, geographically
unique, and recently orphaned Southern Illinois University at Carbondale (SIUC)
fluid vertebrates collections were moved to the Illinois Natural History Survey
(INHS) in Champaign, Illinois where they have remained in boxes and unavailable
to researchers. This award provides funding for the unboxing and full curation
of specimens and specimen-based data in the SIUC collections and their
integration into the INHS biological collections. Data associated with over
650,000 specimens will be available for biological research and a myriad of
other scientific challenges. Undergraduate students will be recruited from the
Museum Studies Program (MUSE) housed in the Department of Anthropology at the
University of Illinois. The project team will be working with and training
undergraduates in two different courses offered under
MUSE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The full curation and integration of the SIUC fluid
vertebrate collections into the INHS will occur through a two-stage process over
a period of three years. First, metadata associated with SIUC specimens will be
normalized by updating taxonomic names, standardizing geographic locality
information, and correcting typographical errors. Specimens lacking
georeferenced coordinate data will have that information added to their record
fields. The second stage will focus on the physical unpacking of the boxes
currently housing the SIUC collections and final curation. Final curation will
consist of assigning new INHS catalog numbers and importing SIUC specimen
metadata into INHS databases, placing specimens in appropriate archival
containers as necessary. Duplicated specimens will be removed and transferred to
collaborating museums. New archival labels will be associated to the SIUC
specimens, which will be placed in appropriate physical locations within the
INHS collection ranges and made available for use. Finally, all SIUC specimen
metadata will be served online through the INHS and iDigBio (idigbio.org) web
portals where they will be available for download by the scientific community.
As a platform to help train the next generation of museum curators, collection
managers, and museum technicians, the project will engage high school and
undergraduate students in database query, specimen identification and
preparation, curation, and georeferencing phases of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.