* 1916136
* Criticality and Active Dynamics in Mechanical Detection by the Inner Ear
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Dolores Bozovic, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2022
* USD 589,527.00

The auditory (hearing) and vestibular (balance) systems provide us with rich
information about the world around us. To achieve this, these sensory systems
perform remarkable mechanical detection, responding to very small movements in
the hair cells of the inner ear. This sensitivity has to be achieved even in a
noisy environment in order to allow individuals to distinguish sounds that they
want to hear and interpret from background noise. While the fundamental process
of hearing is known, the processes that support acuity of hearing (being able to
clearly detect the important sounds) are not well understood. This project will
look at the fundamental mechanics and physics of the response of hair cells in
order to better understand the dynamics of the hearing process. Beyond advancing
understanding of this important physiological process, the knowledge gained from
the research may also inform the development of sensor systems that mimic the
process of the ear. The award will enable the inclusion of undergraduate
researchers, recruited through programs that broaden the participation of
students from under-represented minorities. The laboratory will also include
high school students in the research project, focusing on encouraging women to
pursue studies in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two guiding
hypotheses. First, that the coupling between hair cells changes the dynamics of
the system, poising it closer to criticality. Second, that the presence of weak
chaos in the coupled system enhances its sensitivity. In order to investigate
thse hypotheses, this project will use in vitro preparations of the bullfrog
sacculus to assess how coupled systems of hair bundles achieve their detection.
Specifically, the research will look for signatures of criticality, which would
be a regime that leads to a highly sensitive response and a broad range of
power-law behavior. The project will also explore the role of chaotic dynamics
in the fully coupled system in order to determine how chaoticity in individual
bundles is modified by the coupling, as well as how it affects the performance
of the full system. To elucidate the role of these dynamic regimes, the project
will use preparations that incorporate different coupling conditions. For one
set of experiments, it will use hybrid preparations, in which different numbers
of hair bundles will be connected to build arrays of different sizes. For
another set of experiments, semi-intact systems will be used, which preserve the
innate, overlying membrane. The researcher hypothesizes that the system is
poised near criticality, on the weakly oscillatory side, and that the critical
oscillations exhibit chaotic dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.