* 1916208
* Spatial-Temporal Modeling and Computation for Physical Processes and Numerical Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Joseph Guinness, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 220,001.00

Every minute of every day, a swarm of satellites captures images of the scenes
below, and supercomputers churn out simulations of future weather and climate,
accumulating a mountain of raw information about the Earth and its atmosphere.
Since a significant amount of public funding has been devoted to the collection
and production of this data, it is imperative that statistical tools be up to
the task of analyzing it. This project aims to sort through this information,
accurately filling in gaps in the raw data, inferring meaningful quantities--
such as changing wind patterns--from sequences of images, and refining our
understanding of the Earth as an interconnected system through the analysis of
numerical computer simulations. Statistical techniques developed during this
project will be made accessible to the broader community by public dissemination
of software. Students and emerging researchers will be trained to use the new
methods and will be empowered with specific knowledge and independent critical
thinking skills to venture out and make their own
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project outlines advancements for three
crucial tasks in the geoscientific data analysis pipeline. (1) Observations from
ground monitors and polar orbiting satellites often have gaps in space and time
that must be interpolated. Thus, new Gaussian process approximations are
proposed that significantly reduce computational effort while improving
approximations, allowing for fast and accurate interpolations. (2) Geostationary
satellite sensors afford the opportunity for fine scale, continual monitoring of
the atmosphere. This proposal outlines a framework for using these data--which
consist of a temporal sequence of images--for the purpose of inferring upper air
wind fields. (3) The pace of supercomputing has continued to increase our
ability to produce high-resolution numerical simulations, which requires new
computational tools for analyzing the output. A technique is proposed for local
estimation that results in a globally valid statistical model, a critical
feature that enables numerical model emulation and data compression via
statistical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.