* 1916575
* An integrated geophysics cruise to map the northern edge in the Chukchi Borderland and the adjacent Canada Basin - constraints on basin history and crustal structure
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Bernard Coakley, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,416,278.00

Over the last fifty years, we have learned the ocean basins are relatively
young. Knowing their history is necessary to understand the ancient, adjacent
continents. The Amerasia Basin of the Arctic Ocean is a mystery. While it is an
ocean basin, the familiar patterns created by seafloor spreading are not
obvious. As a result, it has not been possible to understand the basin history.
This project will study the history of three adjacent features in the Amerasia
Basin: the Chukchi Borderland, the Alpha Ridge and the Canada Basin This project
plan to use the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland (GEUS) portable,
flexible multi-channel seismic reflection (MCS) system on a research vessel.
This system, which has been successfully operated in thick pack ice, will
collect MCS data, for stratigraphic and structural interpretation, and provide
sufficient source strength for full crustal refraction work. Stronger constraint
on the deep crustal structure will be obtained in two locations in the Canada
Basin with ocean bottom seismometers (OBS). Refraction data will also be
acquired with sonobuoys during MCS profiling and will be used to model upper
crustal structure. The collection and analysis of the data will provide new
knowledge about the formation of the Amerasia Basin and improve our
understanding of the history of northeast Eurasia and northwest North America.
This project will also help educate a new generation of Arctic marine
geoscientists, support scientific ocean drilling to sample the sediments below
the seafloor and help define the extent of US territory in the Arctic Ocean.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the most part, current understanding of the Amerasia
Basin is based on observations made on the adjacent continents and an assumption
about the tectonic displacements that formed the basin. A new approach based on
establishing critical relationships between adjacent features will make it
possible to recreate the tectonic history of the ocean by scaling up from local
relationships. The Chukchi Borderland is a block of extended continental crust
embedded in the deep water Amerasia Basin. To understand the basin opening, it
is necessary to restore the Borderland to its pre-opening position. The choice
of this position distinguishes tectonic models of the basin which are not well
constrained by observations. In previous work, a 2- MCS survey across the
transition from the Chukchi Shelf to Borderland established that there have been
only slight displacements across this boundary since Early Cretaceous.
Understanding the structure and history of the northern edge of the Borderland,
known primarily from bathymetric data, is the next step. In this area, three of
the major structures of the Amerasia Basin intersect: the Borderland, Alpha
Ridge and the Canada Basin. A dedicated MCS survey in this area will improve our
understanding of these structures and their termination or continuation below
the sediment cover to the north and east. In this project, MCS and refraction
surveys will elucidate the relations between the overtly continental, high-
standing block and the surrounding crust, which may be, in part, of continental
composition as well. Observing the northern edge of the Chukchi Borderland and
adjacent deeper water areas will, by distinguishing crustal types, provide new
constraints on the history of the Amerasia Basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.