* 1916088
* Workshop and Grantees Meeting: Positioning Engineering Design and Systems Engineering Research for Sustained Societal Impact; West Lafayette, Indiana; October 7-8, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,998.00

The objective of this workshop is to develop and articulate research issues and
methodologies in engineering design and systems engineering (EDSE) for high
impact in the emerging workplace and society. Recently, there has been
tremendous technological progress in automation, machine learning, artificial
intelligence, and augmented reality. These technological advances are changing
the environment in which engineering designers work, the kinds of activities
they perform, the kinds of products they design, the information they have
access to, and the way in which they interact with machines, and communicate
with each other. Emerging technologies are not only enabling new types of
products and systems, but also new ways of designing them. The workshop will
provide a forum to foster dialog among leading experts on how EDSE research can
leverage the new opportunities and what the critical research challenges are
created by these emerging changes. The dialog will enable the convergence of
diverse perspectives from the EDSE research community, the foundational
sciences, and application domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will build
on the outcomes of prior workshops, and will focus on the research implications
of emerging trends impacting the workplace of future engineers and the societal
context for which new products and systems will be designed. Expected outcomes
of the workshop include the identification of ways for enhancing the impact of
the EDSE-funded research, the determination of new basic research opportunities
with high potential impact, and the establishment of high quality research
standards to maximize individual and collective impact. These outcomes will be
disseminated through a workshop report, an online web-based portal, and journal
articles. Through various avenues of dissemination, this workshop will promote
the teaching and training of faculty researchers from universities across the
United States, which can impact their research endeavors, teaching activities,
and position them for greater societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.