* 1916211
* Combinatorial Inference: Statistical Uncertainty Assessment for Discrete Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Junwei Lu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 01/31/2023
* USD 147,258.00

Discrete structures like networks, clusters and ranking are observed in many
real-life applications including brain networks, protein clusters, and portfolio
selection. This project will develop a unified statistical framework for
inferring these unknown discrete structures from large-scale datasets in
biology, neuroscience, and finance. The replicability crisis on whether
statistical inference for scientific discoveries can be trusted has drawn
attention from both the scientific community and the public. A new field,
"combinatorial inference", developed by the PI aims to fill the gap between
various existing methods designed for continuous quantities and the lack of
valid reproducibility assessment for discrete ones. This project will also train
the next generation of data scientists to acquire statistical and computational
skills for large-scale scientific data analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a unified inference framework to assess uncertainty
(e.g. constructing confidence intervals, testing hypotheses and controlling the
false discovery rates) when inferring discrete structures include networks,
hypergraphs, clustering and ranking. Three types of problems will be considered:
(1) Testing the hypothesis that the discrete structure has certain combinatorial
properties (e.g., the network is connected, or the graph is triangle-free); (2)
Constructing confidence sets covering the discrete quantities with given
significance level (e.g., the maximum degree of a graph, the elements belong to
a same cluster, top k ranking items); (3) Screening discrete structures of
interest (e.g., the cycles, hubs and cliques in a graph) with the false
discovery rate control. Classical inference mainly focuses on testing hypotheses
and constructing confidence intervals for continuous parameters where analytical
methods and theory can be directly applied. On the other hand, exiting research
on discrete structures in statistical models mainly focuses on estimation and
lacks systematic inferential methods for uncertainty assessment. This project
seeks to advance the frontiers of modern statistical inference in four
directions: (a) Methodology: Developing efficient methods for hypothesis
testing, confidence interval construction, and false discovery controlling
procedures; (b) Theory: Developing new probabilistic tools including non-
asymptotic concentration inequalities and limiting theory and universality
phenomena for combinatorial random quantities; (c) Computation: Computationally
efficient algorithms to implement the combinatorial inferential methods for
large-scale statistical models; and (d) Fundamental limits: Developing new
combinatorial information-theoretic lower bounds to justify the optimality of
the proposed inferential methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.