* 1916068
* Micro-plasma inspired THz liquid photonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2022
* USD 380,199.00

The nontechnical description of the project &lt;br/&gt;The far-infrared region
of the electromagnetic spectrum (0.3-10 THz) has long been considered the last
remaining scientific gap in the electromagnetic spectrum, which is
underdeveloped but ripe for exploitation. This field shows great promise of
basic science research for a variety of reasons. It is known that normal
universal matters are made of four states: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma. The
generation of THz wave from solids, gases, and plasmas has been demonstrated,
used, and understood for decades. To generate THz waves from liquid water has
long been considered as impossible in THz community. This is a scientific
curiosity: why can only three states in matter: solid, gas and plasma, be used
to generate THz waves, but not liquid Among liquids, including water, is it just
due to the large absorption coefficient in THz frequency range. The THz liquid
photonics could be one of the key projects to place the remaining piece to the
missing puzzle. It is reasonable to expect that liquids might have unique
properties if they could be harnessed as THz sources. Liquids have a high
molecular density, close to that of solids, meaning that light over a certain
area will interact with many more molecules than an equivalent cross-section of
gases. This makes liquids very good candidates for the study of high-energy-
density plasma. A successful investigation in THz generation from liquids might
complete the last piece of the matter-phase puzzle for THz sources in the matter
temperature-pressure phase diagram in THz community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical description of the project &lt;br/&gt;Our proposed scientific
investigation of THz liquid photonics focuses on THz generation from carefully
selected liquids by using femtosecond laser induced micro-plasma. Compared with
ambient air in THz air photonics, liquids have much lower ionization energy (for
example, only 6.5 eV for water), but 3 orders higher molecular density, which
means more charged particles can be provided in the same ionized volume.
Compared with solid crystals, phase matching conditions and crystal phonon
absorptions are avoided in the generation process, which significantly limit the
bandwidth of the THz pulse generated from solid sources. Additionally, the
breakdown in liquids is not a permanent damage, which will be naturally erased
through electron-ion recombination. Liquid fluidity can also provide a fresh
interaction area for the next pulse. All these superiorities make liquids a
promising THz source. Therefore, it is imperative to investigate the mechanism
of the THz wave generation from water. A variety of liquids with different
absorption coefficient (polarity), molecular density, photo-ionization
threshold, and viscosity will be investigated. We will conduct a study of THz
photonics in liquids by using laser induced micro-plasma. Specially we propose
to perform systematic study of the generation of broadband THz waves in liquids,
include aqueous solutions (normal and heavy water, salty water, sugar water,
alcohol solution), and over 20 different liquids (with different polarity and pH
levels). Double optical pulse excitation method of THz wave generation will be
used. We will test different liquid solutions, from water film and line to
droplet and mist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.