* 1916378
* Scalable Statistical Inference in Small-World Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Sebastien Roch, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Social networks often exhibit "small-world features". For instance, friends
typically share many common friends, but most individuals have a limited number
of close acquaintances irrespective of the size of the network. Another well-
documented feature of such networks is the "six degrees of separation property",
whereby most people are a small number of social connections away from one
another. Despite their ubiquity, common statistical models of complex networks
do not typically generate graphs with these properties. Therefore, the main goal
of this project is to address the general lack of plausible and tractable
statistical models of small-world networks. Specifically, the PIs will develop a
novel framework for the inference of these networks, including statistical
models, fast and scalable algorithms, as well as supporting theory. These models
and methods will be empirically validated through the development and deployment
of techniques that sample large graphs in ways that helps assess them. This new
understanding will contribute to ongoing interdisciplinary collaborations in
journalism, health care, and law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing probabilistic
constructions of small-world networks, i.e., random graphs exhibiting low
diameter, sparsity and transitivity, tend to be ad-hoc and, hence, often not
suitable for statistical inference. In this project, the PIs will formulate and
analyze interpretable statistical models of small-world networks; and develop
scalable statistical inference for such models based on both spectral techniques
and local sampling. For this purpose, the PIs will develop and explore a family
of network models with high-dimensional latent features. The PIs will analyze
how traditional algorithms perform in this regime, and will develop and analyze
local sampling algorithms, such as respondent-driven sampling. The information-
theoretic limit of community detection will also be studied. This grant will
support the development of two courses aimed at intermediate undergraduates in
UW- Madison's new undergraduate data science degree. These courses will aim to
broaden engagement in both data science and social network analysis. This grant
will also support the training of PhD students in both Statistics and
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.