* 1916893
* Plant immune signaling network: Connecting pathogen perception, chromatin modification and activation of immune responses.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Tesfaye Mengiste, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 844,752.00

Plant pathogens are challenges to crop production. In particular, fungal
pathogens cause destructive diseases that threaten global food, feed and fiber
production and jeopardize diversity of plant species. Studies that expand
fundamental knowledge on how plants fend off microbial infection is expected to
help design better disease control strategies. Multifaceted molecular,
biochemical and genomic approaches will be deployed to understand how plants
regulation activation of defense against pathogens. Plants activate a battery of
defense mechanisms including the synthesis of diverse antimicrobial agents and
other immune responses to deter infection or restrict the extent of damage after
infection. How plants activate or suppress these mechanisms will be studied.
Knowledge on the temporal and spatial regulation of such changes are important
to understand the mechanisms of disease resistance. The untimely activation of
some of these immune responses in the absence of pathogens is not beneficial to
the plant. Consequently a tight control of on timing and spatial activation is
critical. The molecular and biochemical mechanisms underlying such defense gene
activation, reprogramming, and how these occurs in the context of eukaryotic DNA
that is packed with chromatin will be determined. The cellular communication
that link pathogen sensing to the activation of defense in the plant cell will
be analyzed. Discoveries from this project will expand basic knowledge, and pave
the way to develop disease resistant plants. Finally, this project will train
undergraduate, graduate students and post-doctoral scientists in plant molecular
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant immune gene transcription is a major
component of plant immunity with rapid and massive transcriptional programming
occurring in response to pathogens. Changes in equilibrium of histone
modifications mediated by histone modifying enzymes (HMEs) are critical players
orchestrating these cellular responses. However, the mechanisms underlying
transcription reprogramming in response to infection in the context of chromatin
are not understood. This project is to dissect the signal transduction pathway
connecting pathogen sensing to histone modifications, and the consequent
dynamics in chromatin accessibility and transcription. The regulatory impacts of
shifts in equilibrium of histone lysine methylations (HLMs) will be studied
using histone methyl transferases and demethylases with antagonistic biochemical
and functions. Molecular mechanisms and factors regulating events preceding
reversible histone modifications and the subsequent changes in gene expression
will be elucidated. Factors that regulate activation and recruitment of HMEs to
target loci in response to infection to trigger shifts in HLMs and immune gene
transcription will be studied. Transcription factors and nucleosome assembly
proteins that are functional partners of HMEs in gene regulation will be
analyzed. Aim1 focuses on regulation of HMEs by protein kinases, linking early
events in immune responses to changes in chromatin state and gene expression.
Aim2 is to characterize the functions of HME interacting transcription factors
(TFs) and nucleosome assembly proteins. Aim3 is to determine genome wide gene
expression profiles underlying shifts in equilibrium of HLM and decipher its
biological impact. Discoveries from this project will improve basic knowledge
and pave the way for epi-genome modifications of traits. Finally, this project
will train undergraduate, graduate students and post-doctoral
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.