* 1916364
* I-Corps: Minimizing the risk of radiation to prostate cancer patients
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Mohammad Elahinia, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is by improving
the quality of life of prostate and potentially other pelvic cancer patients who
receive radiation therapy (RT). Followed by skin cancer, prostate cancer is the
most common cancer in American men. The American Cancer Society's estimate for
prostate cancer in the United States for 2018 was 164,690 new cases. Most of
these cases will receive radiotherapy as part of their treatment. The new trend
in RT is to deliver a much higher dose of radiation per fraction in a smaller
number of fractions while reducing the required number of RT sessions. However,
during RT of the prostate, the rectum acts as a limiting factor. Due to the
proximity of rectum to prostate, increasing dosage of the radiation can affect
the rectal wall and increase risk of cancer in rectum. The device developed here
allows for the expedited treatment plans while eliminating the undesirable
damage to the rectal tissue. This can greatly improve a patient's quality of
life after completion of radiation treatment. The use of our device reduces the
overall required time for the radiation therapy of prostate cancer and saves
money for health care providers, health insurances, and patients.

This I-Corps project leverages the functionality of nickel titanium to retract
the rectum away from the prostate during radiation beam therapy of prostate
cancer. This will be a minimally invasive device that uses the biomimetic
actuation of the material to create distance between rectum and prostate. NiTi
as a biocompatible shape memory alloy is an ideal candidate for biomimetic and
biocompatible devices. A control systems design is combined with
thermomechanical functionality of the alloy to generate the desired range of
motion and profile of force. The actuation takes place by passing a small
electrical current in a reliable, clean, and silent manner. This type of
actuation is potentially inherently safer when compared to most other means of
actuation, because it has a limited range of motion beyond which applying more
electrical current does not create further motion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.