* 1916061
* Collaborative Research: The leaky rake to solid plate transition on flow through biological filtering structures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Arvind Santhanakrishnan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 212,000.00

Numerous small organisms that swim, fly, smell, or feed in flow rely on
branched, bristled and hairy structures that are significant to biological and
biomedical applications. The movement and orientation of such bristled layers
can change the behavior of the air or water flow through them such that they may
act as either solid plates or leaky rakes. Understanding how animals creatively
take advantage of this type of flow transition could inform the design of
filters and sampling devices. Although such flows have been studied in many
systems, predictive mathematical models of the leaky rake to solid plate
transition remain unavailable. The goal of this project is to reveal the
physical mechanisms behind this transition through mathematical modeling and
experimentation. The theoretical models developed could find applications in
biomedical problems such as the flow of lymph and blood through porous tissues
and vascular protective layers. In terms of education and outreach, students
will be trained at the interface of engineering, mathematics, and biology
through interdisciplinary courses, field research, and multidisciplinary group
meetings. Diverse students will be recruited through the Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation (LSAMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
elucidate the fundamental fluid dynamics of biological and bioinspired filtering
arrays operating at the mesoscale, where inertial and viscous forces are nearly
balanced. It will also reveal the fundamental physics of particle capture and
exchange when advection and diffusion are nearly balanced. Two types of marine
invertebrates will be examined: 1) upside-down jellyfish that drive flow through
3D bristled oral arms, and 2) sea fans that are branched into approximately 2D
sheets. Modeling the leaky-to-solid transition is challenging due to the need to
simultaneously resolve small-scale flow around micron-scale structures and bulk
flow around centimeter-scale arrays. New mathematical models, informed by
experiments, will be developed to describe the effective porosity of flexible
filtering layers. Particle capture rates and concentration profiles around
mesoscale filtering arrays will be quantified experimentally in organisms and
physical models. Further details of chemical exchange will be resolved
numerically using the immersed boundary method. In terms of biology, these
organisms represent one of many examples where particle capture and nutrient
uptake occur in mesoscale bristled arrays. Revealing how this strategy is
advantageous contributes directly to the NSF Rules of Life. In terms of
bioinspired design, these systems exhibit inherently multiscale solutions for
filtering and exchange that will provide new insights into the bioinspired
design of filtering structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.