* 1916612
* Dilute-Donor Organic Solar Cells: Breaking the Fullerene Monopoly
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Julia Hsu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 466,321.00

Solar energy is among the most attractive renewable energy sources, motivating
fundamental research to enable low-cost technologies that are adaptable for a
variety of applications. Organic photovoltaic solar cells (OPVs), based on small
organic molecules and polymers, are a potentially suitable option. OPVs are
lightweight, made of environmentally benign materials, and can be manufactured
by inexpensive methods. This technology provides a path towards a lightweight,
flexible platform for integration of renewable electricity production capacity
into building infrastructure. OPV technology can also generate electricity for
indoor displays, automobile sensors, health monitors, and the internet of
things. A new kind of OPV, the dilute-donor organic solar cell, has recently
been demonstrated to overcome previous technological shortcomings such as the
cell's current-versus-voltage trade off. To date, there is limited fundamental
scientific understanding of how electricity is generated in dilute-donor OPVs.
This project will investigate the established fullerene-based dilute-donor OPV
systems and then use this information to rationally design new systems with
other materials for improved performance and solar conversion efficiency. In
addition to technical advancements, the project includes educational activities
on energy science for high school and undergraduate students, career guidance
for graduate students, and outreach activities to K-12 students and the general
public in the Northern Texas area through a partnership with UT Dallas Science
and Engineering Education Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this
fundamental research project is to expand the understanding of photogenerated
charge carrier transport dynamics in dilute donor organic photovoltaics. The
active layers in current high-performing OPV systems are based on the bulk
heterojunction (BHJ) nanostructure, i.e. a blend of donor (D) and acceptor (A)
molecules in roughly equal amounts. BHJ based cells have two fundamental
drawbacks: (1) there is a trade-off between short circuit current density and
open circuit voltage; and (2) the performance is highly sensitive to the
nanoscale morphology, which to date has been optimized by trial and error.
Recently, a different kind of OPV system which circumvents the trade-off between
short circuit current density and open circuit voltage has gained attention.
Fullerene-based OSCs, also called dilute-donor OPVs, contain only a small amount
of donor material embedded in the fullerene matrix and show a substantial short
circuit current density while maintaining a high open circuit voltage. While the
high voltage value in the dilute-donor system is largely accepted to be
determined by the Schottky barrier height between the metal electrode and the
acceptor matrix, the origin of a high current density without percolating paths
for holes was unknown. This project lays out a joint experimental and
theoretical modeling study to investigate the photo-generation, transport, and
recombination of carriers in dilute-donor OPV systems. So far, all known dilute-
donor OPV studies use fullerene acceptors as the matrix material. However, the
low absorption coefficient and low carrier mobilities of fullerenes are a
fundamental weakness. To address this, the project will investigate ambipolar
materials with smaller band gaps and higher carrier mobilities as matrix
materials, to increase light absorption and improve carrier transport,
respectively. Drift-diffusion calculations using Technology Computer-Aided
Design combined with kinetic Monte Carlo simulations will be performed to
complement the experimental activities. The Monte Carlo analysis will reveal the
fundamentals behind the relative importance of various material properties and
device structures in dilute-donor OPVs. The theoretical results will help guide
the experimental selection of materials. The joint effort will lead to the
rational design of dilute-donor OPVs with high short circuit current density and
high open circuit voltage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.