* 1916527
* Leveraging Distributed Research Networks to Understand Watershed Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2019
* Kelly Wrighton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2019
* USD 13,749.00

Watersheds describe the organization of water moving across land. They can be as
small as a footprint or large enough to encompass all the land that covers water
draining from streams, into rivers, into the Chesapeake Bay, which ultimately
connects with the Atlantic Ocean. Scientists from across universities and
federal agencies (e.g. United States Geological Society, National Sciences
Foundation, Department of Energy) are working to understand the fundamentals of
watershed science, knowledge required to manage and keep water resources safe.
Support from NSF requested here will enable the first workshop to address
current knowledge gaps in the management of watershed systems, and specifically
develop a cross-agency and institution community that can leverage existing
research efforts, and develop new ones, to advance watershed science. This
support will contribute to enhance the participant representation at this
workshop, as funds will be used to increase gender, racial, and early-career
stage participant representation. Moreover, since a key outcome is developing
lines of communication between federal agencies working in watershed science,
this support will also ensure active NSF researchers from Critical Zone
Observatories and others are in attendance to engage with these efforts. This
workshop is a necessary first step to ensure the protection of water quality,
research necessary for preserving drinking, agriculture, recreation, and
sustaining wildlife uses. As cities, states, regions, and countries try to find
new sources of uncontaminated water, preserving and enchaining clean water is a
vital global mission in the 21st century.

A particular focus of the workshop is to reveal how physical, biological, and
chemical processes integrate to govern hydrologic and biogeochemical function
relevant to ecosystem services provided by watersheds. In particular this
workshop will address applications of distributed science approaches to
watershed science- with the goal to develop more coordinated, consistent, and
open research networks. Key outcomes include (1) identifying the components of
watersheds amendable to or as models for distributed science approaches, (2)
analysis of the current watershed modeling efforts and discussion of what data
is needed to implement these models across larger spatial scales (multi-
watershed to continental), (3) development of field sampling and sensor
development strategies, and (4) the social and research challenges and
opportunities associated with the implementation of systematic distribute
science plan. The key outcomes of this workshop and other engagement activities
will be collated in a publicly available Workshop report, which can be publicly
available.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.