* 1916804
* TRTech-PGR:  MAPPING AND FUNCTIONAL CHARACTERIZATION OF CIS-REGULATORY MODULE VARIATION IN PLANTS
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Andrea Gallavotti, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,432,562.00

Transcription factors are proteins that bind to short DNA sequence motifs in
regulatory regions of their target genes and thus control the gene expression
changes responsible for plant developmental programs and environmental
responses. In crop species, variation in transcription factors and the
regulatory regions they bind have been frequent drivers of productivity gains
during domestication and modern breeding, and continue to offer great potential
for further trait engineering. Yet, in plant genomes, the vast majority of
transcription factor-DNA binding events and the gene expression changes they
elicit remain largely uncharacterized, restricting the development of new
varieties that meet the challenges of modern agriculture. In this project,
detailed regulatory information maps and new methodologies will be generated to
identify relationships between transcription factor binding and variability in
gene expression, providing new tools for the rational design of crops with
improved traits. These methods have the potential to fundamentally transform
crop improvement strategies to adequately feed the expanding global population.
To extend the reach of the project, scientists working under this award will
provide specialized training in genomics and bioinformatics to students with
diverse backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large portion of plant genetic
variation is regulatory and resides in non-coding regions, spaces that are often
vast in genomes such as maize. Mining functional elements from these spaces
represents a major challenge, in part because while potential transcription
factor (TF) binding sites are naturally abundant within a genome, only a small
fraction is actually bound and able to affect expression. Empirically cataloging
plant TF binding events and their contribution to transcriptional outputs is
therefore a priority for understanding transcriptional networks and trait
variation. This project will develop TF-DNA interaction methods that enable
comparative analysis of multiple genetic backgrounds, resulting in the
generation of high-resolution maps of conserved regulatory regions and
accession-specific variants that can be linked to transcriptional programs. This
approach will be applied in two species with different genomic properties:
maize, a major monocot crop with a large genome; and Arabidopsis, a model
eudicot with a compact genome. Because many TFs do not function in isolation but
instead interact with other proteins that can alter their DNA binding activity,
this project will also develop techniques to better understand the contribution
of TF pairs to transcriptional regulation. To directly link TF binding events to
phenotypic outcomes, specific regulatory elements in key genes controlling plant
architecture and reproductive development will be functionally characterized
through precise genome editing. Such experiments will demonstrate how modulation
of regulatory regions can be used to create subtle changes in gene expression
levels or spatial expression patterns that may result in advantageous
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is supported jointly by the Plant
Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and
the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.