* 1916606
* Young Mathematicians Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* James Fowler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 140,000.00

The Young Mathematicians Conference (YMC), a premier annual conference for
undergraduate research in mathematics, takes place during a weekend in August,
from Friday noon until Sunday at noon. The conference has been running since
2003 with the ongoing support of NSF. YMC provides a venue for undergraduate
students to present and disseminate the results of their research, discuss
mathematics with their peers and with senior researchers, and receive
recognition of their research achievements. Another primary mission of YMC is to
inspire and encourage students, particularly women and traditionally
underrepresented groups, to pursue mathematics as a
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students submit abstracts, which are judged and
ranked by a panel of 40-70 faculty reviewers. Top-ranked students and their
mentors are invited to participate in YMC. Besides student talks and a poster
session, there are three plenary lectures delivered by world-class
mathematicians to introduce students to topics related to high impact innovative
research of current interest. Videos of these lectures are posted online. A
Graduate School Orientation event invites representatives from PhD programs to
provide information and insights about a graduate career in mathematics. YMC is
a natural place to exchange ideas focused on undergraduate mentoring. Mentors
from different institutions convene at a Mentors' Breakfast where they discuss
best practices, previous experiences, and challenges related to supervising
undergraduate research and mentorship. A strong online presence allows
connections and continuity with past participants. The conference website is
https://ymc.osu.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.