* 1916689
* Improving Modeled Momentum Flux in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Julio Bacmeister, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,401,456.00

Passengers on airplanes often feel a transition from bumpy to smooth flight
shortly after takeoff as they fly through the top of the Planetary Boundary
Layer (PBL), the layer of atmosphere which is strongly influenced by the
surface. The up-and-down turbulent motions felt by passengers are the primary
mechanism through which air at the surface is exchanged with air aloft, and it
is primarily though this exchange that air aloft feels the effects of the
surface and vice versa. Because of their small size, turbulent eddies in the PBL
cannot be simulated explicitly in weather and climate models and must be
represented indirectly through parameterization schemes that represent their
aggregate behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a Climate Process
Team engaged in the development of a parameterization scheme for the turbulent
vertical exchange of momentum within the boundary layer. Vertical momentum flux
is critical for determining surface winds and the change of wind with height in
the PBL. Climate models commonly use simplified parameterizations of vertical
momentum flux in which the flux is downgradient, transporting momentum from
levels with stronger winds to levels where winds are weaker. Downgradient flux
is often adequate but is not a good approximation when a low-level jet is
present in the PBL. For instance hurricanes commonly have their strongest winds
above the surface, and the downgradient approximation could be responsible for
surface winds which are too weak for the accompanying sea level pressure (SLP)
minimum. The great plains low-level jet, a northward-flowing nighttime jet near
the top of the PBL over the US Great Plains, is another case where the
downgradient approximation is questionable, and better representation of
momentum flux is desirable given the role of the jet in the development of
severe thunderstorms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scheme is developed and
implemented in the Community Earth System Model (CESM), an open-source model
hosted and supported by the National Center for Atmospheric Research. The scheme
is able to produce upgradient as well as downgradient momentum fluxes because it
is prognostic, solving a tendency equation for the momentum flux in which
closure is achieved by assuming that the higher-order terms are essentially
stochastic. Values for the high-order terms are obtained from sampling into an
assumed probability density function with parameters determined by a combination
of small-scale process model simulations and field campaign data. The project
also includes scientific investigation using the scheme, including hurricane
simulations with and without it to determine the impact of upgradient momentum
fluxes on surface wind speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact of
the work is that it seeks to improve climate models and enhance their value for
researchers and decision makers. CESM is a community model with a global user
community, thus model improvements achieved in the project can be widely
adopted. The scheme will also be implemented in the climate model of the
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) by collaborators not funded under
this award. Moreover, the work seeks to improve representation of processes
associated with severe weather. The project provides support and training to
undergraduate and graduate students as well as two postdoctoral researchers,
thereby cultivating the next generation of researchers in atmospheric
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.