* 1916864
* Competitive Polymer Hydration and Confinement in Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Elena Dormidontova, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 343,571.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computer modeling,
theoretical research and education to apply the principles of statistical
physics to gain insights on competitive polymer hydration in nanomaterials.
Polymers are long chain-like molecules, some of which can form weak
electrostatic bonds, known as hydrogen bonds, with water or other solvents. Many
nanotechnological applications such as nanomedicine, purification, and sensing
employ biocompatible water-soluble polymers that may be grafted to surfaces or
part of a larger self-assembled supramolecular structure. To a large extent the
properties of these nanomaterials depend on polymer hydration, that is, the
interactions between the polymers and the surrounding water molecules.
Competitive polymer hydration reflects the fact that there is a competition for
the formation of polymer-water hydrogen bonds with other chemical components of
the system. This competition can lead to changes in polymer size and shape,
which may affect the properties of the nanomaterial. The PI aims to use computer
simulation to investigate the factors affecting polymer hydration and the
organization of the surrounding water in polymers grafted to surfaces or forming
larger self-assembled structures. The PI will study competitive hydration
involving the presence of additional solvents, such as alcohols, and the
presence of biologically relevant simple sugars, such as fructose and glucose,
which are typically encountered in many nanomaterial applications. Fundamental
understanding of polymer hydration is essential for proper functioning of
nanomaterials, designing new responsive materials, and optimizing their
performance. This research will contribute to theoretical understanding of the
properties of polymer-grafted nanostructures and create a basis for comparison
of competitive hydration in nanostructures of different geometries, for example
planar vs. curved surfaces, exposed to multicomponent solutions. This project
will also provide insights into molecular transport through nanopores thereby
bridging polymer science and biophysics. Graduate and undergraduate students
will be trained in modern simulation methods and data analysis. The results of
this research will enhance graduate courses on polymer and soft matter physics
as well as stimulate interest in STEM graduate and undergraduate research and
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports computer simulation and theoretical research, and education to
understand the effects of competitive solvation and nanoconfinement of water-
soluble polymers grafted to surfaces of different curvature. Solubility of many
macromolecules depend on hydrogen bonding with water. Hydrogen bonding is a
highly competitive interaction and susceptible to external conditions, which may
alter the balance between acceptors competing for donors or vice versa. The
outcomes of such an intricate balance are often hard to anticipate and hydration
is rather difficult to measure experimentally. Computer simulations are a good
tool for studying hydration and hydrogen bonding. Using largescale atomistic
molecular dynamics simulations, the PI will investigate water structuring and
hydration of polyethylene oxide grafted to solid nanopores, the effect of
synthetic and carbohydrate co-solvents on polymer conformation, and the
properties of polymer brushes grafted to convex, planar and concave gold
surfaces or as part of a self-assembled micelle structure. The research group
will investigate proton donating and proton accepting co-solvents and analyze
hydration dynamics and competition for hydrogen bonding between inter- and
intramolecular hydrogen bonding with polymer brushes leading to conformational
changes and to triggering pore opening/closing in a solvent or temperature-
dependent manner. The influence of polymer length, grafting density, size,
surface curvature, co-solvent concentration, shape, hydrophobicity and chemical
origin, whether synthetic or biological, on competitive hydration will be
systematically studied. Based on simulation data analysis, experimentally
testable predictions will be made regarding co-solvent-triggered changes in the
polymer brush properties including control over the polymer-grafted nanopore
transport or surface interaction of polymer-grafted nanoparticles and micelles,
as used in biomedical applications. This project will provide ample opportunity
for graduate and undergraduate student training in modern computational skills
which can be applied in different scientific and nanotechnological
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.