* 1916431
* Role of the intrinsically disordered protein PIR in Polycomb silencing and environmental responses in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Doris Wagner, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,140,906.00

The goal of this project is to uncover the molecular basis for plant survival
under harsh conditions, such as drought. When plants experience a dry spell,
subsets of genes in the genome are turned off, or silenced, by a protein
regulator called Polycomb. This silencing helps the plant conserve crucial
resources to survive the drought. Some aspects of how Polycomb works to silence
genes is understood, but exactly how Polycomb targets the correct genes to
silence in response to drought is still a mystery. Following up on clues
obtained from recent studies, this project will study a newly identified protein
called PIR, which may provide the missing link between drought and Polycomb
action. Understanding this connection could have broad impacts for agriculture,
as the findings would help plant breeders develop crop varieties that can grow
better in dry environments. The project will also have educational impact by
improving structured active learning activities in classroom settings, in both
introductory and advanced biology courses. In addition, we will develop and
disseminate research laboratory modules for engaging high school students in
authentic research experiences. The educational activities are aimed at
enhancing the success and retention of diverse groups of students in science and
are expected to contribute to preparation of a future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants and animals, Polycomb protein
complexes have long been recognized as key developmental regulators and much is
known about how they repress gene expression by histone modification and
chromatin compaction. In contrast, less is understood about how these regulators
control gene expression in response to exogenous cues. This project will use the
model plant Arabidopsis thaliana to study how drought stress influences
silencing through interaction of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) with
another protein, called Polycomb Interacting Repressor (PIR). Preliminary
results provided evidence that PIR is linked to drought stress response and that
it interacts genetically and physically with PRC2. These observations will be
followed up to explore: how drought stress influences recruitment and activity
of PIR/PRC2 complexes on chromatin; whether PIR functions as a non-
stoichiometric auxiliary PRC2 component; and whether drought leads PIR, which is
an intrinsically disordered protein, to form membrane-less phase-separated
nuclear condensates, known as polycomb bodies. Together, the results should
provide new mechanistic links between drought response and chromatin-based
regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program (Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences) and by the
Plant Genome Research Program and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
Program (Division of Integrative Organismal Systems), all in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.