* 1916661
* Collaborative Research: Have transantarctic dispersal corridors impacted Antarctic marine biodiversity?
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Kenneth Halanych, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Vernet
* 07/31/2022
* USD 667,605.00

Antarctica is among the most rapidly warming places on the planet, and some
reports suggest the Antarctic environment is approaching, or possibly beyond,
the tipping point for ice shelf collapse. The loss of ice around Antarctica is
dramatically changing habitat availability for marine fauna, particularly
benthic marine invertebrate species. Building on past studies, this research
will provide insights into how changing climate impacts species distribution and
community structure. Geological data suggests that during periods when ice
extent was much reduced relative to modern levels, marine seaways connected the
Ross and Weddell Seas on either side of Antarctica. However, most theories about
the origins of current marine invertebrate distribution patterns fail to
consider this transantarctic connection. This research will use molecular
genomic tools to probe the DNA of Antarctic marine invertebrates and explore
alternative hypotheses about factors that may have shaped current patterns of
animal biodiversity in the Southern Ocean. Research will inform predictions
about how species distributions may change as Antarctic ice sheets continue to
deteriorate and provide critical information on how organisms adjust their
ranges in response to environmental change. This work includes several specific
outreach activities including presentations in K-8 classrooms, several short-
format videos on Antarctic genomics and field work, and two 3-day workshops on
bioinformatics approaches. A minimum of 4 graduate students, a postdoc and
several undergraduates will also be trained during this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
understand environmental factors that have shaped patterns of present-day
diversity in Antarctic benthic marine invertebrates. Evidence from sediment
cores and modeling suggests ice shelf collapses have occurred multiple times in
the last few million years. During these periods, transantarctic seaways
connected the Ross and Weddell Seas. This research will assess whether the
presence of transantarctic waterways helps explain observed similarities between
the Ross and Weddell Seas benthic marine invertebrate fauna better than other
current hypotheses (e.g., dispersal by the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, or
expansion from common glacial refugia). Seven Antarctic benthic invertebrate
taxa will be targeted to test alternative hypothesis about the origins of
population genetic structure in the Southern Ocean using Single Nucleotide
Polymorphism (SNP) markers that sample thousands of loci across the genome.
Additionally, research will test the current paradigm that divergence between
closely related, often cryptic, species is the result of population bottlenecks
caused by glaciation. Specifically, SNP data will be mapped on to draft genomes
of three of our target taxa to assess the degree of genetic divergence and look
for signs of selection. Research findings may be applicable to other marine
ecosystems around the planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.