* 1916676
* RAPID: Recovery and Adjustment in the Community after Hurricane Florence
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Charles Benight, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,546.00

Severe natural disasters carry great economic costs and threaten individuals'
health and well-being in both the short and longer-term. Severe natural
disasters during the past decade include unprecedented flooding, devastating
wildfires, and catastrophic hurricanes. On September 14, 2018, Hurricane
Florence made landfall off the coast of Wilmington, North Carolina, causing
billions of dollars in damage to the state and surrounding region. Robeson
County was one of the hardest hit counties in North Carolina, with catastrophic
flooding causing substantial damage to residences, businesses, and
infrastructure. The same county had experienced widespread damage following
Hurricane Matthew in 2016 as well. Many in the hardest hit areas were still
experiencing long-term impacts from Hurricane Matthew in 2018, including loss of
employment and physical health problems related to exposure to mold and other
contaminants. Research focused on the experiences of individuals in this county
offers a unique opportunity to better understand how individuals cope with and
recover from severe and ongoing stress in the post-disaster context. This
project seeks to gain a richer understanding of how individuals manage post-
disaster recovery and the extent to which individual and social factors predict
both positive and negative outcomes. By integrating theories of post-disaster
adjustment and using advanced data analytic techniques, the current study will
lead to a better understanding of individual and community responses to extreme
events and inform the development of future
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Online surveys and daily "check in"
assessments administered via smart phone technology will be used to study
psychological adjustment, social support, community solidarity, and coping
efforts among adult residents of Robeson County, North Carolina who were exposed
to severe and repeated hurricane-related stress. The surveys and the daily
"check-ins" will provide critical data on how people cope with stress over time,
including the extent to which social and individual factors affect adjustment.
By cultivating a very rich set of data on the same individuals over time, it
will be possible to discern patterns of recovery, and understanding which we are
currently lacking. Measuring outcomes on a daily basis will generate significant
amounts of data and we will use advanced non-linear data analysis methods to
identify unique changes or shifts in functioning predicted by guiding
theoretical frameworks (self-regulation shift theory and social support
deterioration deterrence theory). This project extends current knowledge related
to post-disaster recovery by targeting key social and coping mechanisms of
change and highlighting possible critical targets for interventions in the near
and long-term post disaster context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.