* 1916693
* Planning IUCRC at University of Rhode Island: Center for Ocean System Simulation and Control
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jason Dahl, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 08/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

Ocean systems are critical to the well-being of the United States, providing
goods through shipping and port systems, providing energy through offshore oil,
gas, and renewable development, and providing national security through ocean
based national defense systems. The integration of autonomy into ocean systems
has the potential to significantly impact these fundamental industries by
reducing costs and enabling new industry advances through unmanned navigation of
transport vessels, development of underwater drones for oceanographic surveying
or defense activities, digital twin development for operation and control of
vehicles and platforms, and optimization in design for the development of
competitive renewable energy technologies. The Center for Ocean System
Simulation and Control (COSSC) seeks to integrate multi-fidelity computational
modeling techniques with physical sensor systems to advance fundamental research
in the controlled operation of smart ocean systems, including the use of
advanced materials, the use of distributed sensing, autonomy and innovation of
vehicles and platforms, energy savings, and fluid-structure dynamic modeling.
Based on the research interests inputs given by the industry, both sites will
form diversified research groups including underrepresented students, organize
outreach programs for young generations, and design short courses for industry
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this planning phase of the
center is to assess the viability of the center, with two sites located at Texas
A&amp;M University (TAMU) and the University of Rhode Island (URI). This project
will include a planning meeting to meet with prospective industry members of the
center to present fundamental research topics and develop a set of initial
industry vetted research projects to form the research basis of the center. The
TAMU site will focus on industry collaborations in offshore oil and gas and
shipbuilding, with example research topics in smart offshore system health
monitoring, coupled fluid-structure modeling, CFD of extreme loading events,
optimization of floating vessel geometry, and complexity reduction in CFD
modeling. The URI site will focus on industry collaborations in defense and
ocean renewable energy with example research topics in fast CFD hybrid methods,
floating vehicle motion control from reconstructed sea states, hydrodynamic
modeling for micro UUVs, moving vehicle digital twins, and interaction of wave
energy converters with marine sediments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.