* 1916860
* Scaling Up Sustainability Awareness, Impact, and Training within the Materials Science and Engineering Community
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 97,980.00

Materials science will play a pivotal role in solving many of the key challenges
our society will continue to face in the coming years, including providing a
sustainable supply of energy, water, products, services, transportation,
buildings, and public infrastructure. New approaches to sustainable development
will require materials researchers who have technical expertise and understand
the complex interrelationships between materials science and other disciplines.
As the premier professional society for materials researchers, the Materials
Research Society (MRS) is well positioned to help materials scientists address
these challenges. MRS has been building a robust community of practice in this
area for many years. In recognition of the critical and cross-cutting role of
sustainability in materials science, MRS established the Focus on Sustainability
Subcommittee in 2016. This proposal seeks to build on and expand the scope of
sustainability activities and programming within MRS, as well as to increase the
impact of sustainability within MRS and beyond to the entire materials science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRS Focus on Sustainability Subcommittee,
along with two task forces, will execute three thrusts including: (1) enhancing
awareness and understanding of sustainability across MRS; (2) elevating the
impact of sustainability efforts within MRS; and (3) training the next
generation of materials scientists to incorporate sustainability in their work.
Awareness and understanding of sustainability will be enhanced by meeting
attendee engagement through multiple routes, including gamification, handouts,
video, and social media, and a special networking event and program at the 2019
MRS Spring Meeting will seek to engage 140 energy and sustainability symposium
organizers in the MRS broader sustainability efforts. The impact of the MRS
sustainability efforts will be elevated by building on the successful series of
high profile, panel discussions on interdisciplinary sustainability topics, as
well as starting a new effort to bring in invited speakers on targeted hot
topics that intersect with sustainability. A set of new workshops will train
materials scientists to more comprehensively incorporate sustainability in their
research. Finally, background research on the current status of sustainability
in materials science curricula will inform a longer-term reform effort.
Together, these efforts have the potential to increase the role of
sustainability in materials science research and to inform new approaches to
materials science that more completely take sustainability into
account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.