* 1916953
* Modular Electronic Devices by Selective Co-axial Lithography of Nanowire Semiconductors
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Eric Vogel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 07/31/2023
* USD 402,400.00

This project provides new fundamental insights into the manufacturing of
flexible electronic devices for applications in healthcare, energy, and
textiles. Existing materials and current manufacturing approaches cannot
presently produce flexible substrates with the needed electrical performance.
This award investigates an advanced manufacturing process to enable the additive
fabrication of modular transistors with desirable low voltages (&lt; 1 V) and
high operating frequencies (&gt; 1 GHz). This research combines concepts from
chemical engineering, materials science, and electrical engineering, and sets
the stage for a variety of new electronic technologies that ensure the U.S.
maintains its competitive edge in electronics manufacturing. The collaborative
project offers multidisciplinary training opportunities for one graduate student
and the team's podcast, called Nanovation,serves as a forum to discuss the
nanomanufacturing concepts central to this project and, in doing so, generate
interest among the general public and researchers alike.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to develop an additive
nanomanufacturing process to fabricate modular, high-performance field-effect
transistors. The work synergistically combines bottom-up semiconductor crystal
growth with a new selective coaxial lithography method to template a self-
aligned gate stack on a single-crystalline, sub-micron channel. Specifically,
the research team advances the understanding of the coaxial lithographic method,
develops compatible area-selective deposition processes to achieve a low defect
density gate stack, and electrically contacts and characterizes the resulting
nanoelectronic devices. Structural and electrical characterization at each step
provides feedback with which to advance the process and device designs. Success
motivates important next steps, such as, the placement and interconnection of
modular devices to form functional circuitry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.