* 1916839
* Multi-Functional Optical Meta-Systems Enabled by Deep-Learning-Aided Inverse Design
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Yun Fu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2024
* USD 584,511.00

Nontechnical Description: Artificial intelligence especially deep learning has
enabled many breakthroughs in both academia and industry. This project aims to
create a generative and versatile design approach based on novel deep learning
techniques to realize integrated, multi-functional photonic systems, and provide
proof-of-principle demonstrations in experiments. Compared with traditional
approaches using extensive numerical simulations or inverse design algorithms,
deep learning can uncover the highly complicated relationship between a photonic
structure and its properties from the dataset, and hence substantially
accelerate the design of novel photonic devices that simultaneously encode
distinct functionalities in response to the designated wavelength, polarization,
angle of incidence and other parameters. Such multi-functional photonic systems
have important applications in many areas, including optical imaging,
holographic display, biomedical sensing, and consumer photonics with high
efficiency and fidelity, to benefit the public and the nation. The integrated
education plan will considerably enhance outreach activities and educate
students in grades 7-12, empowered by the successful experience and partnership
previously established by the PIs. Graduate and undergraduate students
participating in the project will learn the latest developments in the
multidisciplinary fields of photonics, deep learning and advanced manufacturing,
and gain real-world knowledge by engaging industrial collaborators in tandem
with Northeastern University's renowned cooperative education
program.&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Metasurfaces, which are two-
dimensional metamaterials consisting of a planar array of subwavelength designer
structures, have created a new paradigm to tailor optical properties in a
prescribed manner, promising superior integrability, flexibility, performance
and reliability to advance photonics technologies. However, so far almost all
metasurface designs rely on time-consuming numerical simulations or stochastic
searching approaches that are limited in a small parameter space. To fully
exploit the versatility of metasurfaces, it is highly desired to establish a
general, functionality-driven methodology to efficiently design metasurfaces
that encompass distinctly different optical properties and performances within a
single system. The objective of the project is to create and demonstrate a high-
efficiency, two-level design approach enabled by deep learning, in order to
realize integrated, multi-functional meta-systems. Proper deep learning methods,
such as Conditional Variational Auto-Encoder and Deep Bidirectional-
Convolutional Network, will be investigated, innovatively reformulated and
tailored to apply at the single-element level and the large-scale system level
in combination with topology optimization and genetic algorithm. Such a
generative design approach can directly and automatically identify the optimal
structures and configurations out of the full parameter space. The designed
multi-functional optical meta-systems will be fabricated and characterized to
experimentally confirm their performances. The success of the project will
produce transformative photonic architectures to manipulate light on
demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.