* 1916013
* Efficient Inferences in Task-Evoked Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Studies
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lan Liu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 119,999.00

Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is a popular technology that
measures brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow. A
fundamental challenge of fMRI has been the limited sample sizes. The main reason
for such a small sample size is the high scanning cost. If the sample size could
be shrunk without compromising the information, a great amount of money could be
saved and many additional cohorts could be explored. On the other hand, the
rapid technological advances in brain imaging made it possible and routine to
obtain high-resolution imaging data. While traditional methods of analysis may
have produced acceptable results when the imaging data was in low resolution,
the high dimensional images demand better statistical methods for more precise
and efficient estimations for task fMRI studies. The research stands to make a
significant contribution by better identifying the key components that play an
important role in the learning, memorizing process and shed light on the
cognitive growth. The methods to be developed have the potential to be modified
for analyzing other types of high-dimensional data with limited sample sizes in
medical research, such as genomics data. The program will also significantly
impact the training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a series
of comprehensive statistical methodologies for conducting efficient multivariate
inferences for task fMRI studies. The investigators provide efficient methods to
estimate the effect of exposure and personal characteristics on multivariate
responses at a single time point as well as on the time-series data. The
importance of the research lies in both the statistical methodology development
and the interdisciplinary application. The research will provide theoretical
justification for simultaneous dimension reduction and efficient estimation in
the high dimensional data setting. Specifically, this research overcomes the
technical difficulty that the dimension of brain imaging data is usually
hundreds or thousands of times the sample size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.