* 1916652
* Van der Waals Halide Perovskite Photo-ferroelectric Synapse
* MPS,OMA
* 07/14/2019,06/30/2023
* Jian Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ashley  Vanderley
* 06/30/2023
* USD 417,563.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence is transforming our lives. Even
at the earliest stages of commercialization, we have seen the power and
potential of AI to support workers, diagnose diseases, and improve national
security. Conventional digital computers are not efficient for brain-like
(neuromorphic) computing such as artificial neural networks, which creates a
tremendous power demands. The next stage of artificial intelligence requires
devices and circuits that mimic biological processes. In particular, synaptic
devices must be capable of learning in hardware. They must retain
distinguishable states, be suitable for parallel computing and operate at high
speed and low power. Previous attempts at such devices have been limited by
disruption of the synapse memory during read operations. Essentially, the act of
remembering can cause the synaptic device to forget. This award supports
fundamental research to explore a new synaptic mechanism that circumvents this
issue. These devices will be based on the ferroelectric materials, which have a
spontaneous polarization that can be reversed by an applied electric field. This
polarization can be read nondestructively by light, fulfilling the requirement
for a synaptic device. These synaptic devices will be made from perovskites,
materials with organic and inorganic components that are loosely bound by van
der Waals forces. This approach will enable the realization of high-performance
synaptic devices by informing the selection of materials, devices and circuits
for neuromorphic computing. The results from this award will thereby benefit the
U.S. economy, national security and health by enabling fundamental advances in
the science and technology of artificial intelligence. The PI will also
introduce and disseminate knowledge on materials and devices to enable AI by
outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to explore, understand and exploit the
synaptic memory property and characteristics in photo-ferroelectric devices
based on van der Waals halide perovskites-based for the development of
artificial synapses with designed plasticity. The key idea is to exploit the
non-volatile photo-ferroelectric switching in high quantum efficiency
multifunctional perovskites with devices in crossbar architecture. Van der Waals
halide perovskites carry both ferroelectricity and semiconducting property from
separate functional groups so one could decouple and optimize both properties.
In this project, the PIs will predict and understand the intrinsic/extrinsic
properties of materials proposed under external stimuli, and evaluate and
understand the device characteristics and performance. The PIs will synthesize
thin film high quantum efficiency halide perovskite materials, fabricate two-
terminal artificial synapses/circuits, study atomic structures and fundamental
physical properties, determine device performance including switching speed,
retention time, dynamic window, number of distinguishable states, energy
consumption per synaptic event, endurance, and test/optimize the synaptic device
and circuit for simulating spike-timing-dependent plasticity. This work will
therefore advance knowledge of fundamental material physics, synaptic switching
dynamics as well as ideal circuit architectures of novel photo-ferroelectric
devices based on layered halide perovskite materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.