* 1916647
* NSF-BSF: III: Small: Collaborative Research: Databases Meet Computational Social Choice
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Julia Stoyanovich, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 233,587.00

Social choice underlies the equitable and efficient operation of a society. How
does one aggregate preferences of individuals, arriving at a society-wide
consensus? This question has been the subject of intense debate throughout
history, dating as far back as ancient Greece, and, in the past two decades, has
led to the development of computational social choice - an interdisciplinary
area of research and practice that combines insights from mathematics, logic,
economics, and computer science. One of the main foci of computational social
choice are the algorithmic aspects of determining actual or potential winners in
a poll or in an election. Moreover, dealing with incompleteness and uncertainty
(an inherent characteristic of polling) is an important challenge confronted by
computational social choice. In recent years, the data management community
embarked on an investigation of preference databases, which extend traditional
databases by treating preferences on a par with relational data. This project
will bring forth a foundational and systems research agenda that will create
bridges between the computational social choice and the data management
communities. The main aim of this project is to develop a unifying framework
that brings together preferences, rules, outcomes, contextual information, and
database query languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enrich the
kinds of data analysis tasks that are currently supported by computational
social choice methods to include context, going beyond determining winners, and
into reasoning about positions and issues that the alternatives represent, as
well as information about those choosing. To this effect, this project will
develop a query language that will enhance traditional database query languages
with special operators for voting rules and winners, thus making it possible to
study social choice problems in the context of additional information about
voters, candidates, and issues. Furthermore, this language will support
sophisticated queries about incomplete or uncertain preferences, rules, and
winners in the relational context. Rigorous semantics of queries in this
language will be provided and fundamental algorithmic problems, such as query
evaluation and reasoning about constraints, will be investigated. The techniques
developed in this project will be experimentally evaluated in a query engine
prototype using real data sets. By establishing a technical connection between
computational social choice and data management and by developing a unifying
framework, the computational social choice community will have access to a
plethora of methods for managing incomplete and uncertain information that were
developed by the database community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.