* 1916850
* IIBR Informatics: Intuitive Sampling, Tracking and Counting Software for Biological Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ian Bentley, St Mary's College
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2023
* USD 598,413.00

From studies of single cells to investigations of large organisms, many
biologists study digital imagery to understand how life interacts with the
environment. As biological research becomes more dependent on technology, the
need for rapid analysis of digital data grows. Unfortunately, the software
needed for many analyses is either prohibitively expensive or requires
substantial training. This project will generate image analysis software that
will allow biologists to easily perform measurements on digital photographs. The
software generated will have an intuitive user interface with built-in
instructions developed by biologists, it will contain a wide range of analysis
tools that will allow users to determine the position, distance, area, angles,
and colors on selected objects, and it will be freely available. A second facet
of this project involves the creation of sophisticated tracking and motion
analysis software. By providing these digital analysis tools for a broad
population of biologists this project will advance research and education from
top-tier institutions to high school laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
software will automate most repetitive tasks and provide common calculations
from within so that data can be quickly extracted. In the tracking programs
these calculations include static parameters, such as count, position, and size,
and kinematic parameters, such as velocity and acceleration. Additionally, new
tracking algorithms will be developed that utilize a variety of segmentation
techniques to resolve overlapping objects and improve object identification. A
newly devised morphed segmentation technique will be tested and implemented.
This technique has the potential to generate more accurate counting and tracking
of complex objects, such as animals in flight. The algorithm will use stored
images from frames where the animals are moving individually. Then, when
overlaps occur, individual animals will be approximated based on the stored
images. The software developed here will be principally tested on data from
research on the flight behavior of bats in groups. The results from this
research will provide key data to understand the rules governing guidance
behavior and collision avoidance in bats. Additionally, this project will
involve two supplemental collaborations with investigators researching biology
on the microscopic scale. Together, these collaborations will motivate
refinements to the software so that it is suitable to meet the diverse needs of
biological research. The goal of this project is to develop image and video
analysis programs that can become the go-to free image analysis software for
biologists. The software produced by this work can be found at:
https://sourceforge.net/projects/scientific-image-
analysis/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.