* 1916760
* Phase I IUCRC University of Virginia: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* James Lambert, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The Center for Hardware and Embedded Systems Security and Trust (CHEST)
coordinates university-based research with needs of industry and government
partners to advance knowledge of security, assurance, and trust for electronic
hardware and embedded systems. Interests of CHEST include identification,
detection, monitoring, mitigation, and elimination of vulnerabilities that
affect hardware and embedded systems. The CHEST Center addresses a range of
attack vectors across design, operation, manufacturing, supply chains, and
integration of the hardware, software, and firmware to a variety of systems. The
Center is inventing and disseminating technologies, practices, and guidelines to
stakeholders and educating a next generation of
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF CHEST Center addresses security,
assurance, and trust across several levels: Large-scale systems, embedded
systems, design, operations, requirements, standards, manufacturing, supply
chains, and integrated circuits and boards. Among the CHEST universities, the
University of Virginia (UVA) leads in identifying testbeds for improving
security and trust at the level of integrated systems. UVA develops methodology
for systemic risk, resilience, reliability, logistics, data analytics, and
systems engineering. Research topics include (i) resource allocation and
priorities of large-scale systems; (ii) tracking emergent and future conditions
of supply chains; and (iii) aggregating trust and security of devices to
quantification of system resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security, assurance,
and trust of integrated cyber-physical systems enable meeting fundamental human
needs, along with supporting broader social, environmental, and economic
progress of the nation. The ability of systems to absorb disruptive shocks and
recover with minimal loss is key to protecting human lives and property. The NSF
CHEST Center influences the practices of industry, government, and the military
in design, protection, and resilience to vulnerabilities associated with
hardware and embedded systems. Improving assurance and trust contributes to
reducing the frequencies and severities of adverse events with attention to
system missions, performance, schedule, and cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
CHEST Center website, www.nsfchest.org, provides the repository for all publicly
accessible data, code, results, etc. These pages will be maintained for at least
as long as the CHEST Center is active. In addition, all CHEST Center projects
that are led by UVA are permanently archived in digital format on the UVA file
servers with sufficient provisions for backup and recovery in case of equipment
failure. All archival UVA computers and servers are backed up on a regular
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.