* 1916535
* Phase III IUCRC at Missouri University of Science and Technology:  Center for Electromagnetic Compatibility
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Daryl Beetner, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2024
* USD 540,000.00

Electromagnetic compatibility (EMC) and Signal/Power Integrity (SI/PI) problems
can significantly decrease the reliability, increase the cost, and delay the
development schedules of modern electronic systems. Design for EMC ensures an
electronic system can function in the presence of external electromagnetic noise
and at the same time its radiated electromagnetic interference does not impact
the functionality of other devices. SI/PI design ensures proper circuit
operation at high speeds. Good EMC/SI/PI design is essential to industry for
successful product development and customer satisfaction. The mission of the
Center for Electromagnetic Compatibility is to support EMC/SI/PI research and
education projects with a goal of developing the knowledge base, tools and
people necessary to solve today's EMC/SI/PI problems and address the EMC/SI/PI
problems of the future. Advancing the EMC/SI/PI technologies has significant
societal impacts in the internet and information era, and can significantly
increase the economic competitiveness of the US. The research activities in the
center can bring a disruptive advancement in the hardware level to the new
technologies of 5G wireless, autonomous driving, smart city, etc., and can have
profound impacts on human society and improve national security as our society
is more dependent on data connection and internet of everything.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With emerging technology trends, the need for EMC/SI/PI
research and education grows rapidly. Not only new challenges occur due to
higher data rates, greater design density, and lower power, but also new scopes
are required to address the issues such as novel ways for high-frequency EMC
measurements and hardware related security problems. EMC becomes truly essential
to enable and support technology revolutions and development. The NSF IUCRC
Center for Electromagnetic Compatibility (CEMC) in Phase III will focus on five
thrust areas: 1) EMI, ESD and Immunity; 2) Signal and Power Integrity; 3) Intra-
System EMI and RF Desense; 4) Photonics-Based Microwave Measurement; and 5)
Hardware Security, Safety and Trust. Underlying noise physics and coupling
mechanisms will be studied for various issues such as radiated electromagnetic
interference, electrostatic discharge, radio-frequency interference, and
hardware security. Based on the gained understanding, engineering design tools,
models and methodologies for achieving ESD-robust, immunity-enhanced, SI/PI-
ensured, EMI and noise mitigated, safe and secured design will be investigated,
developed, and dissimilated throughout the industry. The CEMC will continue
serving as a resource center for the EMC community, facilitating research
collaborations, disseminating results, and transferring
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.