* 1916635
* Planning IUCRC Indiana University: Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and IoT (CHASSI)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Linda Camp, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 06/30/2021
* USD 13,959.00

The IUCRC planning project will establish the feasibility of a multi-site Center
for High-Assurance Secure Systems and Internet-of-Things (CHASSI) that will
focus on areas where both security and high assurance are necessary to support
operations of high mission criticality, due to safety or economic impact.
Examples include medical devices, manufacturing, the energy grid, real-time
financial markets, construction, and defense. Combining security and high-
assurance is a difficult question, and by intentionally combining them and the
collective expertise of Center members will lead to new models, techniques,
designs, architectures, and systems that will be applicable across of range of
important U.S. industries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;CHASSI has five sites: Indiana
University, University of Kansas, University of Minnesota, Syracuse University,
and Case Western Reserve University. CHASSI research falls into four main
thrusts: (1) Architectures, design and formal modeling for systems-level
security, privacy, stability, and performance; (2) Secure communication,
sensing, and devices; (3) Scalable trust; and (4) Human behavior in privacy and
security. IU strengths include the internet of things in home environments
(IoT), machine learning in security, applied system security, and
interdisciplinary studies. Complementary expertise at the other sites includes
cyber-physical systems and systems security, formal modeling, assurance of
medical devices, industrial IoT, and human factors.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts are 1) the interaction between industry and researchers; 2)
mentoring of students; 3) inclusive outreach; and 4) inclusion of rarely studied
populations. Industry will obtain access to cutting edge research, while
researchers will improve diffusion and adoption of innovations. The
collaboration between the university and industry also enhance education,
offering students real-world data and experiences. Researchers at IU have a
tradition of working with under-represented populations in research: older
adults, vulnerable populations, and diverse communities. Outreach will include
under-represented populations such as retirees, mentoring will include under-
represented groups, and educational activities will be created for k-12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators from this multi-university-
industry Center will host a single Center-wide repository at:
https://chassi.ku.edu. This shared repository will include meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc., and will be made available for a
minimum of 5 years after conclusion of the award or until the Center transitions
to the next phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.