* 1916275
* First-Principles Studies of Spin-Orbit Torque and Magnetoresistance in Magnetic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Kirill Belashchenko, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2024
* USD 363,787.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational research and
education aimed to advance understanding of the microscopic mechanisms
responsible for the operation of nanoscale magnetic devices. The focus is on
devices where electric currents cause dynamic reorientation of the magnetic
moments. The PI will investigate devices made of two layers. One is a
ferromagnet for which smallest microscopic magnets are aligned or an
antiferromagnet for which the direction of the smallest microscopic magnets
alternates along particular directions in the layer. The other layer is a normal
metal that contains heavy atoms. The ultimate source of current-induced dynamics
is spin-orbit coupling – an effect that arises in Einstein's theory of special
relativity in which electrons which themselves act like tiny spinning tops
interact with their own motion. The spin-orbit effect is strongest in materials
comprised of heavy elements. These bilayer nanostructures are promising for
applications in nanoelectronic devices, such as new types of magnetic memories,
tunable high-frequency nano-oscillators, logic gates, and other building blocks
for digital information processing and storage technologies. Improved
understanding of the underlying mechanisms by which nanoscale magnetic devices
can operate may enable the design of new nanoscale devices and help enhance the
functionality and efficiency of existing prototypes. This research will be
carried out using state-of-the-art computational tools. Graduate students will
contribute to all aspects of the research and its dissemination; in so doing,
they will receive extensive training in advanced condensed matter and materials
theory, and modeling techniques. This project includes additional education
activities involving the redesign of core graduate-level courses in physics
based on modern active-learning and peer-instruction
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
computational research and education on nonequilibrium spin torques produced by
spin-orbit coupling in the presence of an in-plane electric current in
heterostructures consisting of a ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic layer and a
normal-metal layer. This study will utilize first-principles calculations and a
nonequilibrium Green’s function technique with direct supercell averaging over
disorder configurations. The overall goal is to develop better understanding of
coupled charge and spin transport in magnetic nanostructures and mechanisms
contributing to spin-orbit torques and related magnetoresistive effects. This
goal will be achieved by investigating the dependence of the damping-like,
field-like, and higher-order angular components of spin-orbit torque on various
materials and device parameters, including layer thicknesses, disorder type and
strength, crystallographic orientation of the interface, surface oxidation, and
the presence of capping or spacer layers. Comparison of the results with
experimental data will help identify the underlying mechanisms and
phenomenological theories that capture the key features and trends in the
observations. Spin relaxation at metallic interfaces in heterostructures with
current flowing perpendicular to the interfaces will also be studied using
direct averaging over disorder configurations in
multilayers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.