* 1916691
* Phase I IUCRC at Purdue University:  Center for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM)
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Paul Bohn, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 743,806.00

The Center for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM), a partnership between the University
of Notre Dame, Indiana University, and Purdue University, advances U.S.
competitiveness by working with industry to solve current, emerging, and
industry-relevant challenges in measurement science and technology. The center
has two over-arching objectives: (1) deliver best-in-class molecular measurement
tools and expertise that enable the development of powerful new pre-competitive
technologies and capabilities across the pharmaceutical, biotechnology,
food/nutrition/agriculture, energy and analytical instrumentation sectors; and
(2) serve as a proving ground for applications of new instrumentation to
cutting-edge chemical and biochemical problems. Measurement science, and
associated instrumentation, is a key contributor to the U.S. economy, enabling
advances in everything from drug discovery to materials manufacturing. By
bringing together companies in these high-technology sectors with major
analytical instrument makers, the CBM bridges the gap between the initial
demonstration of new ideas generated through collaboration between academia and
industry and the delivery of practical pre-competitive knowledge that can drive
technology development. Just as important, the CBM provides U.S. industry with
compelling opportunities to invigorate human resources through access to a
diversity of center-trained students and opportunities for continuing education
of existing staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CBM is devoted to advancing
bioanalytical measurement science and applying these advances to address
challenges in small molecule pharmaceuticals or agrochemicals development and
delivery, in the analysis of foods, in biologically derived petrochemicals
and/or biofuels, and in biological materials analysis. The CBM serves the
industrial partners with research solutions in: (a) ultrahigh sensitivity assays
for trace-level biomarkers and impurities; (b) discrimination between large
biomolecules and their multi-molecule complexes; (c) reduced volume/materials
analysis and experimentation at high throughput and productivity; (d) analysis
of rare/extremely dilute cells/molecules/exosomes, etc.; (e) massively parallel
approaches to chemical cytometry, genetic profiling, and panel screening; (f)
online and near-line in situ measurements; (g) point-of-use analysis, companion
diagnostics, and inexpensive testing in the field; (h) AI-driven
instrumentation, feedback optimization, and "driverless" instruments; and (i)
enhanced imaging of cells, organisms, and chemical processes. Purdue University
brings specific strength in chemical imaging, mass spectrometry, chromatography,
particulate analysis, instrumentation design and development, "big data"
analytics, and dimension reduction / machine learning for chemical decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.