* 1916380
* Collaborative Research: A fundamental study on supercooled large droplets: impacting, splashing, surface water dynamics, and ice accretion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Hui Hu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 407,056.00

Supercooled large droplets (SLDs), which include freezing drizzle drops and
freezing raindrops, are up to 100 times larger than the cloud-sized droplets
that are involved in most in-flight aircraft icing incidents. When SLDs impinge
on airframe surfaces, they often impact on regions beyond the protection of
current anti-/de-icing systems and splash into secondary droplets that sprinkle
unprotected areas. This causes surface water runback and uncontrolled ice
accretion. Aircraft icing due to SLDs, which occurs more frequently than first
thought, is now recognized as a significant hazard. This collaborative research
project will use a combination of experiments and modeling to understand
underlying physics of SLD icing phenomena so that effective anti-/de-icing
measures can be implemented to ensure safer and more efficient operation of
aircraft in cold weather. The research team will collaborate scientists at other
government agencies and aerospace companies to further broaden the impacts of
the research. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students in
research and will develop educational tools that will inspire high school
students, especially those from groups underrepresented in STEM fields, to
continue in science and engineering studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this collaborative research is to conduct an integrated theoretical,
numerical and experimental research to quantify important micro-physical
processes, such as droplet impact, rebounding, splashing, surface water runback,
and ice accretion, that are pertinent to SLD icing phenomena. Results will
improve our understanding of the underlying physics for safer and more efficient
operation of aircraft in atmospheric icing conditions. The research tasks
include: 1) develop an SLD icing simulation tool based on a validated multiphase
flow solver with a novel moment of fluid interface representation method; 2)
conduct theoretical, experimental and numerical studies to characterize droplet
impinging, rebounding and splashing on dry and wet surfaces pertinent to SLD
icing to develop droplet impact models that contain a comprehensive
consideration of controlling factors ignored in previous studies; and 3) perform
an integrated numerical and experimental investigation to examine the
characteristics of surface water runback and its effects on SLD icing. The
research program will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate curricula
by adding a new teaching module and creating new courseware to stimulate
students? interests in thermal-fluid sciences. Students from underrepresented
groups will be recruited proactively to work on the proposed research to promote
participation in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.