* 1916690
* Ham Radio Science Citizen Investigation (HamSCI) Workshop 2019; Cleveland, Ohio; March 22-23, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Gareth Perry, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 01/31/2020
* USD 49,966.00

This award provides support for a 2-day Ham Radio Science Citizen Investigation
(HamSCI) meeting at Case Western Reserve University. The meeting will enable
collaborations between amateur radio operators and the science community for the
purpose of advancing scientific research and understanding of the ionosphere by
leveraging radio propagation experiments. It will encourage development of new
technologies to support ionospheric research and provide educational
opportunities for the amateur community and the general public. The conference
will also provide professional development and networking opportunities for
students and early career scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support the Ham Radio Science Citizen Investigation (HamSCI) meeting
to be held March 22-23, 2019 at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland,
OH. This meeting will facilitate presentations and discussions on research
advances in radio remote sensing techniques and space weather. This workshop
will enable professional scientists and amateur radio operators to work together
to design a new network of citizen science radio instrumentation and to allow
for the discussion and presentation of results and techniques using the
currently available data. The meeting will engage citizen scientists in space
weather research and also provide educational opportunities for the ham operator
community and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.