* 1916719
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Impact of Holocene Climate Change on Bioavailable Strontium Isotope Ratios
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Michele Buzon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 60,810.00

Dr. Antonio Simonetti, of the University of Notre Dame, along with Dr. Michele
Buzon, of Purdue University, will investigate the impact of climate change on
the isotopic signature of bioavailable strontium during the last ~4,000 years
within the Nile River Valley. This project builds on previous research
collaborations by both principal investigators that have established immigration
patterns and cultural interactions in ancient civilizations for Egyptian and
Nubian sites within the Nile River Valley based primarily on strontium isotope
signatures of archaeological faunal (soil, animal, plant) and human samples. The
results from this first time, detailed investigation will accurately trace any
temporal change in the regional distribution of bioavailable strontium driven by
a drying climate within the Nile River Valley. This approach will prove
extremely useful for other regions around the globe where recent climatic
conditions have changed significantly during the archaeological period of
interest. Strontium isotopes in soil and living and fossil materials vary on a
regional basis and using isotope ratios scientists can trace how individual
during their lifetimes moved between regions. This project will provide insight
into whether environmental factors can change ratios in a single area. This
project will include training of graduate students in state-of-the-art isotope
techniques, and they will also be directly involved in analyzing and
interpreting results. This study will include participation of the American
Sudanese Archaeological Research Center (AmSARC), which has a mission to
encourage American and Sudanese archaeological research and collaboration in
Sudan.

Drs. Simonetti and Buzon will expand coverage of samples investigated by
determining the strontium, lead, and neodymium isotope signatures of faunal,
soil, plant and human samples from combined 20 sites along the Nile River
occupied over various time periods, and compare these results to those from
their present-day counterparts. Samples will also be obtained from collections
of pertinent museums worldwide. Assessing the bioavailable strontium for the
Nile River Valley will also rely on synthesizing existing strontium isotope data
obtained by both PIs from ~250 specimens, which consist of both archaeological
human and faunal samples investigated from Egyptian (Memphis, Qurneh) and Nubian
(Shellal, C-Group, Pharaonic, Amara West, Tombos, Kerma) sites. These combined
results will help to characterize the isotope variability and better understand
human mobility in this region, which is rich with sociopolitical transitions and
contact between groups. The results obtained from this project will help
elucidate any input or influence of Holocene climate change within the Nile
River Valley for the past ~4,000 years. By comparing archaeological or paleo-
strontium isotope signatures of faunal samples to their present-day
counterparts, our study will provide a better understanding of aeolian (wind-
driven) contribution, if any, within the Nile River Valley. The proposed
research will have major implications for archaeologists conducting isotope-
based investigations of ancient migrations around the globe since climate change
is a phenomenon that has occurred throughout Earth's history. For the Nile River
Valley, this has involved a drying of the African Humid Period, which have taken
place in other regions of our planet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.