* 1916979
* Swirling dynamics in liquid-pool fires
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Antonio Sanchez, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,892.00

The dynamics of flames is known to change significantly in the presence of
ambient flow circulation. For example, the interactions of the swirling flow
with the uprising plume of hot gas induced by a fire leads to the formation of
so-called fire whirls or fire tornados, which have been found to occur both in
wildland and urban conflagrations, with disastrous consequences. Despite
considerable research efforts, the physics underlying these flame-swirl
interactions is still unclear. This projects seeks better understanding of this
type of flame dynamics to enable better predictive tools for risk management,
evacuations, and firefighting of wildland and urban fires. Beyond these
advancements for broader society, an outreach component training undergraduate
and graduate students in combustion science as well as contributing to broader
awareness of flame dynamics through a series of outreach demonstrations entitled
"The physics of swirling fires" will help to promote STEM careers and the field
in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research combines linear stability
and sensitivity analyses, controlled laboratory experiments, and mathematical
descriptions of reduced canonical problems to clarify the complex interacting
processes governing the dynamics of pool fires in the presence of ambient swirl.
The investigation targets quantification of the different combustion regimes
corresponding to different levels of ambient circulation, namely, axisymmetric
puffing, fire whirls, dwarf fire whirls, and blue whirls, as well as
characterization of a number of key fluid-mechanical phenomena that control
their existence, including global instabilities, vortex breakdown, and edge-
flame detachment and lift-off. The work will use the results to (i) provide
improved understanding of the underlying physical processes; (ii) quantify
critical transition conditions and associated controlling phenomena; (iii)
clarify effects of variations of buoyancy, outer circulation, wall-surface
thermal characteristics, fuel type, and swirl-generation mechanism; and (iv)
investigate the extent to which these swirling flows can be controlled by
passive means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.