* 1916776
* Phase II IUCRC at UT Dallas: Center for Wind Energy Science, Technology and Research (WindSTAR)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Mario Rotea, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 11/30/2024
* USD 470,056.00

The objective of this project is to establish a multi-university, Phase II
I-UCRC (Industry-University Collaborative Research Center) for wind energy
research, education, and outreach. The effort is based on successful operation
during Phase I that was led by two university sites (UMass Lowell and the
University of Texas at Dallas). Together these two universities have conducted
wind energy research, established long-term partnerships within the wind
industry, trained undergraduate and graduate students to perform state-of-the-
art industry relevant research, and engaged in outreach to K-12 students. The
Center will contribute to the nationâ€™s research infrastructure and enhance the
intellectual capacity of the renewable energy workforce. A diverse group of
scientists, engineers, and practitioners will execute a program of research and
education focused on the design, operation, and maintenance of land-based and
offshore wind energy systems for electricity production. The Center will be
aimed at: (a) enhancing national excellence in wind energy research and
development that has direct relevance to industry, and (b) developing a cadre of
diverse undergraduate and graduate students with world-class training who will
support and eventually lead in the analysis, design, manufacture, and successful
operation of wind energy systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Phase II
I-UCRC will integrate engineering with fundamental research to support the
development of low-cost and high availability wind energy systems. The partners
will engage in cooperative research and education in the following key thrust
areas: (a) Composites, Blade and Rotor Design &amp; Manufacturing, (b)
Structural Health Monitoring and Non-Destructive Inspection, (c) Wind Plant
Modeling and Measurements, (d) Control Systems for Wind Turbines and Wind
Plants, (e) Energy Storage and Grid Integration, (f) Foundation and Towers, and
(g) Environmental Impacts. Industrially relevant research led by the UT Dallas
site is expected to result in: (1) improved systems for controlling wind
turbines and wind farms for power production, while mitigating aeromechanical
loads, (2) diagnostics and prediction of wind plant performance by fusion of
SCADA data and LiDAR data with CFD models at various levels of resolution and
run-time efficiency, (3) experimental protocols for evaluation of aerodynamic
and structural performance of blades, wind turbine components, and scaled wind
plants, (4) decision support tools for grid integration of renewables, (5) novel
rotor technologies for offshore wind energy, (6) new systems to mitigate
wildlife impacts, and (7) evaluation of materials and construction methods for
blades and towers. Experimental facilities available for this research include a
highly instrumented boundary layer and subsonic wind tunnel with a large test
section designed for wind energy and wind engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.