* 1916677
* Phase III IUCRC at West Virginia University: Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Rakesh Gupta, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2024
* USD 559,840.00

The Center for Integration of Composites into Infrastructure (CICI) is a NSF
I/UCRC that utilizes the expertise of West Virginia University, North Carolina
State University, the University of Miami, and Texas A &amp; M
University/University of Texas at Arlington with an objective of accelerating
the adoption of Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP) composites and geosynthetics into
infrastructure applications by utilizing industry wide cooperation. The American
Society of Civil Engineers gives U.S. infrastructure a grade of D+, with a 10
year funding gap of $1.44 trillion, leading to losses of $3.9 trillion to the
U.S. GDP and 2.5 million fewer jobs. FRP composites and geosythentics are
gaining acceptance for infrastructure due to their corrosion resistance, ease of
installation, and proof-of-concept from field demonstrations in service for up
to four decades. The biggest advantage to composite materials is durability, as
they do not corrode or rot allowing for an extended service life thus extending
taxpayer dollars. With the support of NSF, CICI currently consists of a
consortium of four universities and 31 industry members, bringing together
faculty, students, practitioners, manufacturers, trade organizations and
government agencies to overcome the obstacles to widespread deployment of
composites, forging lasting partnerships, and educating students, engineers and
contractors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CICI focuses on four research thrusts. First,
research on material development, manufacturing, and characterization allows for
the development of new composite materials and recycling of discarded polymer
composites with a clear understanding of the physico-chemical and mechanical
properties. Second, the durability and aging of composites is evaluated under
accelerated aging and by examining existing structures to ensure that composites
can have long service lives under harsh environmental conditions. Third, design,
implementation and evaluation of composites in new construction and
rehabilitation of existing structures.. Fourth, CICI contributes to the
development of standards, specifications, and guide documents required for the
deployment of new technologies into commercial practice. West Virginia
University conducts research including characterization of pultruded composites
resulting in design guides; collaborative efforts on the evaluation of existing
field applications; and, rehabilitation of bridges the WV Department of Highways
and US Army Corps of Engineers at a fraction of the cost of traditional
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.