* 1916619
* From Boundary Layer to Deep Convection: The Multi-Plume Eddy-Diffusivity/Mass-Flux (EDMF) Fully Unified Parameterization
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Joao Teixeira, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,740,605.00

Clouds play a critical but delicate role in regulating Earth's climate. They
cool the Earth by reflecting about a quarter of the incoming sunlight back into
space, but they also warm the Earth by trapping outgoing infrared radiation. The
sensitivity of climate to cloud amount and properties poses a substantial
challenge to climate modeling given the difficulty of representing clouds in
climate models. In fact clouds are so difficult to simulate that climate models
typically use separate cloud parameterization schemes (essentially computer
subroutines) to represent different kinds of clouds. In the case of convective
clouds models typically use two schemes, one for the shallow cumulus clouds
which form within and on top of the of the planetary boundary layer (PBL,
commonly the first kilometer or two above the surface), and another for the deep
cumulus clouds which can extend through the depth of the troposphere (to heights
of perhaps 10km or more). The separation of deep and shallow convection is done
for practical reasons but in reality clouds come in all sizes and ultimately the
same laws of physics apply regardless of size. Also, the independence of the
shallow and deep convection schemes can subtly misrepresent the interaction
between shallow and deep convective clouds. A unified scheme, which represents
everything from small-scale convection in the PBL to deep cumulus clouds, is
clearly preferable but also challenging to implement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports a Climate Process Team engaged in the development and
implementation of such a unified convection scheme in the Community Earth System
Model (CESM). The scheme is known as as an Eddy Diffusivity/Mass Flux (EDMF)
parameterization, in which the smallest convective plumes are treated along with
PBL turbulent air motions using a diffusive approximation, combined with a mass
flux methodology for representing clouds which are as tall or taller than the
depth of the PBL. The eddy diffusivity and mass flux components of the scheme
are carefully coordinated so that they can represent the interactions between
dry PBL turbulence and PBL clouds and the transition from shallow to deep
convection. The EDMF scheme developed and implemented here builds on previous
EDMF schemes developed by the lead PI and others, adding features including the
ability to simulate an ensemble of mass flux plumes, thus allowing multiple
convective regimes to exist in a single grid box, and the effects of organized
convection and cold pools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact of
the work is that it seeks to improve the performance of climate models and their
usefulness as tools for scientific research and for providing guidance for
decision makers concerned with climate variability and change. CESM is an open-
source model which is hosted and supported by the National Center for
Atmospheric Research and has a worldwide user community. The scheme will also be
implemented in the climate model of the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory
(GFDL) by collaborators not funded under this award. In addition, the award
supports an annual workshop on turbulence, convection and clouds in climate
models, which serves as a venue for interactions among researchers working on
cloud and PBL parameterization. The project supports three postdocs, thereby
developing the future workforce for climate model
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.