* 1916524
* Impact of language experience on early numerical cognition
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* ilaria berteletti, Gallaudet University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,025,958.00

Early proficiency in math is related to later math performance, and more general
academic achievement, as well as employment success. Deaf children already lag
behind in math upon entrance in kindergarten. At the socio-economic level, this
means these children are not entering STEM-related fields which are seen as a
growing part of the workforce and an engine for continued economic development.
In this project, the team will investigate how early language experiences can
impact the acquisition of foundational number skills. The project explores how
the use of a visual language (e.g., American Sign Language) from birth can
support the acquisition of early number skills as well as how a delay in
language exposure can impact these foundational understandings. Results from
this study will inform teaching, standardized testing, and remediation for
children using a visual language but can also open new opportunities more
broadly for intervention in children struggling to learn mathematics, including
students with learning disabilities &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approximately 120
three to five year-old children with optimal exposure to language (either ASL or
English) and children with delayed full access to language, will be tested every
six months on the counting sequence, approximate numerosity comparison, and
exact number concepts. Children will also be evaluated for their spontaneous
focusing on numerical information and undertake standardized tests for language
and IQ. Parents will answer a comprehensive survey on their child's language use
and in-home language. Children will be followed for approximately two years or
until they reach proficiency in counting, that is they understand the
cardinality principle.By comparing performance and the developmental progression
of the three groups, it will be possible to evaluate the impact of language
experience and determine how a delay in full access to language can affect the
development of these foundational concepts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.