* 1916565
* Collaborative Research: Arctic Stream Networks as Nutrient Sensors in Permafrost Ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Benjamin Abbott, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2025
* USD 543,023.00

Permafrost is ground that remains frozen for at least two consecutive years. It
is found approximately one fourth of the northern hemisphere's land surface and
contains large stores of carbon and nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus.
As Arctic Alaska warms and permafrost thaws, these nutrients are released, which
supports plant growth but also can accelerate the production of greenhouse
gases, affecting local habitat and strengthening the permafrost climate
feedback. Because snowmelt and rain transport some nutrients from land to water,
variations in nutrient concentrations within Arctic stream networks can reveal
where permafrost nutrients are released and why some areas release more than
others. This research greatly improves understanding of how water flow, plant
life, and conditions in the soil and bedrock are affected by wildfire,
permafrost degradation, and extreme weather conditions. Such knowledge is
crucial to protect Arctic communities and forecast how environmental change in
the permafrost region could disrupt climate and weather patterns throughout the
U.S. This project also transfers improved understanding of the Arctic system
directly to the public by creating a network of researchers, writers,
performers, and outreach organizations that 1) visits local communities in the
Arctic, 2) creates a children?s book inspired by Arctic systems, 3) brings
Arctic systems and climate science directly to about 30,000 high school
students, and 4) connects remotely with K-12 classrooms in rural Alaska and the
contiguous U.S. via video chats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project applies a
combination of novel and conventional approaches to quantify nutrient dynamics
across scales and biomes. 1) High-resolution spatial sampling of stream network
chemistry and high-frequency monitoring at watershed outlets quantify lateral
carbon and nutrient flux across ecosystem gradients (e.g. Arctic-Boreal and
coastal-upland) and scales (0.1 to 1,000 square kilometers). 2) Robust nutrient-
limitation assays and tracer injection methods estimate the magnitude of
instream removal and release of nutrients in locations that exert a strong
influence on watershed-scale nutrient flux. 3) Spatial analysis, statistical
modeling, and geochemical tracers link multi-scale nutrient fluxes with
ecohydrological characteristics and thus identify drivers of hydrochemical
change in the Arctic. The spatial and temporal data collected by the project
test a series of long-standing and emerging hypotheses about how active-layer
thickness, vegetation community, topography, hydrology, and current and past
wildfire and permafrost degradation interactively influence carbon and nutrient
flux. More generally, this research generates multi-scale targets for earth
system models that incorporate lateral and longitudinal nutrient flux, reducing
one of the largest sources of uncertainty in predicting net ecosystem carbon
balance of the permafrost region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.