* 1916989
* RAPID: Species on the Move: Tropicalization of Western Atlantic Seagrass Beds
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Kenneth Heck, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 47,485.00

This project builds on an ongoing project that studies the tropicalization of
seagrass beds in the northern Gulf of Mexico where native species are prevented
from moving north as temperature rises because of the continental land mass.
Hurricane Michael opened a new pass from the Gulf of Mexico to St Joseph Bay,
enabling elevated immigration of tropical species (e.g. parrotfish), and the
associated winds and storm surge likely decimated green turtle populations. This
project takes advantage of the hurricane's passage to study the interplay of
turtles and parrotfish as consumers of the dominant seagrass and will support
new and complemental sampling to evaluate the storm's effect on the ongoing
tropicalization of St Joseph Bay. Seagrass communities provide major ecosystem
services and their resilience to changing climate has consequences for coastal
communities. This project will expand on the NSF-funded network to capture
critical environmental information during this hurricane-induced natural
experiment of increased species access. Training of two female early career
scientists (one from an underserved group) will take place in addition to
mentoring through collaborations with the partners of the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent passage of Major Hurricane Michael
directly over the northernmost site (St. Joe Bay, FL) of the NSF collaborative
project "Collaborative Research: The tropicalization of Western Atlantic
seagrass beds" has raised additional questions regarding the trajectory and
speed of the influx of tropical grazers along the northern Gulf of Mexico.
Hurricane Michael produced numerous overwash areas along Cape San Blas and
opened a new pass from the Gulf of Mexico to St. Joseph Bay. This will likely
alter salinities and water temperatures and bring additional larval and adult
recruits to the Bay. Hurricanes have been documented to move species large
distances from their low-latitude home ranges and while these can be only short-
lived range shifts, there is potential for enhanced establishment in locations
where tropicalization is already occurring owing to the decreasing frequency of
cold winter temperatures. This study investigates to what extent these newly
formed passes allow elevated immigration of tropically-associated species, such
as the seagrass consuming emerald parrotfish into St. Joe Bay. Supporting new
and complementary field activities, and leveraging the 12 year record of fish
abundance and species composition in St. Joe Bay and the 2017 population
estimate of green turtle abundance in the Bay are used to evaluate the storm's
effects on the on-going tropicalization of St. Joe Bay that could dramatically
affect the overall conclusions of our collaborators in other locations of the
NSF funded network of sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.