* 1916563
* Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Electrical Synapse Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Fenglian Xu, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The proper development of neural connections, called synapses, is critical for
normal brain function; abnormal synapse formation impairs brain development, and
renders the nervous system dysfunctional in all organisms including humans.
Synapses work by two different mechanisms: those that use particular molecules
to communicate with other nerve cells (chemical synapses), and those that
communicate through specialized electrical connections between nerve cells
(electrical synapses). Most of the mechanism that chemical synapses use to form
and function normally have been well-studied, but much less is known about the
mechanisms guiding the initial formation of electrical synapses. Results from
this project will identify key molecular events that are critical for the
successful formation of functional electrical synapses. The identification of
these mechanisms will advance the understanding of how networks of nerve cells
develop, and provide possible new avenues for the treatment of nervous system
disorders. This research will also provide training opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school student participants; individuals filling these
positions will be recruited from groups traditionally underserved in STEM
fields. The project will additionally support an annual neuroscience workshop to
promote STEM education through the Youth Exploring Science program at the St.
Louis Science Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synapses are specialized structures
that serve as the fundamental unit for all nervous system functions. There are
two main types of synaptic communication in animals: chemical (transmitter-
mediated) and electrical (gap junction channel-mediated). In contrast to our
extensive knowledge of the formation of chemical synapses, very little is known
about the basic mechanisms governing the formation of electrical synapses
(electrosynaptogenesis). This leaves a large gap in the fundamental knowledge of
how animal nervous systems are developed. The objective of this study is to
investigate the roles and mechanisms of neurotrophic factors in regulating
electrosynaptogenesis using an in vitro soma-soma synapse model from pond snail
(Lymnaea stagnalis) brains. We will culture individual gap-junction-forming
neurons and monitor the neurotrophic factor-induced cellular and molecular
events (neural activity, cellular messengers, and signaling pathways) throughout
the course of electrosynaptogenesis. We will also determine whether neurotrophic
factors act to induce synthesis and/or release of neurotransmitters and promote
neurotransmitter-receptor interactions to facilitate electrosynaptogenesis.
Synapse formation will be verified by electrophysiology and neurochip (long-
term, non-invasive) techniques. This study will improve the fundamental
understanding of the molecular, cellular, and synaptic basis of
electrosynaptogenetic events that occur in all
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.