* 1916542
* FASEB 2019 Conference on Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements; July 14-19, 2019; Steamboat Springs, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Xiaolan Zhao, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2020
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support graduate student, postdoctoral and early career
investigator attendance at the Federation of American Societies for Experimental
Biology (FASEB) meeting at Steamboat Springs, CO on July 14 - 19, 2019. This
meeting focuses on Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangements and is co-
organized by Xiaolan Zhao and Scott Keeney, both at the Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center. The format of the meeting is a combination of 49 invited talks,
15 talks selected from submitted abstracts and several poster sessions. A
keynote lecture and two "concepts and challenges" lectures by three leading
recombination researchers will begin the meeting. There is a dedicated 1-hour
session for trainees to interact with leading experts at the meeting and three
separate poster sessions. Two concurrent career-workshops will be held for
trainees and early stage investigators. This meeting affords many opportunities
(both formal and informal) for sharing recent research findings and exploring
collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a premier meeting on recombination
and genome rearrangements, now in its 18th iteration. Recent advances in
chromosome rearrangements, mitotic and meiotic recombination will be highlighted
in this conference, which will bring together diverse scientists from across the
country and internationally. The session topics include recombination
initiation, chromatin substrates for recombination, meiotic recombination,
telomeric recombination, DNA damage responses, mutations and chromosome
rearrangements, genome instability, homologous pairing and strand exchange, and
finally, recombination during DNA replication. The conference primarily
highlights unpublished research findings and provides many experiences for young
researchers to learn about the field and devise future avenues for research. The
meeting will encourage career development of a new generation of researchers,
including those who are underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.