* 1916709
* Sub-Lethal Exposures to Metal and Metal-Oxide Nanoparticles Lead to Antibiotic Resistance in Engineered Environments: A Mechanistic Study
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Navid Saleh, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,000.00

The safety of engineered nanomaterials and antibiotic resistance are two issues
of global concern. Nanomaterials are particles materials that have a diameter on
the nanometer scale, and they are used widely in industry and in consumer
products. However, some nanomaterials have been shown to kill beneficial
bacteria. Antibiotic resistance is the ability of microorganisms to deactivate
antibiotics, thus allowing harmful bacteria to survive. The effects of
antibiotic resistance create an estimated billion-dollar in annual costs to the
United States economy. This research project will study the question of whether
nanomaterials can stimulate antibiotic resistance in disease-causing bacteria.
These investigations will be accomplished through multi-phase experimental
studies to identify toxic concentrations of nanomaterials and to characterize
the adaptive responses of microorganisms to nanomaterials. Successful completion
of this project will advance our understanding of how nanomaterials stimulate
antibiotic resistance. The researchers will develop an interdisciplinary
undergraduate course on antibiotic resistance that incorporates an expert panel
discussion on antibiotic resistance, a lab module on adaptive resistance, and
student-produced podcasts that address challenges in antibiotic resistance.
Multiple undergraduate students will be engaged in the research activities
through the Graduates Linked with Undergraduates (GLUE) program. Successful
completion of this project will advance our understanding of the link between
antibiotic resistance and nanomaterials and enable the public, regulatory
agencies, and industry to make informed decisions about the use of products
containing nanomaterials to protect human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The twin
problems of antibiotic resistance and the safety of engineered nanomaterials are
issues of global concern. This research project will assess whether metal and
metal-oxide engineered nanomaterials stimulate antibiotic resistance in
bacteria. This objective will be achieved by studying the expression of
antibiotic stress genes and mutative antibiotic resistance due to hereditable
genetic changes in Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and
Escherichia coli in the presence of metal and metal-oxide engineered
nanomaterials. The specific objectives of the work are to: i) determine sub-
lethal concentrations of metal and metal-oxide nanomaterials and their
associated dissolved metals for planktonic bacteria; ii) assess the occurrence
and mechanistic basis for adaptive resistance in planktonic bacteria exposed to
sub-lethal nanomaterial or dissolved metal concentrations; iii) evaluate the
temporal transcriptional response of planktonic bacteria to sub-lethal
nanomaterial or dissolved metal exposures; iv) assess mutative resistance in
planktonic bacteria due to sub-lethal nanomaterial or dissolved metal exposures;
and v) explore adaptive resistance in biofilms due to sub-lethal nanomaterial or
dissolved metal exposures. Importantly, this project will differentiate between
the impact of "intact" nanomaterials and that of dissolved metals on antibiotic
resistance development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.