* 1916769
* Planning IUCRC at University of California, Irvine: Energy Information Nexus (EIN)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Jacob Brouwer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 14,999.00

Data centers represent ~2% of all electricity consumption in the United States,
with a projected growth rate of 12% per year. Cloud service companies and
mechanical/electrical infrastructure suppliers must continuously adapt to
satisfy this growing demand, while meeting reliability, cost, and sustainability
targets. Rather than focusing on energy and computing as separate problems, the
Energy Information Nexus (EIN) consortium supports development of a new
generation of data centers that embed power production and storage into the data
center itself. On-site power at the rack or pod level offers many strategic
advantages, including redundancy and reliability (eliminating the need for
backup power), high efficiency, improved load following and supply management,
as well as technological pathways to renewable energy based on stored fuels
derived from intermittent wind and solar power. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIN will
collaborate with industry and government partners to explore the use of fuel
cells, batteries, supercapacitors, DC power networks, and other energy
technologies in data centers, and to identify and overcome key process and
technology bottlenecks. Through collaborative research, industrial forums,
educational initiatives, and public outreach, EIN will advance data center
engineering as a leading arena for distributed power and energy storage, and
facilitate our nation's transition toward energy sustainability. The Energy
Information Nexus (EIN) will fulfill these goals through the following mission
objectives: Conducting technoeconomic analyses and system modeling of new
approaches to data center energy architecture. Quantitative case studies by EIN
will allow members to forecast the directions of technology and business and to
better position themselves for growth in this area. Performing pre-competitive
research that accelerates development of embedded energy technology relevant to
data centers. EIN research will focus on fundamental problems residing at key
bottlenecks or junctures among technologies identified by industrial members.
Interdisciplinary training of students to foster broad understanding of both
computing and energy technology. EIN will bridge the divide between these
technology arenas and create a new generation of engineers who understand the
opportunities and constraints of both. Facilitating development of supply-chain
standards with widespread support among industrial participants. EIN will help
members develop new infrastructure and supply-chain standards such that
participants in the supply chain share risk and synchronize businesses growth.
Industrial and government membership of the EIN will span four principle
overlapping business sectors including end users, infrastructure providers,
energy technology developers, and utilities to facilitate a broad discussion to
achieve the consortium's mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.