* 1916762
* Phase I IUCRC Northeastern University: Center for Hardware and Embedded System Security and Trust (CHEST)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Yunsi Fei, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The Center for Hardware and Embedded Systems Security and Trust (CHEST)
coordinates university-based research with needs of industry and government
partners to advance knowledge of security, assurance, and trust for electronic
hardware and embedded systems. Interests of CHEST include identification,
detection, monitoring, mitigation, and elimination of vulnerabilities that
affect hardware and embedded systems. The CHEST Center addresses a range of
attack vectors across design, operation, manufacturing, supply chains, and
integration of the hardware, software, and firmware to a variety of systems. The
Center is inventing and disseminating technologies, practices, and guidelines to
stakeholders and educating a next generation of
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF CHEST Center addresses security,
assurance, and trust across several levels: Large-scale systems, embedded
systems, design and operations, requirements, standards, manufacturing, supply
chains, and integrated circuits and boards. Among the universities, the
Northeastern University (NU) leads CHEST efforts for designing, mitigating, and
protecting hardware and embedded systems against malicious attacks at the levels
of architecture and embedded devices. Topics include: (i) clean-slate secure
architecture to balance performance and information security on CPUs and
accelerators; (ii) lightweight hardware primitives for security at the edge of
Internet-of-Things; and (iii) hardening techniques for deep learning systems on
edge computing under adversarial attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security,
assurance, and trust of integrated cyber-physical systems enable meeting
fundamental human needs, along with supporting broader social, environmental,
and economic progress of the nation. The ability of systems to absorb disruptive
shocks and recover with minimal loss is key to protecting human lives and
property. The NSF CHEST Center influences the practices of industry, government,
and the military in design, protection, and resilience to vulnerabilities
associated with hardware and embedded systems. Improving assurance and trust
contributes to the reducing the frequencies and severities of adverse events
with attention to system missions, performance, schedule, and
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF CHEST Center website, www.nsfchest.org, is
the repository for all publicly accessible data, code, results, etc. These pages
will be maintained for at least as long as the CHEST Center is active. In
addition, all CHEST projects that are led by NU are permanently archived in
digital format on the NU file servers with sufficient provisions for backup and
recovery in case of equipment failure. All archival NU computers and servers are
backed up on a regular basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.