* 1916632
* Origins and impacts of nitrogen-fixing symbioses in a major clade of flowering plants
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Douglas Soltis, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 12/31/2023
* USD 749,003.00

All living organisms require nitrogen to grow, but atmospheric nitrogen is not
directly available to most species and must first be converted into a form
suitable for use. Legumes, such as peas, lentils, and soybeans, and several
other flowering plant groups can form symbiotic relationships with nitrogen-
fixing bacteria and house them in their roots in return for access to usable
nitrogen. This symbiotic relationship is essential to ecosystem functioning and
agricultural productivity. Despite the strong value in understanding this
interaction, scientists have yet to unravel how this symbiosis evolved and its
long-term evolutionary consequences for the global diversity of flowering
plants. This project will close this gap by resolving the evolutionary
relationships of 15,000 nitrogen-fixing species of flowering plants, analyzing
the genes associated with their bacterial symbioses, and linking this new
knowledge to a comprehensive database of species' habitat and morphological
traits. Researchers will build scientific capacity through workshops on cutting-
edge data science approaches in biology, targeting high school, undergraduate,
and post-graduate levels. Outreach to the general public will increase awareness
of the importance of organismal symbioses across the tree of life and how
knowledge about these relationships can enhance food security and human well-
being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will evaluate the macroevolutionary
consequences of angiosperms' symbiotic relationships with nitrogen-fixing
bacteria by testing four overarching hypotheses. Did bacterial symbiosis enable
plant species to invade new, harsher soil environments low in nitrogen? If so,
were other plant traits gained that allowed the plants to cope with these
extreme habitats? Did the gain of bacterial symbioses allow these plant groups
to evolve new species more rapidly than those without this relationship? Did
global climate change over geologic time, including the spread of colder and
drier habitats and falling atmospheric carbon dioxide levels, drive recent
evolution of bacterial symbiosis? Researchers will use sequence data from ca.
230 nuclear loci to reconstruct a time-calibrated phylogenetic framework for the
nitrogen-fixing clade of angiosperms and develop a suite of biodiversity
informatics methods to generate species-distribution models and functional trait
matrices at scale. Researchers will then analyze these data using comparative
methods. Outcomes of the research will provide a rigorous understanding of the
ecological and evolutionary factors that drove the gains and losses of this
symbiosis through time and of how nodulation has itself impacted the
diversification and global distribution of angiosperms. Methods developed by the
project will facilitate future synthetic analyses utilizing rich, curated data
resources across broad phylogenetic, spatial, and temporal
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.