* 1916910
* Collaborative Research: The Ecological Context of Complex Society Emergence
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniel Sandweiss, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 140,529.00

Paleoclimate research seeks to understand the role of environmental change on
human society. Archaeological remains provide a long-term perspective on human-
environment interaction not available from other sources. This project will
contribute to this interdisciplinary field of science by reconstructing the
cultural and environmental factors responsible for a 9000-year vegetation
history of a valley in southern Peru. This information will allow scientists to
model the effects of future climate change, human impact, and social responses
to that change. This research began with a chance finding in 2012 during
archaeological excavations in a floodplain in the Chincha valley of southern
Peru. While excavating in a farm field near a 2300-year-old archaeological site
to better assess prehistoric agricultural practices, researchers found evidence
of wet and marshy conditions five kilometers from the ocean during the middle
Holocene circa 7000 -1500 years ago. This was quite unexpected because
archaeologists and paleo-climate specialists had assumed the area to have been
open desert prior to human occupation. Previous scientific consensus was that
the desert was irrigated around 3000 years ago by people using canals drawn from
the deeply entrenched rivers that course through the valley. Additional work
found similar patterns of hydromorphic (waterlogged) soils and evidence of the
use of artificial drainage canals. Analyses of ancient seeds, pollen, plant
microfossils, and diatoms (fossil algae) confirmed evidence of a lush landscape
back to 9000 years ago that included plants such as cattails, sedges, and
rushes. This project's systematic scientific research will confirm, modify, or
reject the hypothesis of a paleo-wetland. The project incorporates students from
two US universities who will work with students in Peru, thereby increasing
cross-border training and seeding future collaboration. These early career
researchers will learn advanced laboratory techniques to reconstruct past
environments, including state-of -the- art techniques in ground-penetrating
radar and archaeological methods.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Stretching from Chile to
California, the Pacific desert watershed is home to very dense human populations
today and has provided favored locations to live for millennia. These areas are
also some of the richest agricultural lands in the world. A full appreciation of
their environmental and cultural histories is vital, not least because fresh
water is the limiting factor in population growth and agricultural productivity.
To properly understand the intricate history of vegetation, water, irrigation,
geology, and human settlement, this project will obtain data from a
representative swath of land in the entire Chincha Valley of coastal Peru. The
vegetation, geological, and geomorphological history will be meticulously
reconstructed. Project participants will measure the ground water levels over
millennia. Correlations of cultural and environmental records with El Nino
events, tsunamis, tectonic events, and other natural processes will shed light
on the relationship between cultural adaptations and environmental change.
Buried archeological sites and canals will be detected with ground-penetrating
radar. At its conclusion, the project will provide a highly detailed
understanding of the human-environment history of a key Pacific watershed
drainage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.