* 1916658
* Collaborative Research:  How can we assess nitrogen saturation in xeric ecosystems? Accounting for water, time, and nitrogen availability
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Erin Hanan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 451,878.00

Atmospheric nitrogen deposition has the potential to negatively affect
ecosystems. It is usually clear if an ecosystem has received too much nitrogen
because there are high levels of nitrogen in water and gas leaving the
ecosystem. However, it is unclear how ecosystems in dry places, such as deserts,
respond to added nitrogen. Drylands cover a third of Earth's land surface. It is
important to understand how added nitrogen will affect these ecosystems. This
project will also build the scientific workforce by training undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates in scientific methods.
Many of these students will be reached through a Hispanic serving institution.
Outreach activities to public K-12 schools will take place in southern
California. This research will help predict how environmental change will affect
ecosystem processes and services, such as clean air and water. This project will
be especially important for understanding how dry ecosystems function.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate nitrogen dynamics in
watersheds receiving relatively little precipitation. The study sites are in
southern California and receive different levels of atmospheric nitrogen
deposition. The overall goal of the project is to develop a better framework for
assessing nitrogen saturation. The research will expand nitrogen saturation
theory to dry systems. It will account for the pulsed nature of rainfall during
seasonal transitions. The project will quantify atmospheric nitrogen inputs
using passive collectors and spatial modeling. Nitrogen measurements will also
take place in the soil and water. These measurements will then be used to
improve a biogeochemical model. The model will test watershed responses to
nitrogen addition. The combined approaches of measurement and modeling in this
study will advance theory surrounding the role of hydrology in driving nitrogen
dynamics at the watershed scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.