* 1916793
* Phase III at Oregon State University:  Center for Advanced Forestry Systems (CAFS)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* CARLOS GONZALEZ, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The Center for Advanced Forestry Systems (CAFS) was established in 2007 to
address challenges facing the wood products industry, landowners, and managers
of the nation's forestland. Over the past decade, the 7 university sites
(University of Maine [lead], North Carolina State University, Oregon State
University, University of Georgia, Purdue University, University of Idaho,
University of Washington) that collaborate under CAFS have successfully provided
the structure and resources needed for scientific collaboration in the areas of
forest genetics, site manipulation, and growth &amp; yield modeling. As CAFS
moves into Phase III, focus will shift to address the technological challenges
of the 21st century, with research questions aimed at multiple spatial and
temporal scales (including molecular, cellular, individual-tree, stand, and
ecosystem levels). Forests provide a major part of the Earth's oxygen, remove
and store a substantial amount of atmospheric CO2, provide habitats for much of
the world's plants, animals, and microorganisms, serve as feedstock for
bioenergy, biofuels, and biomaterials, and are a source of economic opportunity.
CAFS regional and national research on a wide range of technological
capabilities to sustain healthy forests, with an emphasis on decision-support
tools and remote sensing, will support the US forest industry by solving
problems with targeted, applied, and collaborative research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Advanced Forestry Systems (CAFS) brings
together industry and agency scientists and practitioners and university
scientists to solve problems facing our nation's planted and natural forests.
CAFS Phase III interdisciplinary research approach will enhance the
competitiveness of the U.S. forest products industries by solving problems at
multiple temporal and spatial scales, and by determining fundamental solutions
that transcend traditional tree species, regional, and disciplinary boundaries.
During Phase III, CAFS will focus on precision forest management, forest
genetics, key decision-support tools, and remote sensing research. Technology
transfer between CAFS scientists and industry will facilitate the adoption of
technologies such as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) and Light Detection and
Ranging (LiDAR), which are rapidly changing how forests are measured, monitored,
and managed. CAFS graduate students, recruited from underrepresented and
traditional groups, will be unique in the forestry sciences because of their
applied problem-solving and interdisciplinary skills across multiple scales.
Healthy forests are vital to the world's ecological, social, and economic
health; wood is a major economic commodity that serves as the raw material for
building and as a feedstock for bioenergy, biofuels, and biomaterials; and 2.7+
million jobs depend on forests, representing a payroll of over $110 billion.
CAFS, as the leader for R&amp;D relevant to the forest industry, will directly
benefit the national forest economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.