* 1916417
* MetaDash: A Teacher Dashboard Informed by Real-Time Multichannel Self-Regulated Learning Data
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Roger Azevedo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,165,836.00

The project is supported by the Education and Human Resource Core Research
program, which supports fundamental research in STEM learning and learning
environments. It is important to find new ways to support students' ability to
construct, analyze, critique, and use models of STEM phenomena. Given that
teachers are the main mediator of any educational innovation, it is imperative
to support STEM teachers to effectively engage students in critical thinking
skills. This project involves the research and development of MetaDash, a
teacher dashboard that provides information regarding students' cognitive,
affective, metacognitive, and motivational self-regulatory learning processes
during STEM instruction. The dashboard is informed by multi-modal channels that
synthesize information such as student facial expressions, eye gaze behavior,
electrodermal activity, and verbalizations. MetaDash will impact current teacher
training by providing real-time student data (both individual student and
aggregated) to enhance instructional decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research methodology centers around the design and
testing of Metadash as an intelligent, multichannel data visualization tool that
displays key aspects of students' learning processes and knowledge construction
in real time. The research approach investigates (1) how and when to present the
multi-channel input based on human-computer-interaction design principles and
informed by teacher usability studies; (2) how to optimize statistical
approaches to handle unstructured data from multiple sources; and (3) how to
create behavioral signatures for constructs such as self-regulation, motivation
and frustration using multi-modal measures such as eye-tracking and facial
expression. The ultimate goal of MetaDash is to foster STEM learning by
supporting teachers' and students' monitoring and control of CAMM SRL processes.
As such, MetaDash will advance current dashboards by providing teachers with:
(1) multichannel STEM learning and cognitive, affective, metacognitive, and
motivational (CAMM) self-regulated learning (SRL) data collected from students;
and (2) individual student and aggregate data to accelerate teachers' decision-
making.