* 1916728
* The Relationship between Architecture and Social Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* James Cameron Monroe, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 127,090.00

Archaeological research on slavery in the Atlantic World has long focused on
understanding the nature of cultural and social life in plantation contexts
across the Americas. In recent decades, however, archaeological research across
the African Diaspora has begun to explore the nature of resistance movements in
colonial slave societies and the new societies forged in their ashes. The quest
for freedom is taking center stage in archaeologies of enslavement, revealing
how Africans and their descendants participated actively in the making of the
modern world. And yet, one critically relevant exemplar of resistance has been
absent from archaeological analysis, the independent states of post-revolution
Haiti. Led by Prof. J. Cameron Monroe (UC Santa Cruz) and collaborators from
Haiti and the US, this project explores how material culture was used to express
political independence and identity in northern Haiti after the Haitian
Revolution. The project examines how elites in post-revolutionary Haiti used
public and private architecture, domestic objects, and everyday meals to
manifest independence from France, as well as political control over a rural
populace. The project will contribute to a broader understanding of the
diversity of state-making processes in the Age of Revolutions, and the complex
ways that material culture shaped national identity in the past and continues to
do so in the present. The project contributes to long-term development plans for
Haiti's National Historic Park, identified as one of 5 primary targets for
cultural heritage development following the earthquake of 2010. Additionally,
the project is providing field training experience for graduate students and
college students from Haiti and the United States, particularly students from
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Milot Archaeological Project (MAP) engages theories of sovereignty that
highlight the use of material culture to make, and reject, claims to political
power in the past. The project focuses on the Royal Palace of Sans-Souci,
located in the historic town of Milot in Haiti's Northern Department. Sans-
Souci, a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1982, was the primary royal residence
of King Henry Christophe, first and last king of the short lived Kingdom of
Haiti (1811-1820). Sans-Souci was built as an exceptional example of the
Neoclassical architectural style, a tradition used around the Atlantic World to
represent symbolically the imposition of order, rationality, individuality, and
freedom - Enlightenment-era values that guided state craft in the Age of
Revolutions. Archaeological research at Sans-Souci examines the relationship
between the public expression of these values, represented in architecturally,
and their reception, rejection, and reformulation within domestic contexts.
Project participants bring together non-invasive archaeological survey, 3D
modelling, and the analysis of artifact, faunal, and botanical remains from
excavated domestic contexts to address these issues. This project provides an
important Caribbean example to longstanding discussions about the relationship
between Enlightenment-era ideologies and consumer practices taking root across
the Atlantic world. Additionally, project is the first to explore the nature of
state formation in post-colonial Caribbean, providing an historical rich and
archaeologically robust case study with which to model state formation processes
more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.