* 1916495
* Collaborative Research: Undergraduate Research Groups in the CSU Alliance for PUMP: Preparing Undergraduates through Mentoring toward PhDs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Cynthia Flores, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 18,673.00

This project focuses on increasing the participation of underrepresented
students in PhD programs in the mathematical sciences. These students include
undergraduates currently at a California State University (CSU) which are ethnic
minorities, first-generation college, or financially disadvantaged. This will be
accomplished by a CSU Alliance including all 23 campuses, which provides a
robust recruitment process, training for faculty on how to be a strong mentor,
and frequent assessment. Students are equipped with the tools to be successful
in doctoral programs through high-quality, personalized activities. PUMP has
already had tremendous success on southern CSU campuses and is now being
extended to include northern campuses as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities for this project include (a) an orientation workshop for faculty
geared to maximize the success of mentoring students from underrepresented
groups; (b) at least one year of undergraduate research projects for junior and
senior math majors; and (c) a PUMP symposium where the undergraduates will
present talks on their research. The PUMP undergraduate research group (URG) is
structured so that students master the mathematical content while developing the
ability to go from general course work to independent work and research. The
program requires that topics for the URGs, while accessible to students, make
meaningful contributions to the mathematical sciences, allowing the faculty from
institutions with limited research opportunities to keep current and active in
their fields. This project shall contribute to increasing the quantity, quality,
and diversity of the mathematical sciences workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.