* 1916673
* Research: Looks Like Me: Leveraging Funds of Identity to Enhance Engineering Career Pursuits in Rural/Reservation Communities
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Brock LaMeres, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 06/30/2024
* USD 415,166.00

It is estimated that there will be over 600,000 engineering and engineering
technology job openings between 2014 - 2024, yet the United States is not
producing enough career ready college graduates to meet these projected demands.
Many students are capable of becoming engineers but do not because they (a) do
not understand what engineers do or (b) do not think they have the abilities
needed to become an engineer; this is particularly common for underrepresented
groups such as females and minorities. Diversifying the engineering workforce
could result in more diverse solutions to engineering challenges. A lack of
exposure to engineering in grades K-12 could limit the number of students
pursuing engineering careers. This project fosters partnerships between tribal
and community colleges and the surrounding rural and tribal school districts to
engage rural and indigenous elementary students in place- based engineering-
focused activities that will help motivate and prepare them for engineering-
related careers. Professional learning communities consisting of pre and in-
service elementary teachers, instructors from partner tribal and community
colleges, and faculty from Montana State University will work together
throughout the project with the goal of supporting teachers in the design and
implementation of placed-based engineering activities to increase 3rd - 5th
grade students' awareness of, interest in, and preparedness to pursue
engineering related careers. Students and their families will document their
views about learning, knowledge, and engineering through photo journals which
will be used, along with classroom observations, to identify students' current
perceptions of engineering and to develop place-based engineering- focused
interventions for the students that connect to the programming and research
happening at the tribal and community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;The citizens of rural
Montana and the seven tribal reservations within Montana have a great wealth of
local funds of knowledge. Children internalize these family and community funds
of knowledge and resources to make meaning and define themselves, creating funds
of identity that serve as a lens through which they view and absorb new
information and new identities. This project explores the connections between
funds of identity and engineering identity development and the mediating factors
that inform this relationship. The project team engages with teachers to
identify methods that can be used to identify elementary students' funds of
identity and current perceptions of engineering. This information is then
utilized by professional learning community members to develop place-based
engineering-focused interventions for students. The research design is a
multiple case study with Little Big Horn College (tribal college) and partnering
reservation elementary schools as Case A and Gallatin College (community
college) and partnering rural schools as Case B. Both quantitative and
qualitative data are collected from individual students, teachers, and tribal
and community college partners at multiple time points, allowing researchers to
examine the intervention across time and contexts. Data are analyzed at the
individual, with-in case, and cross-case levels to examine student, teacher, and
community level impacts. This exploration of the connections between funds of
identity and engineering identity in children will provide valuable insight into
how educators can leverage funds of identity to create meaningful learning
experiences that allow students to recognize the value of their knowledge and
support their engineering identity development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.