* 1916609
* Influence of Structure, Interionic Interactions, Interfacial slip and Viscous-electric Coupling Phenomena on the Rheology of Nanoconfined Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

The overall goal of this project is to advance the knowledge about structure-
property relationships for ionic liquids, which are organic molten salts with
tunable compositions. Besides high ionic conductivity, ionic liquids exhibit low
volatility, good thermal stability, low flammability, and a wide electrochemical
window. These properties could enable safe energy storage devices with higher
energy and power density and longer-term stability than is possible with current
technologies. However, the performance of these devices depends on the viscosity
of the ionic liquids in extremely narrow spaces, and their high viscosity has
been linked to reduced electrical conductivity and capacitance, poor wetting of
porous electrodes, and lower power density. Therefore, research that addresses
the flow characteristics of nanoconfined ionic liquids is of paramount
importance. This project will examine the relationship between liquid
composition and flow behavior in nanoscale channels. Thereby, it will enable to
establish design principles of ionic liquids as electrolytes for next-generation
supercapacitor and battery technologies. The proposed research will also
contribute to the development of the US work force by training two graduate
research assistants at the intersection between materials chemistry and
engineering, interfacial science, and rheology. This multi-disciplinary approach
will help broaden participation of underrepresented groups in research and
benefit engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will
address three major issues in the flow of nanoconfined ionic liquids: the
relationship between liquid structure and nanorheology, the effects of surface
composition (wettability) and nanoscale roughness on material behavior, and the
connection between electrostatic and viscous phenomena. The experimental study
will use a surface forces apparatus by confining the liquids between two
surfaces with controlled characteristics. Measurements of static and
hydrodynamic forces as well as dynamic shear will be carried out on a set of
judiciously selected ionic liquids with a wide range of compositions. The
findings of these studies will be used to develop a framework to predict the
rheology of nanoconfined ionic liquids. Furthermore, the knowledge generated by
this research will enable practitioners to modulate the nanorheological response
of ionic liquids through the precise control of their structure, surface
wettability, roughness and potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.