* 1916556
* Materials Selection and Design - A Tool to Enable Sustainable Materials Development and a Reduced Materials Footprint
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Julie Schoenung, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2021
* USD 16,616.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Building on the success of previous sustainability-
themed MRS meeting symposia, Symposium ES13 will encourage an integrated
approach toward the importance of considering sustainability in the development
of materials and will provide a medium for technically based, interdisciplinary
discussions of core materials technologies and their connection with societal,
ecological, and economic drivers. MRS has scheduled a two-day symposium and
poster session (morning of April 23 through afternoon of April 24, 2019) that
will illuminate the path toward sustainable development of materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This new Materials Selection and Design (ES13)
symposium will address the fundamental research challenges associated with
properly understanding, assessing and reducing the materials footprint of
current products and commodities that drive our economy and meet the needs of
humanity. The symposium will provide a platform for materials researchers and
related interdisciplinary experts from industry, academia, and government to
present research on sustainable materials development from a life cycle and
design perspective, including topics on sustainability-focused materials
selection and design tools; data needs, collection and&lt;br/&gt;management; and
incentivizing change to promote sustainable materials development and integrated
research to move toward a circular economy. Twelve invited speakers, who are
world leaders in sustainable materials development and represent industry,
academia and nongovernmental organizations from around the world, will be giving
presentations at the symposium. One of the symposium sessions will include a
provocative 1-hour panel discussion and a joint session with Symposium ES14:
Materials Circular Economy for Urban Sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.