* 1916222
* Multivariate Analysis for Samples of Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Elizaveta Levina, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,999.00

Data collected in the form of networks, often with weighted edges, have become
increasingly common in practice, but classical statistical tools do not apply to
such data. This project will develop a statistical toolbox of network-aware
methods for several common statistical analyses. The main motivating application
is neuroimaging, which allows collecting brain connectivity network data from
human subjects. These methods can be used to identify brain connectivity
patterns associated with disorders, to estimate normal brain development
trajectories and deviations from it for children and adolescents, to study
changes associated with normal and abnormal aging in older subjects, and to find
new subtypes of known disorders. The methods will be developed and extensively
tested in close collaboration with neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops network analogues for common multivariate analysis tools for
vector-valued data, such as estimating the mean, classification, clustering, and
principal component analysis. The overarching theme is developing network-aware
methods by striking the balance between collapsing the networks to a few global
summary measures and treating them as a long single vector of edge weights, with
the goal to obtain methods that are not only accurate, but also scientifically
interpretable. The technical challenges in developing such methods arise,
broadly speaking, from the need to impose high-level network structure, such as
communities, onto low-level network features, such as individual edge weights.
Addressing these challenges will involve sophisticated tools from modern random
matrix theory, structured penalties, advanced optimization techniques, and
computationally efficient algorithms, to be developed for each of the new
network analysis tools proposed. The close collaboration with neuroscientists
and psychiatrists will ensure that the statistical tools developed are
thoroughly tested and vetted in the neuroimaging community. Project results will
be widely disseminated through publications, presentations, and software
packages, in both statistical and neuroimaging venues, and are expected to raise
the current standards for statistical network analysis in the field of brain
connectomics. The project will also train graduate students in an important
emerging area of modern statistics and help them develop advanced computing and
interdisciplinary collaboration skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.