* 1916824
* Collaborative Research: Spatial Analysis of State Agropastoral Economies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* John Marston, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 152,192.00

Dr. John M. Marston, of Boston University, and Dr. David Meiggs, of the
Rochester Institute of Technology, in collaboration with colleagues from the US,
the Netherlands, and Turkey, will undertake research to examine how societies
manage sustainable agricultural production across the varied landscapes under
their control. Anthropologists have documented different strategies used by
social elites to manage agricultural economies, which reflect either
collaborative, inclusive or hierarchical, exclusive mechanisms for maintaining
societal stability and elite authority. Yet, the relationship between particular
practices by elites and responses by farmers and herders is not well
established, and social scientists seek to better understand how elite
priorities were negotiated within a society and balanced against elite needs to
secure goods used in external exchange. Archaeology offers a unique, long-term
perspective on both successful and unsuccessful social responses by farmers and
herders to these political strategies of elites under changing environmental
conditions, and contributes to clearer understandings of the agricultural
resilience of human societies, including societies
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has been at a disadvantage when
attempting to understand relationships between the geographic scale and seasonal
organization of agriculture, and the responses of elite managers and state
bureaucracies. This project will employ multiple analyses of plant and animal
remains, excavated from the site of Gordion in Central Turkey and curated as
museum collections, to study agricultural economies across two time periods that
straddle a significant political and economic reorganization in the region. The
international research team, led by Drs. Marston and Meiggs, will use isotopic
analyses of plant and animal remains, as well as geographic information systems
(GIS) models, to examine geographic patterns in both animal grazing and
agricultural fields that supplied the population of Gordion. The results will
shed light on the configuration and spatial organization of farming and
pastoralism across several hundred years of significant social and environmental
change in the region. This project will provide a "bottom-up" approach with
which to evaluate linkages between elite control and agricultural practices. The
research team will create multidisciplinary training opportunities for students
and disseminate project data and methods via open source
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.