* 1916386
* Using Engineering Design Prototypes to Improve the Communication and Argumentation Skills of Undergraduate Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Catherine Berdanier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the ability of
engineering students to communicate effectively. Given the ill-defined, complex,
and increasingly technical nature of engineering design, engineers must be able
to explain the design rationale behind complex systems. However, most
communication competencies at the undergraduate level focus on technical writing
and research presentations. This work investigates the relationship between
design prototypes and communication competencies. A growing body of research
points to the importance of prototypes during the engineering design process,
particularly as communication tools. However, the potential use of prototypes to
help undergraduates learn how to communicate effectively has not been well
explored. This project will bridge this gap by characterizing the communication
strategies of undergraduate engineering students. It will then leverage the
results of this research to guide improvements to the engineering curriculum,
including development of evidence-based curriculum and educational tools to help
students more effectively explain, defend, and advocate for specific design
decisions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Engaged Student Learning project includes
a multiple-methods research study to investigate engineering students who
undertake prototyping activities in team-based capstone design courses, and to
characterize their verbal communication strategies when "pitching" prototypes to
a design review panel. It is predicted that this data will be valuable for
understanding the changes in language and disciplinary discourse students use as
they become socialized as members of their engineering discipline. This research
also seeks to understand student perceptions of this transition. The project has
guiding four research questions: (1) How do students communicate their design
intent and project outcomes using prototypes? (2) To what factors do students
attribute success or failure of design solutions when communicating design
intent with prototypes? (3) To what extent are students aware of their
communicative patterns using prototypes? and (4) What methods can be developed
to enable peer-to-peer formative feedback? This project is supported by the NSF
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program: Education and Human Resources,
which supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of
STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.