* 1916859
* Exploration of Low-Dimensional Gas Clathrate Hydrates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Joseph Francisco, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 485,336.00

Water molecules consist of two hydrogen atoms bound to a central oxygen in a
boomerang shape. When many water molecules condense into liquid water, or solid
ice, this simple placement of atoms results in a unique molecular-level
structure and complex properties that depend only on the arrangement of atoms in
the water molecule, and not the container in which its placed. At least this is
true for large containers. As the size of the container is reduced to nanometers
(about 100,000 times thinner than sheet of paper), the structure of the liquid
is also affected by the interaction of the individual molecules with the sides
of the container. Nanoscale confinement can result in structures and properties
that differ dramatically from bulk water. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professors Joseph S. Francisco, Xiao Cheng Zeng, Chin Li Cheung, and Jaeil Bai
of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) are using computer simulations
combined with laboratory experiments to explore the physical properties of water
and water/methane mixtures (known as clathrate hydrates) when they are confined
to nano-slits and isolated carbon nanotubes. The fundamental insights gained
from this work contribute to our understanding of a broad range of societal
problems, including frost heaving in soil (an upwards swelling of soil during
freezing conditions) and the extraction of natural gas from shale rock. In
addition, the project is training students and postdoctoral associates in
computer-aided chemical research and in the design of advanced experimental
devices. Measurements are carried out in a Department of Energy National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on molecular insights into
physical properties and phase transitions of highly confined water and ice, low-
dimensional polymorphous and polyamorphous transitions, as well as the
prediction of new phases of low-dimensional ice and clathrate hydrates. More
specifically, the UNL team is pursuing three objectives: seek new polymorphous
and polyamorphous phases of water and gas hydrate in nano-slits with widths of 8
- 12 Angstroms (or the bilayer to trilayer forms of ice); investigate the
mechanism of low-dimensional carbon dioxide (CO2) and carbon monoxide (CO)
hydrate formation; study the molecular hydrogen hydrate formation mechanism in
nanoscale confinement focusing on hydrogen storage. Molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations, including the state-of-the-art, replica-exchange MD simulations for
computing the free-energy surface of confined fluids, is used.