* 1916421
* I-Corps: Cardiac Password - The Next Generation Biometric Authentication
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Changzhi Li, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a new
authentication solution that can identify users in a noncontact, non-volitional
and secure way. Continuous authentication and noncontact operation are great
values for an authentication system. However, many of the existing
authentication methods do not provide those values. The proposed product is a
new continuous authentication system by noncontact sensing cardiac waveform
based on a smart radar technology. Compared with existing authentication
systems, this technology improves the convenience and safeguard of many systems
and facilities. This project could benefit many institutions or personnel that
seek for a higher-level protection to prevent cyber attacks. Besides the
benefits to a more secure world, the radar-based motion sensing technology to be
investigated in this project could benefit other disciplines such as
health/elderly care (examples include sleep monitoring and fall detection),
disaster search and rescue (examples include finding victims buried under
earthquake debris and tracking rescuers), and smart living applications (one
example is remote gesture control of appliances). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project aims to bring authentication solutions to a more secure and
convenient level. Cardiac password, based on the human heart cardiac motion
waveform, will work as a new noncontact biometric to authenticate users into
computers and facilities. The technology is a high-sensitivity and high-accuracy
motion sensor. Such a motion sensor can be embedded in an electronic system or
device such as a computer, a smart meter, or an energy control system. It can
also be installed at the entrance of a room/facility that requires
authentication to access. The motion sensor continues to track the user?s
heartbeat waveform to guarantee the system/device is used by the same authorized
user or the room/facility is occupied by the same authorized person. The
development of this technology combines researches in Electrical Engineering,
Bioengineering, Computer Science, and Cyber Security. It involves multiple
research areas including radio-frequency (RF) system design, bio-signal
processing, pattern recognition, biometrics, and computer security. The result
of this project will provide a secure, trustworthy, and noncontact continuous
authentication approach based on invariant and non-volitional features of human
cardiac motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.