* 1916599
* Workshop: Transdisciplinary Research on Incivility in STEM Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Kathryn Clancy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2020
* USD 59,985.00

Research suggests that sexual harassment and other harassing behaviors are
common in STEM contexts, and that an underlying culture of incivility in
academic contexts may underlie permissiveness toward harassing behaviors.
Incivilities and rudeness typically do not meet a legal standard for hostile
workplace environment and are rarely reported or sanctioned. Yet these behaviors
can have major consequences on workplace dynamics, including greater work
withdrawal, absenteeism, and likelihood of leaving a position. Given that
inclusive work environments have been shown to increase research innovation and
inventiveness, a culture of incivility also has the potential to harm the
production of science. The goal of this two-day workshop is to engage scholars,
practitioners, and other stakeholders on the science of harassment and
incivility, and the consequences of incivility for scientists and the production
of science itself. Scholars from a range of STEM fields and critical studies
will be brought together to engage and advance knowledge on these topics.
Workshop organizers will broaden participation in this workshop through explicit
inclusion policies and financial support for underserved registrants, the
inclusion of junior scholars and trainees, and availability of all pre- and
post-workshop materials for free online. This workshop will advance knowledge
and scholarship on incivility in STEM contexts, including examination of the
ways in which issues of incivility manifest in public and scholarly debate, and
the ways in which organizational structures, policies, historical contexts and
cultures relate to academic environments that tolerate incivility and are not
conducive to collaboration and cooperation. This workshop will be participant-
driven, with a mixture of organized and unorganized sessions, with note-takers,
to capture the scholarship and thinking of a diverse group of participants.
Participants will examine variation in academic environments, institutional
responses, and individual interpersonal skill sets with respect to uncivil
behavior. The minimum outcomes of this workshop will include the production of a
post-workshop report that details 1) the workshop participants' new, working
definition of incivility, 2) the workshop participants' definition of healthy
conflict, and 3) specific recommendations for both institutional and community
responses to acts of incivility in scholarly spaces. An open Slack workspace
will build on the report to encourage post-workshop activities locally and
nationally among interested scholars, practitioners, and advocates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.