* 1916393
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Taming Memory Corruption with Security Monitors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ajay Joshi, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 800,000.00

Modern computing systems are under constant attack by organized crime
syndicates, nation-state adversaries, and regular cyber-criminals alike. Among
the most damaging attacks are those that exploit so-called memory corruption
vulnerabilities which often confer the attacker with access to sensitive
information or allow the attacker to execute arbitrary code on the victim's
machine. To counter the threat posed by memory corruption vulnerabilities, this
project will research and develop new defensive capabilities realized through
the joint design of hardware and software. Hardware and software co-design holds
the promise to enable the introduction of rigorous, principled, and efficient
protection against low-level exploitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To defend
computing systems against memory corruption attacks, this project will augment a
RISC-V processor with an array of security policy engines (ASPEn). ASPEn will
feature both specialized and programmable policy engines. Specialized engines
will be optimized for performance, power, and area, and enforce static security
policies that are known at design time. To accommodate for the constantly-
changing nature of the security landscape, programmable engines will be
programmed to enforce more flexible security policies. The project is structured
into two thrusts; Thrust-1 will design the ASPEn Security Monitor System for the
RISC-V processor and Thrust-2 will focus on software design and the various
policy types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a generic
security-focused hardware/software co-design approach that can be leveraged to
secure other processors than the RISC-V core used for this project. This broader
impact will further be supported by the open-source release of the resulting
hardware designs, as well as the new and modified software stack consisting of
tool chains, libraries, and policy types. Furthermore, the project will include
a variety of training and outreach activities through tutorials, workshops, and
curricular development. The project will also continue existing successful
efforts of involving undergraduate, high-school, and underrepresented minority
and women students throughout its duration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
resources and results will be made available publicly. The main project page can
be found at https://seclab.bu.edu/projects/aspen.html, and source code releases
will be made available via the project's code repository at
https://github.com/BUseclab/ASPEn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.