* 1916486
* Meeting: Hands-on Workshop for Building Working Groups of CRISPR-Cas9 Undergraduate Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Anil Kumar Challa, Hampden-Sydney College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 04/30/2020
* USD 48,762.00

Providing effective and engaging laboratory experiences is an important part of
the effort to improve undergraduate biology education. Introducing current and
cutting-edge topics to undergraduate students keeps them excited and brings
relevance to the material being studied. The rapidly emerging technology of
genomic engineering using programmable nucleases like the CRISPR-Cas9 system is
a topic that is both scientifically exciting and socially relevant. As CRISPR-
Cas9 continues its meteoric rise into mainstream molecular biology, it is
essential for students to learn how to work with it. To that end, this award
will support a four-day workshop at the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities that
builds on the momentum of a similar project in 2018. The overall goal of the
conference organizers is to expand the development and propagation of effective
CRISPR-Cas9 tools across multiple model systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At the
conference a group of "veterans" from the 2018 workshop will join CRISPR-Cas9
experts across several popular model systems to work with a new cohort of
undergraduate-focused instructors towards three objectives. The first is to
foster "big sibling/little sibling" working groups between 2018 workshop alumni
and new 2019 participants that can sustain the experiences from the workshop.
The second is to share the successful implementation efforts of participants
from the 2018 workshop, improve previously implemented pedagogical modules, and
create new ones beyond the scope of the original zebrafish workflow suitable to
different types of classrooms/labs. Finally, the conference will continue to
foster and provide support to the undergraduate educators to disseminate gene
engineering/editing technologies and make innovations to their classrooms/labs.
The long-term goal of this workshop is to form small, regional groups of
experienced and new instructors that can support each other both locally and
nationally and to develop online resources that will allow these groups to
publicly share their insights with the education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.