* 1916929
* Research: Supporting Ethical Engineering: The role of immersive engineering subcommunities
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,313.00

The National Academy of Engineering emphasizes the importance of ethics in
engineering and therefore in engineering education, going so far as to produce a
book, "Practical Guidance on Science and Engineering Ethics Education for
Instructors and Administrators." In most universities, however, current
engineering ethics education suffers from two problems. First, stand-alone
ethics courses have not shown success at helping students develop new "habits of
mind" that help them bring ethical considerations into their day-to-day
engineering work. Second, most engineering ethics education focuses on certain
kinds of ethical issues, like responsible conduct of research and responsibility
to employers and clients. Those are important, of course; but equally important,
though underemphasized in engineering ethics courses, are issues related to the
broader societal impact of engineering products. Because technologies- from
everyday tools such as cell phones to emergent technologies such as autonomous
cars- are shaped by society while also shaping society, engineers working in the
public and private sector have a responsibility to a broader set of stakeholders
than just employers and clients. Therefore, socially responsible engineers must
consider not only the direct, intended, short-term effects of a technology, but
also the potential longer-term, indirect, unintended consequences: the social,
cultural, political, economic, and environmental impacts of these technologies
on users and broader society. Doing so requires not only good intentions but
also some knowledge and skills connected to understanding how engineering is
embedded in society, how societal and technological developments mutually
influence each other. This understanding, and the desire to use it, can lead to
better engineering- engineering that takes various end-users and stakeholders
into account. But a single engineering ethics course or service learning project
is unlikely to fully develop the knowledge, skills, and "habits of mind" needed
to engage in high-quality, socially responsible engineering. This project
therefore explores a promising other approach to producing socially responsible
engineers: immersing students for multiple years in community whose members live
together in the same dorm, engage in projects together, and take courses
together about ethics and about the relationships between technology,
science/engineering, society, and ethics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Maryland's College Park Scholars Science Technology and Society Living
Learning program is one of the most established of such programs for engineering
undergraduates in the country. Through an ethnographic approach to modeling how
participation in this Science Technology &amp; Society program influences
learners' identity and behavior, this project studies an "enculturation"
approach to engineering ethics education through long-term immersion programs.
The project integrates "outsider" (researchers') and "insider" (participating
students') observations of and reflections on culturally salient events,
activities, and artifacts to create ethnographic descriptions of which cultural
practices (embedded in institutional history/values reflected in and produced by
social interactions) are consequential for shaping engineering students' ethical
reasoning and identity. Following a cohort of students over 2 years enables the
team to develop accounts of how individuals do - and do not - take up cultural
practices while in the Science, Technology, and Society program. Project
findings will inform the creation and refinement of Science, Technology, and
Society programs and other engineering communities that take an immersive
cultural approach to the formation of engineers with the knowledge, tools, and
motivation to attend to ethical issues in engineering practice. The graduates of
such programs will contribute to creating ethical cultures in their workplaces,
leading to more ethical engineering practice. Women and students from
underrepresented minority groups are disproportionately likely to feel
marginalized by an engineering culture that excludes or minimizes the value of
socially-embedded engineering, therefore, the project intends to improve the
ability of engineering communities to support their students' ethical
development and provide hospitable environments for marginalized
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.