* 1916649
* I-Corps: Automatic Music Generation Using Artificial Intelligence and Music Theory
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Lu Lu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
revolutionize the music industry and related sectors such as game development
and video production which significantly involve music. With the proposed music
generation technology, copyright issues can be avoided since the music generated
is completely original. Furthermore, compared to traditional composing methods
which take at least an hour for the user or composer to produce a one-minute
piece of music, the proposed technology spends only less than a minute to
generate the music of the same length. These advantages will allow small game
developers and self-media producers to generate original music that fit to their
needs in a very short amount of time with minimum cost, which significantly
benefits the game and self-media industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project features the technology of automatic music generation from user's
humming based on AI and music theory. Without any professional knowledge of
music, a user can simply start by humming a short melody. Combining the AI
algorithm with music theory, the application completes other necessary musical
components (such as chord progression, beats and tempo) and expands the short
input melody into a full piece of music for which the user can change genre and
do post-editing. The technical differentiators of the proposed technology are
threefold. Firstly, a pitch detection algorithm is developed to recognize the
user's humming tune and turn it into musical notes, which are then optimized to
conform to music theory and logic. Secondly, a novel algorithm combining
Recurrent Neural Network and music theory is developed to generate a full piece
of music, including the main melody, chord progression, motive and
accompaniment, based on the user's short input melody. Thirdly, the post editing
stage allows the user to modify the notes and genre according to the generated
chord progression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.