* 1916616
* Asset Allocation: A Statistical Learning Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Vadim Linetsky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 398,700.00

This award will contribute to the advancement of national prosperity and
economic welfare by developing new and improved methods to solve optimal asset
allocation problems. Portfolio optimization problems involving allocation of
resources across multiple assets are of fundamental importance in financial
management and are faced daily by financial institutions, asset managers,
pension plans, university endowments, insurance companies, and individual
investors. Beyond finance, portfolio optimization problems arise in other
industries, such as portfolios of drug development projects in the
pharmaceutical industry, portfolios of research and development projects in the
technology industry, portfolios of energy generating assets in the energy
industry. This award aims to improve out-of-sample performance of asset
allocation methods by building on recent advances in machine learning. The award
contributes to the education and development of human resources by providing
research opportunities to students and enriching student experience at
undergraduate and graduate levels by bringing challenging applied problems in
asset allocation to the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pioneering work of
Markowitz on mean-variance portfolio optimization laid the theoretical
foundations of applying optimization to the asset allocation problem.
Notwithstanding the enormous importance and influence of these classical
contributions, the fact remains that, from an empirical point of view,
Markowitz-style portfolio policies are often outperformed by the naive 1/N equal
weights portfolio policy out of sample due because of limitations associated
with estimating statistical parameters from historical data. This project
modifies the classical Markowitz portfolio optimization by introducing a new
portfolio optimization framework inspired by recent advances in machine learning
and econometrics. A partially egalitarian least absolute shrinkage and selection
operator (PELASSO) building on the celebrated LASSO regression was recently
introduced in the econometrics literature in the context of solving the problem
of optimally combining different forecasts. Inspired by these recent
developments, this project employs the PELASSO portfolio optimization approach
by regularizing the portfolio optimization problem to assign portfolio weights
of some of the assets to zero and to select and shrink weights of the surviving
assets in the portfolio towards equal weights to hedge against parameter
estimation risk. The PELASSO portfolio optimization aims to achieve improved
out-of-sample performance and is evaluated empirically using rich data from high
frequency econometric sources. The project utilizes methods at the intersection
of optimization, statistics, machine learning and
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.