* 1916110
* Collaborative Research: Net-Shape and Scalable Additive Manufacturing for Thermoelectric Waste Heat Recovery Materials and Devices using Selective Laser Melting
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Sheng Shen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 06/30/2023
* USD 276,131.00

Over 55 percent of the energy consumed in the US is released as waste heat. For
the manufacturing sector alone, the total unrecovered waste heat is estimated to
be 2,500 trillion BTU per year. The waste heat from American automobiles is
equivalent to losing over $50 billion each year. Among various waste heat
recovery technologies, solid-state thermoelectric generators (TEGs) are a
promising strategy to increase energy efficiency, alleviate air pollution, and
reduce carbon emissions. Traditional TEG manufacturing includes material
synthesis, module assembly, and device integration, which has low productivity
and high cost. A widespread deployment of TEGs in existing energy systems can be
achieved only by resolving following key challenges in TEG manufacturing: cost-
effective synthesis of abundant, low cost, reliable, and high ZT (figure of
merit) thermoelectric materials; scalable manufacturing of TEG devices; function
graded realization in the temperature gradient environment. This project has an
additive manufacturing (AM) based net-shape nanomanufacturing process, that
takes the advantages of the latest advances in materials science, heat transfer,
and manufacturing, to tackle these challenges. To accomplish this ambitious
goal, an interdisciplinary team of experts in energy harvesting, material
science, heat transfer and manufacturing is assembled at Virginia Tech, Carnegie
Mellon, and UW, in collaboration with an industry leader of AM. Students from
diverse background will be trained for the twenty-first century workforce. Great
efforts will also be made for outreaches to K12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a novel
integrated nanomanufacturing process for high-performance thermoelectric
materials and functional devices using the selective laser melting (SLM) based
AM method. Furthermore, a correlation between the laser processing variables and
thermoelectric material characteristics will be established to provide
fundamental understanding of laser-material interactions to achieve a net-shape
and scalable AM method for thermoelectric devices. Specifically, the following
hypotheses will be tested: (1) The non-equilibrium conditions produced during
the laser-based AM process can introduce numerous nano-defects, nanoscale
particles, and abundant multi-scale grain boundaries, which can reduce the
thermal conductivity dramatically by phonon scatterings. (2) doped Si or other
nano-particles will be used as additive materials in the nanomanufacturing
process to improve the mechanical properties, enhance the electrical
conductivity, and increase the Seebeck coefficient. (3) The laser-based AM can
readily realize the graded doping and variable cross-section areas along the
length of the thermoelectric elements with temperate variance to make the best
use of the temperature-dependent material properties for achieving high
performance thermoelectric devices. (4) Using the laser-based AM, the direct
manufacturing of thermoelectric materials, thermal insulation layers, electrical
conductor layers, and heat exchangers as a functional and integrated energy
harvesting system, can result in higher mechanical stability and thermal
reliability as compared to the traditional manufacturing approaches.
Characterized as low-cost, high-efficiency, and industry-scalable
nanomanufacturing of clean energy systems, this technology, if successfully
tested and validated, will become extremely attractive for many industries
associated with energy and manufacturing systems, such as automobiles, power
stations, steel plants and many more. Understanding the fundamentals of electron
and phonon transport for thermoelectric materials, developing next generation
manufacturing tools, and designing novel heat transfer systems will result in
increased efficiency of the energy system and reduced of US dependency on
foreign energy sources. The industrial partnership accelerates the assimilation
of basic science research into industrial practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.