* 1916651
* Phase II IUCRC at Ohio State University: Center for Disruptive Musculoskeletal Innovations (CDMI)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Carolyn Sommerich, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2024
* USD 399,977.00

Human life is characterized by physical movement. Yet, a growing number of
adults are disabled by joint pain that regularly limits their physical activity.
Musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) encompass degenerative, inflammatory and
developmental conditions, injury, and overuse. The personal impact ranges from
devastating effects on health to subtle reductions in quality of life. MSDs
affect more than half of the US adult population, and 75% of those over age 65.
The mission of the Center for Disruptive Musculoskeletal Innovations (CDMI) is
to address pressing societal needs associated with the growing burden of MSDs.
Priority CDMI research themes include: characterizing MSD causal pathways;
developing tools for MSD risk assessment, diagnosis, and functional recovery;
predictive analytics for clinical care management; medical device design and
testing; and clinical outcomes assessment with an emphasis on cost/benefit and
patient value. Our goal is to generate data on incidence, pathomechanisms,
treatment outcomes, and costs associated with MSDs, and based on these data,
develop new technologies for MSD prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.
Collectively, these efforts will result in healthier Americans and a stronger
and more-competitive U.S. economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CDMI has
strategically joined four academic sites that integrate expertise in:
Musculoskeletal disorder (MSD) causal pathways, tools for MSD risk assessments,
biomechanical models, and bioengineering (The Ohio State University - OSU); MSD
biology, diagnostics, clinical cohorts, digital health, and clinical data
analytics (University of California, San Francisco - UCSF); Medical device
design, computational modeling, empirical testing, and testing standards
(University of Toledo - UT); and Advanced materials, sensors, and chemical
engineering (affiliate site Northeastern University - NU). The UCSF site focuses
on digital health technologies and solutions, regenerative therapies, clinical
data analytics, and development of diagnostic tools that help better match
patients to treatments and better quantify patient response to therapy. UT
research centers on development of devices, biomaterials, and clinical
assessment of surgical procedures. OSU applies its sensitive risk exposure tools
and person-specific biomechanical models to clarify how physical, psychological,
psychosocial, and personal risk factors influence injury risk. The CDMI Research
Roadmap identifies high priority areas for project proposal solicitation. These
include basic science, biomaterials, clinical outcomes (including digital
health), SMART devices, development/assessment of innovative devices/surgical
techniques/instruments, healthcare economics, osteoporosis, soft tissue repair,
patient assessment tools, test method development, MSD casual pathways, MSD risk
assessments, and injury prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.