* 1916526
* Corrosion of Buried Steel at New and In-Service Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Sammantha Magsino, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 03/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (the National
Academies) will convene an ad hoc committee of volunteer experts from relevant
fields in engineering, materials sciences, and manufacturing to consider the
state of knowledge regarding, and technical issues associated with the corrosion
of steel used in earth applications (e.g., ground stabilization, pipelines, and
infrastructure foundations). Committee members chosen from academe and the
private and public sectors will prepare a peer reviewed consensus report
summarizing the primary mechanisms of the corrosion of bare or coated steel
placed in earth materials (e.g., unconsolidated earth or rock in different
geologic settings); the state of practice for characterizing earth materials for
properties that influence corrosion and corrosion rates; and the use, efficacy,
and uncertainties associated with methods to predict, identify, and monitor
corrosion of steel in earth materials. The committee will seek broad input from
relevant technical communities through meetings and a multi-disciplinary
workshop on existing and developing field, laboratory, and modeling methods for
characterizing and monitoring corrosion of buried steel. Gaps in knowledge and
the short- and long-term research and practices needed to improve long-term
performance of steel in earth applications will be
described.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corrosion models by materials scientists have
focused largely on corrosion of steel in air and water. Fewer models predict
corrosion and corrosion rates for steel in earth materials, and those models do
not adequately reflect earth environments with heterogeneities in local
chemistry, geology, biology, hydrology, and land use. When failures of buried
steel occur, it often is not known whether the cause was poor geotechnical site
characterization, poor choice of steel design and protection, improper
construction, inappropriate modeling of steel corrosion mechanisms, changes in
subsurface conditions resulting from changed land use or climatic conditions, or
a compounding of these factors. This study will be an interdisciplinary
examination of uncertainties throughout the "lifecycle" of buried steel: from
performance modeling, to steel manufacturing, to subsurface site
characterization, and to the design, construction, and operation and maintenance
of infrastructure employing buried steel. Research needed to fill the knowledge
gaps in these endeavors will be recommended. Ultimately society will benefit
from more resilient and cost-effective infrastructure that performs as expected
and required fewer repairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.