* 1916732
* Planning IUCRC University of Kansas: Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and IoT (CHASSI)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Victor Frost, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 14,999.00

This IUCRC planning project will establish the feasibility of a multi-site
Center for High-Assurance Secure Systems and Internet-of-Things (CHASSI) that
will focus on areas where both security and high assurance are necessary to
support operations of high mission criticality, due to safety or economic
impact. Examples include medical devices, manufacturing, the energy grid, real-
time financial markets, construction, and defense. Combining security and high-
assurance is hard, however, intentionally combining them will lead to new
models, techniques, designs, architectures, and systems that will be applicable
across of range of important U.S. industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHASSI has
five sites: University of Kansas (KU), University of Minnesota, Syracuse
University, Case Western Reserve University, and Indiana University. CHASSI
research falls into four main thrusts: (1) Architectures, design and formal
modeling for systems-level security, privacy, stability, and performance; (2)
Secure communication, sensing, and devices; (3) Scalable trust and privacy; and
(4) Human behavior for privacy and security. KU brings expertise in attestation,
networking, cyber-physical systems, plus hardware, software, database, and
mobile security. Complementary expertise at other sites includes mission
assurance and systems security, assurance of medical devices, industrial
Internet-of-Things (IIoT), manufacturing and energy applications, and human
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHASSI faculty members will gain an understanding
of the specific interests and actual needs/barriers of industrial companies.
Likewise, companies will benefit from exposure to: cutting-edge university
research across all sites; networking with and learning best practices from
other industry colleagues in and out of their sector; students who may be
potential hires; and faculty that might perform center projects or proprietary
research. During the planning period, KU will explore ways to advance diversity
and outreach with IHAWKe (Indigeneous, Hispanic, African-American, Women KU
Engineering) and Women in Computing through recruiting prospective students,
educating current students, and identifying student
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborators from this multi-university-
industry Center will host a single Center-wide repository at:
https://chassi.ku.edu. This shared repository will include meeting materials,
program information, publications, etc., and will be made available for a
minimum of 5 years after conclusion of the award or until the Center transitions
to the next phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.