* 1916946
* Workshop on 21st Century Bioarchaeology; Tempe, AZ - October 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Jane Buikstra, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2020
* USD 49,964.00

This is a proposal to fund a multi-day workshop to be hosted by the Arizona
State University in Tempe, Arizona in October 2019. The goal of the workshop is
to identify ways to facilitate research and education in this markedly
interdisciplinary field that is assuming increased prominence in the Social and
Behavioral Sciences. Bioarchaeology exists at the intersection of biological
anthropology, archaeology, and socio-cultural anthropology. Practitioners to
date have largely been trained in one of these sub-fields, assimilating
additional information on an ad hoc basis. The proposed workshop will focus upon
creating a model curriculum across the relevant fields, while also defining big
picture questions that invite bioarchaeological input. Problematic areas of
methodological topics, especially those relating to research design and
analytical methods, will receive in-depth treatment. The workshop provides a
platform for scientific collaboration, the results of which will benefit those
working to develop more effective methodologies and avenues for the
dissemination of findings from anthropological research to promote public
scientific understanding. Products from the workshop will be made publicly
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discussion at the workshop will focus on key
issues facing the field, both curricular and in research. Examples include: 1)
identifying and implementing a desirable balance in training between
evolutionary theory, social theory, and methods; 2) how to creatively and
effectively deal with the osteological paradox; 3) the research balance between
big picture questions and focused, contextually rich research; 4) statistical
approaches to small sample sizes and integrating continuous and categorical
data; and 5) the importance of outreach and sensitivity to perspectives of
descendent communities. Bioarchaeology, profoundly interdisciplinary, has
emerged as a productive and popular anthropological research and teaching
domain. To date, there has been no encompassing consideration of the curricular
and research issues that should be addressed in order to advance the field and
to take advantage of 21st century developments from outside anthropology, for
example, in biogeochemistry, epigenetics, statistics, public health, and other
physical and social sciences. Funds support travel costs for a diverse group of
approximately 40 participants in various career stages to and from the School
for Advanced Research in Tempe, AZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.