* 1916074
* Multivariate Histograms and Inference with Finite Sample Guarantees
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Guenther Walther, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Data that comprise several different measurements on each subject are common for
modern big data. In order to store these big data in a database as well as for
other applications, it is essential to summarize these big data in a compact
form without losing important information. This is known to be a difficult
problem due to a phenomenon called the `curse of dimensionality'. This research
will implement a concrete plan to overcome this stumbling block for a number of
important data analysis tasks. Importantly, the resulting methodology will
provide relevant guarantees for the accuracy of these analysis tasks as well as
fast algorithms for their implementation. The award will provide support of
graduate training through research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Density estimation
based on multivariate data is known to be a difficult problem due to the `curse
of dimensionality'. But in many applications the density is not the final goal
of the inference, rather it is a stepping stone to access other objectives. In
particular, the histogram represents a summary of the data for the main purpose
of showing important features in the data, such as modes, and for estimating
probabilities of subsets of the population. This proposal will address the
latter problem directly in order to derive a useful multivariate histogram. The
research will develop simultaneous confidence bounds with finite sample
guarantees for the probability contents of certain data-dependent subsets of the
sample space. It will be shown that these bounds possess certain optimality
properties and that the widths of the bounds depend essentially only on the
probability content of the sets and not on the dimensionality of the space, thus
avoiding the curse of dimensionality. The project will develop fast algorithms
to construct a histogram that satisfies these bounds and which therefore
inherits these properties. The research will investigate the performance of this
histogram, also in regards to detecting important features in the distribution
such as modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.