* 1916614
* Santa Fe Conference on Rock Magnetism
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Dario Bilardello, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This award is for partial support to hold a Conference on Rock Magnetism and its
Applications, June 6-9, 2019 in Santa Fe NM, continuing a biennial series of
such conferences. St. John?s College will serve as the venue. The award will
provide partial coverage of expenses, particularly for students and early career
participants. The broad goal of the Santa Fe Conference series is to bring
together present and future leaders in the field for in-depth discussion of
fundamental aspects of rock and mineral magnetism, and applications in global
geophysics, tectonics, extraterrestrial magnetism, and surficial environmental
studies; these discussions are intended to be more intensive, interactive and
sustained than is possible under the format of large society meetings. Broader
impacts of this activity include: (1) transdisciplinary and interdisciplinary
communication to foster new approaches to geoscience problems involving iron
minerals and their use as paleomagnetic field recorders and as indicators of
paleoenvironmental conditions and Earth processes; and (2) the development of
young scientists by providing the opportunity to meet and interact with leading
international researchers, gain a deeper understanding and broader perspective,
and form the basis for future cross-disciplinary
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One explicit aim of the 2019 conference is
to explore short-term (decadal to millennial) variations in the geomagnetic
field, their records in natural and archeological materials, and their effects
on the production of radionuclides such as 10Be and 14C in the Earth?s
atmosphere. Plenary speakers include a leading expert in cosmogenic nuclides .
Another key objective is to examine the new understanding of stable remanence in
nonuniformly magnetized grains that is being achieved through novel approaches
to magnetic microscopy and numerical micromagnetic modeling. The meeting
includes a full-day workshop on modeling of magnetic microstructures using the
MERRILL software, including a keynote presentation, discussion of the state-of-
the-art by leading experts, and hands-on exercises that will teach workshop
participants how to apply advanced modeling in their own
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.