* 1916490
* "Advancing Students' Proof Practices in Mathematics through Inquiry, Reinvention, and Engagement"
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Stephen Strand, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,115,961.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving undergraduate mathematics education. It will do
so by creating curriculum modules for a transition-to-proof course for both two-
year and four-year institutions. The modules, grounded in inquiry-based
instruction, will be developed through a collaboration between California State
University Chico, Clackamas Community College, Michigan State University, Butte
College, and Mount Hood Community College. The Teachers Development Group will
provide expertise in developing pedagogical strategies for implementing the
modules. The project will use established methods to create knowledge, as well
as innovative tools that have potential to improve the quality of education
experienced by mathematics students. Actively engaging students in learning
through inquiry-based instruction may enhance the student learning experience in
the transition to proofs. This improvement may increase student entry into and
persistence in proof-based mathematics courses, thus contributing to a
mathematically sophisticated STEM workforce. The products created by the project
will be freely available as web-based resources, such as an online Wiki-style
textbook and web-based multimedia instructor supports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to draw on established design research methodology to develop
inquiry-based curricular materials and a suite of resources designed to support
instructors in taking on the challenges associated with ambitious student-
centered pedagogy. Project deliverables will include a modular curriculum (for
use in courses designed to help students transition to advanced proof-based
mathematics), web-based instructor support materials, a Wiki-textbook template,
and a professional development workshop. The project will be designed to create
an ideal starting point for mathematics faculty to begin teaching with student-
centered inquiry methods that are known to be more supportive of student
success. The project will investigate how students can be supported in
reinventing foundational topics in real analysis as well as how inquiry-based
instruction can provide equitable outcomes. The project will also investigate
the supports instructors need in implementing inquiry-based instruction. The
project outcomes will be disseminated through a professional development
workshop, an open-access repository, conference presentations, and publications.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.