* 1916976
* Impact: Redefining Electrical and Computer Engineering Faculty (iREDEFINE ECE)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Agnieszka Miguel, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 01/31/2023
* USD 49,994.00

Despite many efforts to increase diversity in the electrical and computer
engineering professoriate, the number of women on engineering faculty remains
alarmingly low. To maintain and strengthen the US as a leader in STEM, it is
essential to alleviate barriers and broaden participation of all facets of the
US population into the STEM workforce. The goal of this workshop is to motivate
women who are doctoral students in electrical and computer engineering to
consider faculty positions at US universities. Over 20 women doctoral students
will be invited to attend a workshop offered at an annual conference of
electrical and computer engineering department heads. The workshop sessions
include negotiation strategies, effective teaching methods, writing successful
proposals, and navigating the academic job search. Participants will have the
opportunity to present their research to department heads. Through specialized
sessions, participants will interact with department heads to learn about their
programs, potential faculty positions, and learn about the expectations for new
faculty. NSF support will make the workshop accessible to participants from
institutions that may not have the financial resources to support the travel of
their doctoral students. By directly impacting over 20 women students, the
workshop will increase the number of women applying for academic positions in
electrical and computer engineering. Participation in the focused programming
will prepare the participants to be successful in their academic careers.
Participants will extend their professional networks through interactions with
the diverse range of professionals, from both academia and industry, who attend
the department heads conference. Furthermore, by connecting participants with
successful women academic leaders, the workshop will catalyze their interest to
become the role models for the next generation of women electrical and computer
engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will advance knowledge
on successful strategies to broaden the participation of women in the
engineering professoriate. It is well documented that providing access to role
models and mentors is an effective strategy to retain students from
underrepresented groups in engineering. This workshop will provide a mechanism
to increase access to such role models and mentors for women doctoral students
in electrical and computer engineering programs. The workshop is designed to
increase the range of opportunities for participants to interact with and build
a rapport with department heads and industry leaders. This workshop will broaden
participation in electrical and computer engineering by better preparing women
doctoral students to enter academic careers supported by a diverse professional
network of mentors and peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.