* 1916007
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2019 ACM Sigmetrics International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems (Sigmetrics 2019)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Anshul Gandhi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The ACM Sigmetrics 2019 conference will be held at the Phoenix Convention Center
in Phoenix, Arizona from June 24-28, 2019, and will be part of the ACM Federated
Computing Research Conference (FCRC) 2019. Sigmetrics is the premier forum for
discussing the development and application of state-of-the-art, broadly
applicable analytic, simulation, and measurement-based performance evaluation
techniques. Historically, Sigmetrics brings together 200 or more professionals
from academic and industrial backgrounds. The technical program of Sigmetrics
includes research and work-in-progress poster presentations of refereed papers,
workshops, tutorials, panel discussions, and invited keynote talks by the
world's leading experts in the area of performance evaluation of computer
systems. Sigmetrics provides an international forum for presentation of original
research results as well as exchange and dissemination of innovative and
practical systems modeling ideas, which are particularly valuable for student
participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides travel support for about
25 U.S. based graduate student participants to attend the Sigmetrics 2019
conference. A strong representation of U.S. researchers at the conference,
particularly students, is essential in maintaining U.S. competitiveness. This
grant will provide travel support for students based on merit and need, and
particular emphasis will be placed on diversity for the selection of awardees to
increase participation of under-represented groups. This support will help
students attend the conference and interact with professionals in both industry
and academia. Taking part in the educational experiences available at
Sigmetrics, including tutorial sessions and workshops, will provide students
with important learning and mentoring opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.