* 1916933
* Frontier Landscapes and Community Responses
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kathryn Weedman Arthur, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 270,316.00

Dr. Kathryn Weedman Arthur of the University of South Florida, along with
colleagues from the United States, Italy, France, and Ethiopia will explore how
humans modified their environment and social practices in the aftermath of
inflicted disasters. Importantly, the team proposes to study the historical
impacts of human conflict on forests and the extent and type of human
conservation practiced during and after conflict. Forests are critical resources
for stabilizing soils for surrounding agriculture and providing timber, paper,
fuel-wood, clean air, and biomedicine among other resources. Archaeology is
particularly suited to offer past solutions for how people successfully
conserved or rebuilt essential forest landscapes. This study expects to
construct a model relevant today to the peoples of the African continent, as
well as the United States in mitigating future climate and socio-economic
vulnerabilities to forested environments. The International team wishes to
foster intellectual exchange for problem solving between scientists of different
nations and offer educational and skill training for several US graduate
students in archaeology and environmental studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Arthur and her research team propose to study how and if people are able to
recuperate their landscape in the aftermath of immense conflict and tragedy,
such as that created by the historic Atlantic and Red Sea slave trades. The
project proposes to study more than two-hundred forests that surround historic
settlements that date from the thirteenth to nineteenth centuries AD in southern
Ethiopia'a region northern and eastern states raided for the slave trade.
Scholars debate over whether these forests represent pristine "natural"
environments preserved through historic conservation efforts in resistance to
outside political change or if the forests represent change in practices to
provide social-political and environmental resilience for the future after
conflict. With Dr. Arthur?s leadership, her team plans for small scale testing
of the forests to retrieve soil samples and artifacts, to date and reconstruct
the environmental and cultural history of the forests. The team also intends to
conduct an environmental assessment and map the living forests, as well as core
sample the highland springs to obtain historic pollen for environmental
reconstruction. The team anticipates the construction of a model outlining the
relationship between the past and present cultural and environmental factors
examining how people living on the borderlands of states are able to resist or
be resilient to conflict through forest conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.