* 1916800
* Advanced doping techniques for AlGaN-based power devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Ramon Collazo, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 435,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Power semiconductor devices are critical for the energy
infrastructure. By 2030, as much as 80% of generated electricity will pass
through at least one power conversion stage before use. Maximizing the energy
efficiency of devices that perform power conversion is therefore of utmost
importance. Power switches based on nitrides of Group III elements will be the
building blocks of future power grids. While power diodes based on III-nitrides
have been developed, research for the next generation of power diodes and
switches needs to be initiated. A potential material candidate for the next
generation is the ultrawide bandgap aluminum nitride (AlN) and Al-rich aluminum
gallium nitride (AlGaN). This project will establish the fundamentals for
controlling the electronic properties of III-nitrides by dopant engineering.
This provides a robust toolbox for the design of devices based on basic
semiconductor processing, but with the understanding that processes need to be
tailored to the targeted applications. Doping advances will lead to reliable
devices capable of switching unprecedented power densities and operating at
temperatures beyond traditional limits. The ultimate impact of this project will
be to preserve and extend natural resources by allowing for the efficient use
and transmission of electrical energy. This project could also enable the
development of ultraviolet LEDs and
lasers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study will
establish advanced doping capabilities in n-type Al-rich AlGaN to realize a
doping toolbox as the first step towards the realization of a novel power
Schottky diode or HEMT device structure. The program is based on the hypothesis
that AlGaN and potentially even AlN can be n-doped with technologically relevant
free carrier concentrations to realize the potential expected from such power
switches. Based on this hypothesis, the ultimate technical goal is to
demonstrate controllable n-type doping in AlGaN, thus realizing a practical
doping toolbox to allow for the realization of advanced power device structures.
The following challenges need to be met: (1) doping of AlGaN with Si in the low
doping range (&lt;10E16/cm^3) for drift layer applications by controlling the
compensator background concentration, (2) controlling the free electron
concentration in the high doping range (&gt;1E19/cm^3) by identifying and
controlling self-compensation, and (3) suppressing DX-center formation by
application of non-equilibrium processes such as ion-implantation and quasi
defect Fermi level control. In addition, a wider doping range and better
compensation control can be achieved by using alternative dopants such as Ge.
Our group have been in the forefront of these developments by demonstrating not
only novel point defect control schemes but also by demonstrating its
capabilities such as the Schottky diode based on AlGaN and deep-UV lasers. The
proposed research will develop a unique framework by which to realize the
concept of dopant engineering in ultrawide bandgap semiconductors and related
electronic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.