* 1916496
* Collaborative Research: Principal Component Analysis over Tree Spaces and Its Applications to Phylogenomics
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 118,807.00

Phylogenomics is a relatively new field that seeks to understand evolutionary
relationships between organisms at the scale of the whole genome. One of the
central questions in evolutionary biology is a better understanding of the
relationships between organisms, usually summarized in the form of a
phylogenetic tree. The methods in common use for developing these trees tend to
work best for closely related organisms, and when the sequences are relatively
short; for example, the DNA sequence for a single gene applied to a collection
of mammals. When comparing more distantly related organisms, or data from large
portions of the genome, current techniques can break down. Since modern
technology can quickly and cheaply produce genome-scale sequence data, there is
a pressing need for better analytical tools tailored to this large-scale high-
dimensional data. The most popular statistical methods for finding general
patterns in large-scale data, such as Principal Component Analysis (PCA), make
the assumption that the space where the data lies is flat, like the plane
geometry of Euclid. However, the space of possible phylogenetic trees has a
decidedly non-Euclidean geometry, with a surface more akin to an origami figure
made with a sheet of rubber. The goal of this project is to develop alternative
types of principal components, and methods to calculate them, which take into
account the unusual structural features of the mathematical space of
phylogenetic trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCA is a statistical method
that takes data points in a high dimensional Euclidean space into a lower
dimensional plane which minimizes the sum of squares between each point in the
data set and their orthogonal projection onto the plane. It has been used for
clustering high dimensional data points for statistical analysis and it is one
of the simplest and most robust ways of doing dimensionality reduction in a
Euclidean vector space. However, it assumes the properties of a Euclidean vector
space. The space of all possible phylogenies on a fixed set of species does not
form a Euclidean vector space, so PCA must be reformulated in the geometry of a
tree-space. Motivated by the previous work by T. Nye in 2011 on construction of
the first principal component, or principal geodesic, the PIs propose two
geometric objects under different metrics which represent a k-th order principal
component: (1) the locus of the weighted Frechet mean of k+1 points in a tree-
space, where the weights vary over the associated probability simplex, under the
Billera-Holmes-Vogtman (BHV) metric and (2) the tropical convex hull of k+1
points in a tree-space via the tropical metric in tropical geometry known as the
max-plus algebra. The first aim of this project is to prove properties of the
PCA under the BHV metric and the PCA under the tropical metric over tree-spaces.
Then, the second aim is to develop efficient algorithms to compute/approximate
them. Simulation studies will be conducted to show these algorithms perform
well. Then the PIs will apply these algorithms to empirical data sets, such as
Apicomplexa, a phylum of parasitic alveolates including malaria, and African
coelacanth genomes, and sequences of hemagglutinin for influenza from New York.
The broader impact will include advising undergraduate students for the
implementation of the algorithms and user interfaces of the software products.
These research experiences will complement a new Data Science program being
developed as a component of the current Hawaii EPSCoR program. A portion of the
summer effort will also be used to collaborate with nearby high school science
and engineering programs in the development of data analysis lesson
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.