* 1916740
* Real time magnetic control of DNA origami devices and metamaterials
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Carlos Castro, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

DNA nanotechnology enables the design of dynamic nano-scale devices that can
exhibit complex motion, reconfiguration, and transfer forces similar to
macroscopic machines. These tiny constructs are also easily modified to
incorporate biomolecules or nanoparticles, making them highly promising as tools
to perform mechanical testing at a molecular scale or to create shape
transforming materials. However, realizing the functional potential of such DNA-
based devices or materials requires a robust approach for the rapid and precise
control of their motion. To address these challenges, dynamic DNA-based devices
and materials will be integrated with magnetic actuation platforms to enable
robust and cost-effective approaches to test mechanical properties of
biomolecules and DNA-based nanomaterials whose shape and properties can be
magnetically controlled in real-time. These devices and materials can have broad
applications in fields including biophysics, nanomanufacturing, biosensing, and
nanorobotics. In addition, the research project will provide inter-disciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students in fields including magnetism,
biophysics, DNA nanotechnology, and nanomaterials. The work will be translated
into broader science and engineering workforce training through outreach
activities for high- and middle-school students and teachers in topics of
physics, engineering and biology (e.g. magnetism, mechanics, DNA) with hands-on
classroom and laboratory projects that demonstrate DNA self-assembly and
magnetic actuation of DNA devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA-based self-assembly
is a powerful method to create nano-constructs of molecular systems. To achieve
the full potential of these systems rapid temporal (sub-second) and high spatial
(10-50 nm) control has remained a challenge. This work will integrate design and
hierarchical assembly of DNA devices and materials with a domain-wall based
magnetic tweezers platform to enable advanced controlled actuation of DNA
constructs. These magnetic tweezers allow for simultaneous control of multiple
magnetic particles with force and motion inputs in multiple directions and at
multiple locations. The study will thus leverage magnetically driven DNA
constructs to develop force spectroscopy platforms with a focus on testing
effects of applied forces on molecular interactions, in particular protein-DNA
interactions. The devices will enable application of forces in multiple
directions (e.g. tension and compression), which is highly challenging with
other methods, while the DNA structures provide precise control over relative
positioning and orientation of molecular samples. Furthermore, materials will be
developed based on hierarchical assembly of DNA nanostructures where domain-wall
magnetic tweezers will drive expansion, collapse, or rotation of materials
and/or underlying components. Geometrical parameters and actuation forces will
be guided by finite element simulations to render novel tailored DNA structural
metamaterials with tunable properties such as negative Poisson's ratio or
drastic shape changes that can be controlled via user-defined or computer
controlled magnetic fields. Outreach and education efforts will engage students
and high school teachers through the Ohio State University Translating
Engineering to K through 8 program. Portable magnetic actuation systems will be
developed to allow these high school teachers and students to interact with
nanoscale systems and demonstrate associated basic
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.