* 1916895
* Evolutionary Processes in Conserved Developmental Pathways
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Martin Kreitman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2022
* USD 961,847.00

This research fills an important gap in knowledge about the genetic mechanisms
by which organisms diverge over evolutionary time to form distinct species. It
also provides a platform for graduate and undergraduate training in molecular
genetics, developmental biology and evolution, and an exciting opportunity for
under-represented high school students from the local community to participate
in this research and to undertake a formal in-residence summer training program
in molecular genetics designed for high school students taught at the University
of Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Multicellular organisms undergo complex
development processes beginning with a fertilized egg to produce the adult body
plan with specialized body parts and organs. One of the great scientific
achievements of the comparative genomics era is the discovery that many of the
genes and genetic pathways that orchestrate this developmental process are
widely shared across distantly related taxonomic groups, spanning fruit flies
(the subject of this investigation) and our own species. From this discovery, it
is widely assumed that the crucial regulators of shared developmental processes
will be functionally conserved and will not contribute to the evolutionary
divergence that accompanies speciation and adaptive change. This research
challenges this assumption with a set of precise genetic experiments in the
fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, involving conserved genes required for
establishing its anterior-posterior segmented body plan. For each of three
genes, Bicoid, giant, and hunchback, protein coding and noncoding cis-regulatory
sequences from different fly species will be challenged to replace their
orthologous counterparts in Drosophila melanogaster. Evidence of functional
divergence will be sought in embryonic gene expression, protein expression,
development, viability, and co-evolutionary interaction with the gene even-
skipped, a shared regulatory target.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.