* 1916481
* BD Hubs: Collaborative Proposal: West: Accelerating the Big Data Innovation Ecosystem
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Plato Smith
* 05/31/2024
* USD 991,733.00

The BD Hubs foster regional networks of stakeholders and cooperate nationally on
US priorities of importance to a region and to the nation. The activities of the
BD Hubs contribute to a vibrant national data innovation ecosystem. The West Big
Data Innovation Hub builds and strengthens strategic partnerships -- harnessing
the data revolution to address scientific and societal challenges. Whether
working towards the future of data-informed healthcare or tackling projects in
disaster recovery, the Hub envisions a diverse community empowered to contribute
to areas of national priority. The Hubs focus on data science activities and
initiatives that inspire cross-sector collaboration and exemplify the need for
multi-disciplinary approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the West
Big Data Innovation Hub will: (1) Develop and enable translational data science
(TDS) pilot projects in our thematic areas to highlight the value of cross-
sector collaboration, enhance fluency with real-world use cases, and emphasize a
pragmatic and holistic view of the data and analytics lifecycles. We envision
our signature TDS initiatives for 2019-2023 to include: Fire and Water: Data
Collaborative for the Future of Natural Resource Management; Stress-Testing
Access for Road Video; and Housing Instability: Trusted Data Collaborative for
Responsible Data Management. (2) Facilitate team formation across different
stakeholder groups through our activities, capturing inspirational stories and
encouraging teams to reflect and share their insights about cross-sector
collaboration. (3) Raise awareness of regional opportunities and inspire work in
priority areas including Natural Resources &amp; Hazards, Metro Data Science,
Health &amp; Medicine, Data-Enabled Discovery &amp; Learning, Data Sharing,
Cloud Computing, and Responsible Data Science. (4) Support data science
education and workforce development. Recognizing that a diverse, multi-faceted
workforce is key to addressing current scientific and societal challenges, we
will continue to expand our portfolio of education and workforce development
efforts, including a focus on Train-the-Trainer sessions, Pedagogy and Practice,
Data Science for Social Good and the Data Science Corps, Findable Accessible
Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR) data, and institutional change -- providing a
platform for broadening participation in data science. Core to our progress in
Programmatic Activities, Socio-Technical Shared Resources and Services, and
Education and Workforce Development Activities will be a coordinated evaluation,
opportunities for scaling regional successes to the national network of Big Data
Hubs, and strategic efforts for Hub sustainability including the development of
external funding streams. These efforts will be designed to enable community
input and to strengthen channels for ongoing dialogue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.