* 1916604
* Extraction and Transport to the Magnetosphere of Solar Wind Energy during Periods of Low Mach Number Solar Wind Flow
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Ramon Lopez, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 659,394.00

Understanding the impacts of space weather, changes in the magnetic plasma
environment surrounding the Earth, relies on basic definitions of how we measure
extreme conditions. Geomagnetic storms represent the extremes of our local
geospace environment and represent times when our national space-based assets
(satellites for defense and commerce) are most vulnerable. This work will
determine what conditions lead to extreme space weather through use of
observational datasets and physics-based models of the space environment. The
broader impacts include understanding space weather conditions during extreme
conditions (a priority set out in the National Space Weather Action Plan) and
training students and a post-doc on research in a Hispanic Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new classification of
geomagnetic storms based on overall storm energetics, with an emphasis on storms
with large amounts of power dissipated in the ionosphere where the activity can
have significant space weather consequences. A set of events will be selected
that will represent the most energetic storms, including "superstorms" that
occur under conditions of low Mach number solar wind flow. These events will be
studied using both data and simulations (global MHD models run with and without
a ring current module) to determine the controlling factors for energy transfer
to the geospace system. The goal of this research is to create a comprehensive
conceptual model that explains how the solar wind energy incident on the
magnetosphere is transferred to the ionosphere and magnetosphere during periods
of the relatively low solar wind Mach number that characterize large magnetic
storms. The research will also identify to what extent current global models can
capture the essential physics of that transfer and identify possible areas of
missing physics that could contribute to a better correspondence between models
and data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.