* 1916030
* Design of a genetically programmable artificial cell system for biocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Claudia Schmidt-Dannert, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 624,587.00

The machinery that drives protein synthesis can be purified intact from cells.
Using this machinery, protein can be produced at the direction of synthetic DNA
outside of a cell. This opens up a wide range of opportunities. Cell activities
can be isolated and studied. Artificial systems can be designed to perform a
limited number of cell functions. A cell-like system could be fabricated that
produces a single chemical or pharmaceutical. The goal of this project is to
encase cell-sized compartments inside polymer membranes. The compartments will
contain protein synthesis machinery and DNA. The enzymes that are created will
produce valuable chemicals from simple starting materials. DNA for different
cell systems will be mixed and matched to allow rapid prototyping of artificial
cell configurations. The project will provide training and mentoring
opportunities for high-school, undergraduate and graduate students. STEM
outreach activities aimed at PreK-12 students will be pursued using resources
available locally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in cell-free systems are
enabling the bottom-up design of synthetic cells. These cells could be comprised
of a genetically encoded multi-enzyme cascade. Spatial organization could be
designed to mimic cellular environments. Rapid prototyping of biocatalytic
cascades is a key capability of these systems. Cell-like systems would be
specifically designed to meet biocatalytic process requirements. These would
include robustness, operational stability and catalytic efficiency of enzymes,
and membrane porosity for co-factor, substrate and product transport. The design
of such, genetically programmable artificial cell-like systems for in vitro
cascade biocatalysis has not yet been accomplished and poses challenges that
this project will address. A framework will be developed for the design,
fabrication and operation of a robust artificial cell system for multi-enzyme
cascade catalysis. An industrially relevant redox cascade will constitute the
model system. A robust chassis will be built with a composite membrane, enforced
by a genetically programmed protein-based cell-wall that contain pores/channels
that facilitate membrane transport. Biocatalysts will be expressed inside the
compartments along with protein based macromolecular structures for spatial
organization of enzymes and control microenvironments. Knowledge gained in this
project will serve as a framework for the bottom-up design of a synthetic cell
chassis with genetically programmable subcellular features and membrane
properties. The artificial cells developed in this project will allow
experimental testing and further development of mathematical models proposed for
compartmentalized systems. Results from these studies will advance our
understanding of biological systems and provide guidance for the rational design
of synthetic cells for biomanufacturing and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.