* 1916047
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on Integrated Network Management (IM'19)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Carol Fung, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 02/29/2020
* USD 14,410.00

Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)/International
Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) Symposium on Integrated Network and
Service Management (IM) is a leading conference in network and service
management community. The IM 2019 conference will be held April 8-12, 2019 in
Washington DC, USA. The conference brings together researchers and practitioners
from academia and industry which provides a multidisciplinary trend-setting
forum to explore the hottest areas of information and communications technology
management related to industry, academia, government, enterprise and other
market segments from around the world. Attending conferences such as IM is of
paramount importance for the development of graduate students. Students will
have the opportunity to touch frontier research topics in the area of network
and service management and establish collaboration relationships with other
researchers during the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This
project provides travel support for high school, undergrad or graduate students
in the United States to attend the IM 2019 conference. The travel awards will
focus on bringing in first-time attendees and under-represented minority
students into the conference, since attending conferences is an important part
of their educational experience, and they often have limited travel funds. The
research community and the technical workforce benefit from the improvement of
students in the pipeline, and new ideas generated through introducing new
participants into the research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.