* 1916375
* Non-Parametric Estimation under Shape/Norm Constraints
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sabyasachi Chatterjee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 160,000.00

This project is about advancing methodology and theoretical understanding of
certain algorithms that are widely used today in machine learning and
statistics. Decision Trees are an important type of predictive modelling method.
They have a long history and modern variations like random forest are among the
most powerful techniques available. One part of the project would develop new
and theoretically sound decision trees accompanied by software implementation.
The other part of the project applies to signal processing. Total Variation
Denoising is a popular method used in image processing to do noise removal. The
current algorithm as it stands, is not fully automated. This project would
develop a fully automated version of this algorithm which is theoretically
valid. In the bigger picture, the research would generate improved versions of
these time tested algorithms and our understanding of how and why they work
would be refined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main focus of the project
is to study non parametric estimation of non smooth functions such as piecewise
constant/linear/polynomial functions, in high dimensions. One major agenda here
is to give theoretical guarantees for CART like estimators. These guarantees
would provably demonstrate adaptivity to the number and arrangement of
rectangular level sets of the regression function. Theoretical understanding of
such adaptivity for CART like estimators are largely absent in the literature
and this research should be a first step towards filling this gap. In this
project, an extension of the Dyadic CART estimator, called Model Selection Cart
(MS Cart) is proposed as a computationally and theoretically tractable method to
achieve the desired adaptivity. We have already developed an algorithm (to be
implemented and made publicly available), based on a dynamic programming
approach, which provably computes the MS Cart estimator efficiently. We are
currently working on showing theoretical guarantees for MS Cart. Another main
focus of the proposal is to study the methodology of Total Variation Denoising
(TVD). This technique is a non linear image denoising technique heavily used in
the image processing community. The first problem talked about in this proposal,
under this topic, is a step towards rigorous understanding of the statistical
risk of the TVD estimator. Worst case analysis of this risk is now well
understood in the literature. The research proposed here will go beyond worst
case analysis and reveal the adaptivity of the TVD estimator. The second
proposed problem deals with the very practical issue of choosing the tuning
parameter for TVD in a fully data driven way. A new tuning parameter free
estimator is proposed here whose practical performance has been thoroughly
checked by us in simulations. We will show that our proposed estimator is
minimax rate optimal while being fully data driven. Such an estimator is not
available in the literature, as of now. This estimator has the potential to make
the TVD methodology much more user friendly than it already is as choosing a
tuning parameter can be a delicate issue. The PI will also address several non
parametric estimation problems in settings such as quantile regression and in
general exponential families. In particular, one agenda here is to study shape
constrained estimation in quantile regression which would be a first step
towards going beyond restrictive linear assumptions often made in the existing
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.