* 1916888
* Collaborative Research: Manufacturing of Polymer Nanofiber Arrays on Surfaces by Chemical Vapor Deposition into Liquid Crystal Templates
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Nicholas Abbott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 424,614.00

This research grant establishes knowledge for a transformative new manufacturing
process that has the potential to benefit a range of U.S. industries, creating
new jobs and economic activity. Manufacturers of electronics, food packaging and
medical devices currently coat their products with thin films of plastics that
function as protective barriers using a process called chemical vapor
deposition. The investigators supported by this research grant have discovered a
new way to greatly expand the potential usefulness of chemical vapor deposition
in manufacturing, using the process to fabricate surfaces covered with arrays of
end-attached plastic nanofibers. Surfaces decorated with carpets of nanofibers
exhibit properties that differ dramatically from continuous coatings, such as
providing tunable optical or adhesive properties that might be used in energy-
efficient and flexible displays or next generation robotics. This award supports
fundamental research needed to understand how these nanofiber films form and how
their surfaces are encoded with properties useful for electronics, food and
medical device industries. The advances achieved during this research have the
potential to be rapidly scaled into an industrially practiced nanotechnology,
bringing economic prosperity and security. The grant also provides an
outstanding opportunity for multidisciplinary training of the next generation
manufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to be investigated in
this grant involves chemical vapor deposition of polymers into thin films of
liquid crystals. Specifically, chemical vapor polymerization performed on
surfaces coated with micrometer-thick films of liquid crystals leads to
formation of organized assemblies of end-attached polymer nanofibers with
unprecedented control over organization, size (length and width), surface
chemistry, chirality, and shape (straight, bent or helical). In contrast to
conventional liquid crystal-templated polymerizations, the monomer concentration
in the liquid crystal phase remains low, as the monomers are formed in the vapor
phase and then diffuse into the liquid crystal template. Accordingly, chemical
vapor polymerization minimizes monomer-induced changes to the liquid crystal
phase behavior and enables access to nanofiber arrays with precisely defined
structures. Given the diverse range of liquid crystals available for use as
templates for chemical vapor polymerization, this project has the potential to
provide a paradigm-shifting approach for large-scale manufacturing of oriented
nanofiber arrays with complex interfacial morphologies and
chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.