* 1916521
* Impact of Interactive Holographic Scenes in Developing Engineering Students' Competencies in Sensing Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Doug Bowman, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,976.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by preparing construction engineering and management students
to use modern sensor technologies at construction sites. Over recent years, the
construction industry has adopted widespread use of sensing technologies at
construction sites, with resulting operational and safety benefits. The use of
these sensing technologies has triggered a demand for construction engineering
graduates who can enhance industry operations, innovation, and safety through
successful deployment of sensor systems. However, it is difficult to prepare a
future workforce that is technologically competent in the use of sensing
technologies because safety, schedule, and weather-related constraints limit
student access to construction sites. This proposal aims to overcome these
limitations, in part, by using a mixed reality pedagogical framework combined
with holographic telepresence technology. This educational approach is intended
to equip construction engineering and management students with competencies in
sensor technologies. The project promotes academia-industry partnerships by
involving industry practitioners in determining the relevant construction
engineering competencies and in developing an appropriate pedagogical approach.
The learning activities developed for undergraduate students will also be
adapted for use in K-12 programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
holographic telepresence is being employed to bring digital participants and
remote locations into the engineering classroom in 3D, thereby permitting hard-
to-reach construction site personnel and experiences to be imported into the
engineering classroom in real time. The goal is to create and assess a
pedagogical framework for equipping construction engineering and management
students with the competencies required on construction project sites.
Specifically, the proposed framework involves projecting interactive holographic
scenes of construction sites into the classroom environment, so that students
can explore strategies for finding data sensing solutions to industry problems.
A mixed method research study will be conducted to answer research questions
that address the nature of the expected core competencies of graduating
construction engineers and the value of the interactive holographic scenes in
training construction engineers. The findings will serve as a guide for
developing: (1) an innovative construction engineering and management education
curriculum; and (2) a training program tailored towards improving existing
construction workforce technical competencies. The plans include investigation
of demographic influences on learning and spatial reasoning in the 3D
holographic environment, which is likely to yield interesting insights regarding
broadening participation in engineering. An important benefit of the project to
society lies in the potential to demonstrate that affordable holographic
telepresence technology can be harnessed by our educational institutions to
provide higher levels of engagement in the STEM teaching and learning process.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.