* 1916115
* Collaborative Research: Generalized Fiducial Inference in the Age of Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jan Hannig, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Data and their use have become extremely important in modern society. This
provides for an urgent need to study mathematical foundations of statistics and
data science. In this project the PIs explore interaction of generalized
fiducial inference with modern data science problems and techniques. There are
several benefits of the proposed research. First, it is expected that the
proposed research will increase our understanding of inference and relationships
between the frequentist, fiducial and Bayesian paradigms and how do these
paradigms fit into data science which the aim to improve better data science
practice. Second, it is expected to lead to new and efficient procedures for
quantifying uncertainty in a number of applications. An important example is the
calibration of likelihood ratios reported by data science algorithms in forensic
science that has potential implication for practical usage of likelihood ratios
in courtroom. Additionally, the project will provide research opportunities to
graduate students and, in particular, help train women and minority graduate
students in the field that is of a great benefit to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beginning around the year 2000, the PIs
and collaborators started to re-investigate the ideas of fiducial inference and
discovered that Fisher's approach, when properly generalized, opens doors to
solve many important and difficult problems of uncertainty quantification. After
many years of preliminary investigations, the team was able to put together a
coherent, well thought out plan for a systematic research program in this area.
The PIs termed their generalization of Fisher's ideas as generalized fiducial
inference (GFI). The PIs are now working towards applying their GFI methodology
to handle data science problems that have emerged due to our ability to collect
massive amounts of data rapidly. In particular the PIs propose to conduct
research into the following topics: (1) In-depth investigation of fundamental
issues of GFI so that they can be simply used on manifolds, with constraint, and
penalties. This is essential for applicability. (2) Development of a bias free
fiducial selector, so that a sparsity of the fiducial distribution is induced as
a natural outcome of a minimization problem and unbiasedness is achieved using a
novel de-biasing approach. (3) Interplay between objective Bayesian and fiducial
solutions for covariance estimation. (4) Uncertainty quantification for graphon
and regression with network cohesion. (5) Use of deep networks for computation
of GFI. (6) Applications of GFI to a wide variety of practical problems; e.g.,
calibration of likelihood ratios used for quantifying evidence in forensic
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.