* 1916160
* Leveraging Stochastic Resonance for High Spatial-Resolution Extracellular Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hakan Toreyin, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,331.00

The nervous system is a network of billions of neurons, where several types of
signals propagate through. By monitoring the electrical signals propagating in
the network, the connectivity of the nervous system and how information is
represented in the nervous system can be explored, which can lead to significant
advances in a wide spectrum of applications ranging from understanding the
disruptions in the network of the nervous system in the case of neurological or
psychiatric conditions to decoding intentions. Efforts in electronics design and
data analytics over the past decades have led to energy-efficient, real-time,
and accurate neural monitoring systems. However, these systems suffer from
significantly smaller number of observable neurons per electrode (~ five to ten)
compared to the theoretical number (&gt;200) because of (i) missed small-
amplitude electrical signals of neurons that are far from the electrode and (ii)
signals of neurons with very low activity levels being masked by those of
highly-active neurons. The proposed study aims to engineer an energy-efficient
and low-complexity neural monitoring system addressing these issues to maximize
the number of neurons that can be detected per electrode and therefore improve
the scalability. This technology can transform the way extracellular monitoring
is performed in neuroscience and neurotechnologies studies. The results can be
useful for other weak signal detection applications with limited power budgets
such as sensing and communication blocks of Internet of Things (IoT) and sensor-
network applications. The proposed interdisciplinary project will be integrated
with educational and outreach activities promoting diversity by engaging and
training educationally disadvantaged students from K-12 to graduate levels in
neural monitoring, weak signal detection, and brain-computer
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles one of the holy grails of
implantable brain-computer interface technologies: How can neural activity of
the brain be accurately and energy-efficiently captured and classified at high
resolution both spatially and temporally? To address the question, the project
will explore and test the following hypothesis: By designing multiple spike
detectors each tuned for maximizing the sensitivity to different spike
amplitudes and activity-levels of neurons by leveraging stochastic resonance
(SR), a phenomenon observed for weak signal detection at various systems
including biological neurons, it should be possible to maximize spike detection
sensitivity and spike sorting specificity of an extracellular monitoring system.
To test the hypothesis, the project will be conducted through three interacting
objectives: (1) Demonstrate SR-enhanced spike detection and sorting and design
the extracellular monitoring framework. (2) Design energy-efficient electronics
for physical implementation of individual blocks. (3) Perform system-level
integration and validation. First, theoretical analysis on optimum noise
intensity and detector specification will be verified using synthetic datasets
of extracellular neural recordings created. Then, physical implementation of the
framework will be performed. Lastly, a system-level integration of the physical
system will follow benchmark comparisons against the state-of-the-art
extracellular monitoring algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.