* 1916102
* SBIR Phase I:  SocialRoots
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Ana Jamborcic, SOCIAL VOTER LABS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I is focused
on creating a platform specifically designed for more democratic online
collaboration. It will give one of the first real-world examples into how groups
of users interact with other groups via less centralized software architectures.
This will provide insights into a new set of ways to architect software
permissions and relationships relating to group to group information sharing.
The platform would also be an exploration into how to support fractal and
emergent group dynamics, as well as an opportunity for thousands if not millions
of tiny experiments regarding the specific nature of group formation, coalition
formation and higher-level communication needs for effective democratic
organizing at scale. This could provide immensely meaningful insights into new
ways software can support collaboration, democratic infrastructure, and improve
current understanding of how to optimize democratic and decentralized IT
governance systems more broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
an effort to study how to create architecture for IT software with many-to-many
relationships. The goal is to create layers of group interaction while balancing
scalability with resiliency. This proposal is focused on building a new paradigm
of software design that supports the concept of group to group information
exchange, which will improve collaboration in democratic organizations. The main
innovation is a software-based system for decentralized organizations, which
will eventually be using blockchain. This paradigm would incorporate (a) Group
to group and coalition formation; (b) Permissions supporting
democratic/sociocratic/cooperative organizations; (c) The ability for users to
connect more easily with each other in a more organized way (via existing
communication tools) and exchange high-level information across groups while
maintaining autonomy; and (d) Visibility into the matrix of group and coalition
formation, which would enable all individuals better context for further
coordination and decision-making. A decentralized app (Dapp) that allows the
platform to be managed democratically with member/user decision making via
blockchain will be developed during the potential Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.