* 1916743
* A Multimodal CMOS Platform for Electromagnetic-Based Tissue Treatment and Dynamic Imaging Using Terahertz Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Ali Niknejad, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Cancer is one of the leading causes of death, second only to heart disease.
Traditional cancer treatment (radiotherapy and chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and
targeted therapy) is in need of new and synergistic modalities to increase
survival, and tumor-treating fields (TTF) have been heralded as the "fourth
modality" in cancer treatment. To date tumor-treating fields has been applied
mostly to glioblastoma (FDA approved) and there is excitement to apply this
therapy to other cancers, as evidenced by multiple ongoing clinical trials. This
research will help to improve the understanding of the physical mechanisms by
which this treatment works, discovering synergies with key chemotherapeutic and
targeted molecular therapies, and optimizing it for each cancer cell type - and
potentially to each patient's own tissue. Using a custom integrated circuit, we
will develop sensors that can detect cells and image tissue using very high
frequency electromagnetic fields (100-300 GHz) which have been shown to be
effective at differentiating between tumor cells and healthy cells, and also
between actively dividing cells and non-dividing cells. This will be used as a
tool to detect the cell state during the application of tumor-treating fields to
the cell. The hope is to both understand the biological reasons for the efficacy
of tumor-treating fields and also to help optimize the voltage and frequency of
the tumor-treating fields. This research opens the door to a future implantable
device using the developed sensors that could in real time aid in the discovery
of efficacious treatments - conveying instantaneous cellular response to therapy
to allow real-time optimization of treatment for each patient - the ultimate
goal of personalized medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sensor platform
integrates arrays of terahertz sensors for tissue-scale sub-cellular imaging
into traditional Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) technology,
allowing miniaturization and integration with other functions including on-chip
signal processing and communication. Previous research has demonstrated that
tumor cells can be identified without using any special markers or labels by
measurement of the frequency dispersion of the dielectric constant. Most
measurement platforms to date either measure cells in bulk or can only measure a
single pixel at a time, and lack spatial resolution to measure sub-cellular
structures. A true imaging platform that can measure the dielectric constant
over a very small spatial resolution will be realized by leveraging the array-
based nature of CMOS technology for imaging larger tissue areas - thereby
permitting one to dynamically map the contents within a cell while using lower
frequency electromagnetic (EM) fields to actuate the cell. Using frequencies
over 100 GHz allows miniaturization of individual pixel elements, but this
requires innovation to improve the sensitivity of the sensors. By simultaneously
sensing the cells with high frequencies and activating the cells with low
frequencies (so called Tumor Treating Fields), one will have the ability to
actively manipulate and monitor cell division - key to cancer treatment. Tumor
Treating Fields (TTF) have been shown to disrupt normal cell mitosis by
interacting with strongly polarized molecules. Recently, TTF has been shown to
be effective in treatment of certain kinds of cancers, most notably glioblastoma
(GBM), a highly aggressive brain tumor. This is the first such advance in this
disease in decades, and is synergistic with select chemotherapies. The proposed
research investigates the ability to control, study and optimize EM fields on
single cells within the context of a more complex tissue microenvironment, which
is necessary to optimize TTF and select drug combinations but has heretofore
been unattainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.