* 1916894
* Lateral Flow Based Nanoelectronic Sensing Array for Detection of Chronic Cerebral Hypoperfusion Biomarkers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yuxin Liu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Ability to understand and diagnose disease has experienced considerable progress
over the past decades due to the advances in quantifications of molecular
biomarkers. Commonly used methods for quantifying protein markers in a clinical
setting are immunonephelometry or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Both
require a centralized lab to separate whole blood and to perform multiple strict
washing steps over several hours. Also, proper infrastructure and a higher
degree of training are required, and therefore expensive. This project aims to
develop an enabling technology by integrating highly sensitive nanoelectronic
immunoassay arrays and lateral flow devices for detecting protein biomarkers
with improved diagnostic modalities, capable of using minimal amounts of blood
and of returning rapid results. The results from this project can lead to the
development of a generic platform for detecting a broad range of molecular
biomarkers in assisting earlier disease diagnostics and assessment and
monitoring treatment outcome. The applied technologies built from low-cost
microfabrication and nanoelectronic detection would significantly reduce the
costs for healthcare delivery, and be especially beneficial for regions with
limited access to healthcare. Additionally, this project offers opportunities
for integrating students' educational experience across interdisciplinary areas,
stimulates students' interests in the fields of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics, encourages the participation of underrepresented
groups, develops curriculum with new resources, and boosts the biomedical
engineering program at West Virginia University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chronic
cerebral hypoperfusion has been considered a significant cause for vascular
dementia and Alzheimer's disease associated with reduced blood supply and
gradually damaged regions of the brain which are responsible for memory,
cognition, and behavior. It is vital to diagnose chronic cerebral hypoperfusion
as early as possible because the prompt institution of drugs for increasing
cerebral blood flow improves outcomes and delays the onset of advanced dementia.
The objective of the research is to develop an integrated multiplexed detection
immunoassay for rapid-detecting chronic cerebral hypoperfusion biomarkers. Three
research tasks have been proposed to accomplish the study. First, a
nanoelectronic immunoassay array will be developed, fabricated, and optimized.
The nanoelectronic immunoassay array will allow well regulation of matrix
effects of electrolytes and statistical validation of measured results. Second,
the nanoelectronic immunoassay array will be integrated with a lateral flow
device to realize a portable and capillary driven platform with minimizing the
need for off-chip equipment. The integrated device is capable of real-world
sample pretreatment, fluid transport, and single biomarker detection. Third,
multiplexed detection of biomarkers will be conducted and corroborated by a
clinically relevant chronic cerebral hypoperfusion model to determine the most
informative combinations of biomarkers. By accomplishing the proposed tasks, the
integrated device will allow generation of more meaningful and conclusive
information for clinical diagnosis. This project is jointly supported by the
Electronics, Photonics and Magnetic Devices (EPMD) Program of the Electrical,
Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) Division and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.