* 1916630
* Workshop: Advancing Inclusion and Diversity: San Diego, CA: April 17, 2019
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Susan Sterett, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 03/31/2020
* USD 4,400.00

This workshop will bring together scholars interested in issues related to
diversity and inclusion in the profession of political science. The goal of the
workshop will be to develop suggestions for best practices regarding inclusion
that would serve as models for departments and organizations. The workshop will
build on previous workshops on related topics to develop strategies for
improving practices concerning various problems of exclusion in the political
science profession, with a focus on advancement in the profession of people of
color and women. The project will thus contribute to developing mechanisms for
broadening participation by members of underrepresented groups in the academy.
The recommendations that arise from the workshop will be posted on the WPSA
website, which will serve to both signal commitment by the organization to
promoting inclusion and disseminate information for other institutions and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diversifying the profession of political
science has contributed to diversifying knowledge, and can contribute to better
including students from different backgrounds. This project is a complement to
extant efforts in the profession to promote diversity. Specifically, the
workshop will contain three parts. First, it will draw upon previous workshops
and documents from other disciplines to come up with prescriptions for best
practices for encouraging inclusion. Second, the workshop will incorporate
insights from a university's mediation office about appropriate resources for
conflict management. Third, the workshop will meet with the Latinx pre-
conference workshop to brainstorm ideas for dealing with diversity issues in the
workplace Overall, through these steps, the workshop will seek to address
managing rejection and hostility, and provide recommendations for
gatekeepers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.