* 1916205
* Collaborative Research: Sediment Transport Mechanisms and Geomorphic Processes Associated with Shore Ice along Cold Climate Coastlines
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Ethan Theuerkauf, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 09/30/2019
* USD 237,072.00

Cold climate coastlines are highly vulnerable to reduced winter ice cover in
response to climate change. Limited or variable shore ice cover results in
enhanced storm-induced coastal erosion and damage to coastal infrastructure. The
dynamics of how reduced ice cover influences coastal evolution is poorly
understood which inhibits accurate forecasting of future coastal response in
cold climates. This work aims to improve our fundamental understanding of how
sediment interacts with shore ice as well as the resulting coastal landscape
change. The first part of the project will involve laboratory experiments aimed
at studying the physics of sediment and ice interactions. The second part of the
project will gather field measurements that use the laboratory measurements as a
basis to investigate how cold climate coastlines naturally respond to the shore
ice. This study will result in a model that will help explain how reduced and
variable winter shore ice cover alters the coastal landscape, which will help
coastal managers proactively plan for future climate change impacts. The project
will train graduate and undergraduate students who will be recruited from groups
underrepresented in the STEM fields. Public educational resources will be
delivered to inner-city schools through partnership with Chicago Public Schools
and will be shared nationally through The Scientific Research and Education
Network (www.sciren.org), which is a science education non-profit founded by the
PI.

Accurate modeling of coastal evolution in cold climates is hindered by a limited
understanding of the processes and responses associated with winter shore ice.
This study will utilize unoccupied aerial and aquatic systems through a combined
field and laboratory approach to test the hypothesis that variable ice cover is
more erosive than consistent ice cover. This approach will yield the most
comprehensive understanding to date of the morphodynamics of nearshore ice.
Laboratory experiments in a frozen wave tank and ring shear apparatus will be
used to constrain the forces required to entrain sediment within ice as well as
the fundamental processes associated with transporting sediment-laden ice. Field
investigations will be used to validate laboratory experiments as well as to
describe the geomorphic processes and responses associated with shore ice. We
will isolate the primary conditions facilitating sediment transport and
shoreface geomorphic change during winter and resolve how the shoreface responds
to these processes, which will provide the basis for models to include coastal
evolution in cold temperature climates. The final result of this proposed study
will be a conceptual model and set of empirically derived equations generated
from the field and laboratory measurements that describe how shore ice drives
sediment transport. This knowledge will be shared with practitioners through
Great Lakes Coastal Zone Management Programs, local and regional stakeholder
groups, and federal agencies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.