* 1916137
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: Developmental genetics of host invasion initiated by fungal spores
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Townsend, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

Fungi interact with their environments and with human life in various ways.
Fungal adaptation to their environments has resulted in diverse fungal
lifestyles. Just within the fungal class Sordariomycetes, there are examples of
mutualistic symbionts living harmoniously with plants; pathogens that damage and
kill plants or mammals; fungi that decompose organic matter; fungi that attack
other fungi; zombie fungi that parasitize, manipulate, and kill insects. The
life history of each of these fungi begins with a simple spore called a
conidium. Conidia can be produced rapidly and in huge numbers, and provide the
primary means for dispersal to new hosts. This research program will examine
changes in gene expression among species during conidium germination and growth
on different hosts. This will reveal the evolved features that enable spore
germination and host colonization under different conditions to better
understand fungus ecology and evolution. The diversity of fungi also renders
them an exciting and tractable teaching platform; broader impacts include a
fungal ecology education project in which students at Celentano Biotechnology,
Health and Medical Magnet School 6th grade students collect, identify, and
isolate fungi commonly found on plants and insects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research will elucidate the genetic basis of sporulation and
evolution of fungal parasitism in Sordariomycetes. This class of fungi contain
members that have evolved the capability and specificity to attack plants,
insects, fish, mammals, and fungi via in situ spore germination. Seven
Sordariomycetes will be studied: two entomopathogens (Metarhizium anisopliae and
Cordyceps militaris), a plant pathogen (Fusarium graminearum), a plant endophyte
(Epichloe festucae), two mycoparasites (Tolypocladium ophioglossoides and
Trichoderma asperellum), and the saprotrophic model Neurospora crassa (with
endophytic capabilities). Asexual spores (conidia) of these fungi will be
germinated to initiate colonies in medium and on host plants. Comparative
genomics and transcriptomics will be performed on the resulting cultures. This
will provide insights into their shared genetic programming and into the evolved
basis of their divergent host preferences. Evolutionary ancestral expression
inference will be used to identify genes responsible for pathogenicity. This
approach will identify genes that have undergone recent shifts in gene
expression during spore germination-in particular, shifts that occurred along
the shared ancestral lineages where key traits (such as host specificity or
pathogenic morphogenesis) have evolved. Genes that are substantially
upregulated, downregulated, or conserved in level of expression during the
recent evolution of each of these seven species and their ancestors will be
determined. These genes will be genetically perturbed and the resulting
phenotypes will be investigated to determine their function in pathogenesis,
potentially leading to new technologies for the control of fungal infections in
diverse contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.