* 1916558
* Collaborative Research:  Novel framework for estimating continuously-varying diversification rates
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jeremy Beaulieu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 485,151.00

Determining the factors that have shaped the huge differences in the number of
species among groups of organisms, such as insects versus mammals, has long been
of interest to both biologists and paleontologists. Mathematical models for
understanding differences in species diversity use two quantities, the rate of
speciation (when one species becomes two) and the rate of extinction (when a
species disappears). These quantities are similar to those used in studying
human populations, the birth rate and death rate. Although paleontologists have
proposed explanations for differences in the numbers of species, biologists,
using mostly family trees of species based on the analysis of genetic data, have
largely concluded that speciation is more important than extinction in
explaining these patterns. The central theme of this research is that what
drives modern species diversity is not differences in speciation, but rather the
differences in "turnover rate," which is defined as the birth rate minus the
death rate. Turnover rate measures how often extinction and speciation events
happen over long periods of time. This research will expand existing
mathematical models for estimating species diversity to include new models that
use quantities, such as turnover rate, that are much more tied to biology. The
project will also provide a training workshop in these computational skills in
the southeastern U.S., an important and underrepresented part of the country in
STEM. This workshop will train students and other early career researchers to
become a computationally literate STEM workforce, which is important to the
economic well-being of the nation. The project will also provide professional
training opportunities for two postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Darwin's great insight was a rejection of
typological thinking in favor of recognizing the variation across life. Yet, in
diversification analyses, typological thinking is not just a convenient crutch
made for methodological convenience. Finding the points at which species shift
from one rate "type" instantly to another has received unjustified attention.
This research will move away from this typological thinking, towards more
biological realism by assuming that diversification rates continuously vary.
Central to this framework is a theme of rate "inheritance," where
diversification rates evolve and are inherited from ancestor to descendant, much
in the same way as a trait would evolve on a tree. Rather than focusing on
speciation and extinction, or even net diversification, this research will focus
biological interpretations on estimates of turnover and extinction fraction. The
overarching hypothesis is that extinction fraction is near but probably somewhat
less than one. In other words, speciation events slightly outnumber extinction
events over time. What drives diversification patterns, therefore, is not
speciation rate varying independent of extinction, or even extinction rate
varying, but rather the overall turnover rate. This research will develop a new
likelihood-based framework that evaluates a large family of diversification
models that more realistically treat rates as continuously varying on a tree and
focuses estimation on a new and more mechanistic
parameterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.