* 1916877
* Collaborative Research: Discontinuous shear thickening and shear jamming in dense suspensions: statistical mechanics and the microscopic basis for extreme transitions of properties
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2022
* USD 312,844.00

Materials formed from particles are often handled in the fluid state, such as
cement and concrete. These particle-laden fluids have complex flow properties,
and understanding the basis for this behavior is critical to design and control
of the particle interactions that are responsible for the properties. The
surface interactions are also the controlling factor in the behavior of liquid-
saturated soils. In the geotechnical context, controlling the interactions is
not feasible, but understanding and predicting behavior is especially important.
This project seeks to explain the behavior of flowing materials that exhibit
very strong property changes. The focus is on suspensions with a high
concentration of solid particles in a liquid. These materials often shear
thicken, meaning drastically increase their viscosity, such as in cornstarch
suspensions in water. This project will use simulation and theoretical methods
to examine how the particle forces and surface shape cause shear thickening.
Computer simulation models the forces of interaction between the particles and
solves for their motion. From the forces and the particle velocities, the flow
properties such as the viscosity can be determined, and these are validated
against experiments. A set of theoretical tools is applied to describe the
forces in the material and how they are connected in a network, much like the
connections in a fishnet. The overall goal of the project is to establish a
theoretical framework allowing prediction of the flow properties from a
knowledge of the basic forces, thus allowing better design in engineering
contexts and prediction in geophysical contexts. The team will work with
industrial partners in the cement and concrete sector to use the understanding
toward design of additives that modify flow behavior while retaining desired
properties in the flowing and solid material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using
discrete-particle simulation and statistical mechanical theory, the goal of this
project is to develop a statistical mechanical framework that describes the
basis for shear thickening and jamming in highly-concentrated suspensions of
solid particles in liquids. The contributions of this work will advance the
statistical mechanical framework for nonequilibrium suspensions, allowing better
ability to predict behavior at the macroscopic scale from a knowledge of the
particle interactions. A simulation tool in its established and validated form
will be used to explore the nonequilibrium steady states (NESS) ensemble of
shear-thickening suspensions under constraints on stress, shear rate, and volume
fraction. The ensemble data from simulation will be explored by several
theoretical tools, including network theory to establish a structure-property
framework appropriate for dense suspensions that approach the jamming condition.
A machine learning approach will be applied to advance methods previously
developed by the team for prediction of the probability of the stress state
based on the microscopic force interactions. Methods from large deviation theory
will be used as a framework for describing the fluctuations of properties in
NESS ensemble. The simulation method will also be advanced by systematically
considering the role of size distribution and particle surface complexity. In
addition to simple shear, oscillatory shearing and more complex flow protocols,
in which an orthogonal oscillatory component is superimposed on simple shear,
will be developed and the results explored by the noted theoretical tools. The
research will engage undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral researchers. The
team will prepare technical society short courses and engage in STEM outreach to
expose materials physics to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.