* 1916020
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative Research: Understanding and Mitigating the Privacy and Societal Risks of Advanced Advertising Targeting and Tracking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Alan Mislove, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 823,570.00

Advertising now funds most of the popular web sites and internet services:
companies often provide their services for free, in exchange for collecting data
from their users as they interact with the service. In recent years, the scale
and resolution of user data that platforms collect has led to a dramatic
increase in the variety of targeting, reporting, measurement, and tracking
mechanisms that platforms offer to advertisers. Unfortunately, our understanding
of the privacy and societal risks of these mechanisms has not kept pace with
this increase, raising scientific questions about how much advertisers can learn
about platform users through these mechanisms, as well as about their potential
for acting in a biased or discriminatory way. Because on the Internet can sign
up to be an advertiser on all of these platforms -- granting access to these
mechanisms and data at very low cost -- makes understanding their implications a
critical need. The goal of this project is to improve privacy for all users, and
raise awareness among users and regulators of the extensive -- and often hidden
-- advertising ecosystem that underlies today's popular services, and the
privacy and societal risks it poses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
following a three-pronged research agenda. The first set of research tasks
centers on enhancing privacy, addressing the problem of revealing advertising
statistics while providing strong guarantees of user privacy based on methods
from the field of differential privacy. The second set of research tasks focuses
on detecting and preventing discrimination, addressing the multitude of ways in
which the advertising platforms' features could inadvertently or intentionally
discriminate against different groups through the choice of which ads to display
to which users. The third set of research tasks addresses issues of transparency
and control, studying whether current transparency practices are comprehensive
and truthful from both users' and regulators' perspectives, and whether the
provided control features have the expected effects on ad delivery and align
with people's expectations of privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.