* 1916142
* EPCN: Enhancing the Modeling, Simulation, and Visualization of Large-Scale Electric Grids Utilizing Detailed Synthetic Power Grids and Data Sets
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Komal Shetye, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 04/30/2022
* USD 548,759.00

The high voltage electric grid plays a critical role in the day-to-day
functioning and welfare of society, while supporting other major infrastructure
as well. Tremendous research and development efforts are needed for improved
grid design and operations to ensure reliability in the face of ever-changing
load and generation characteristics, natural disasters, and evolving electricity
markets. Electric grid research is heavily dependent upon access to high
fidelity electric grid models and datasets. However, much of the crucial
information about the design and operation of actual electric grids is
considered confidential, and hence not publically available and often not even
available to researchers in the field. The proposed project aims to meet this
need by developing and applying high quality, synthetic electric grid models and
datasets that represent the complexities of actual electric grids, but contain
no information about real grids and hence can be made publicly available. The
project results should be helpful to researchers and educators in the electric
power area, and also to industry practitioners in training new engineers to
solve problems facing the grid. Another important aspect of this project is the
results will be made publicly available for the benefit of the many different
groups of people interested in learning more about the electric grid including
researchers and educations in a wide variety of different fields that depend
upon the electric grid, and the public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to advance research and development in many domains by providing
modeling and computational analytics associated with simulations of large-scale
synthetic electric grids. The modern power grid is continuously generating large
volumes of data, such as from phasor measurement units (PMUs). With the right
analytics and measurements, it is possible to monitor system health, detect
disturbances, and predict events such as outages. The project has four main
parts. First, to build on the network creation methodology with detailed
modeling to allow for extended time dynamic simulations and generating realistic
synthetic data. The detailed modeling will include sub-transmission networks,
protection system elements, cyber infrastructure, and enhanced dynamics of
system elements. Second, to leverage the synthetic grids from the first task to
develop improved algorithms and models for a real-time simulation. Several new
computational enhancements will be needed at this stage, with a goal being to
innovate through adventurous, potentially transformative techniques that greatly
extend conventional power system dynamic simulation. Third, to create synthetic
and hence public data sets that reflect the complexity, and often errors, that
would be obtained from actual devices such as from PMUs. Last, to take the
outcomes of the first three parts and develop interactive, multi-user simulation
scenarios. There will be a major education and research component to this.
Improved visualization of the system parameters and results will also be
explored to help with improved decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.