* 1916395
* Collaborative Research: High-Dimensional Spatial-Temporal Modeling and Inference for Large Multi-Source Environmental Monitoring Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andrew Finley, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 80,000.00

Remote sensing technologies and Geographic Information Systems continue to bring
about dramatic developments in scientific discovery. Scientists in a variety of
disciplines today have unprecedented access to massive spatial and temporal
databases comprising high resolution remote sensed measurements. Statistical
modeling and analysis for such data often entail reckoning with spatial
associations and variations at multiple levels while attempting to recognize
underlying patterns and potentially complex relationships among the scientific
variables. Traditional statistical hypothesis testing is no longer adequate for
these inferential objectives and statisticians are increasingly turning to
multi-level or hierarchical modeling structures for analyzing complex spatial-
temporal data. However, there continue to remain substantial computational
bottlenecks as scientists encounter the data deluge in remote-sensed data that
demand specialized "BIG DATA" technologies. The PIs will address these problems
by developing probabilistic machine learning tools for spatial-temporal BIG DATA
within the context of scientific advancements in forest structure, topography,
and weather-related events (e.g., storms) that can have far-reaching public
health, economic, environmental, and security implications. Several innovations
in statistical and computational methods and related software development are
envisioned. The proposed data products will offer quantification of forest
damage/change and landslide risk assessment for Puerto Rico following hurricanes
Irma and Maria. Key educational components include dissemination of proposed
technologies across the scientific communities including data scientists,
engineers, foresters, ecologists, and climate scientists. The PIs plan to train
the next generation of data scientists through dissemination efforts for
undergraduate and graduate students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs will develop a statistical framework for executing elaborate case studies
and data analysis on high-dimensional remotely sensed data, where "high
dimension" alludes to one or all of a massive number of (i) spatial locations;
(ii) time points; and (iii) responses or outcomes. The PIs will introduce
massively scalable multivariate spatial process models within a rich Bayesian
hierarchical framework to obtain fully model-based inference for the underlying
data generating process. Innovative statistical methodologies are proposed to
implement hierarchical models at scales involving tens of millions of spatial
locations, thousands of time points and possibly hundreds of remote-sensed
variables. The massive scalability of these models will be achieved through
sparsity-inducing spatial-temporal processes and other graphical models, matrix-
variate low-rank models, conjugate Bayesian distribution theory, and meta-
learning paradigms using approximations of a collection of posterior
distributions. Theoretical results that enhance current methods will be explored
as will be several proposed case studies at hitherto unprecedented scales. The
PIs will develop a full suite of spatial models in a wide variety of experiments
involving massive data sets. Since massive data sets are where complex
relationships can be detected effectively, the proposed methods are well-suited
for modeling complex scientific phenomena. Key substantive inference and
statistical quantification will be offered for forest damage/change and
landslide risk assessment for Puerto Rico following hurricanes Irma and Maria.
The PIs will provide probability-based uncertainty quantification and will
substantially enhance the scientific community's understanding of storm-related
damage assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.