* 1916553
* Marine CSEM study of the southern Hikurangi Margin:  A first step towards estimating the global gas hydrate carbon budget
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Steven Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 824,516.00

Gas hydrate is a solid ice-like mixture of water and gas, usually methane, that
forms in seafloor sediments when pressure is high enough and temperature is cold
enough. Such conditions are found in water depths greater than about 500 m, and
gas hydrate is found on continental slopes world-wide wherever there is methane
produced from the decay of organic matter or leaking from hydrocarbon systems.
Vast amounts of carbon have accumulated this way, but estimates of the total
quantity vary by several orders of magnitude, mainly because of limitations in
using seismic methods to assess hydrate concentration, especially at lower
concentrations. This gap in knowledge is a problem, because hydrate can have a
big impact on human activity and well-being. Changes in sea level or temperature
can cause hydrate to decompose, possibly contributing to seafloor landslides
that can trigger tsunamis. Loss of sediment stability from hydrate decomposition
can damage man-made seafloor infrastructure. Methane leaking from the seafloor
is used as energy by some biological systems, but if too much escapes it can add
to acidification and impact the health of the oceans. This project will begin to
plug the gaps in knowledge about offshore hydrate by using a novel non-seismic
geophysical method to image hydrate under hundreds of square kilometers of
seafloor off the southern margin of New Zealand's North Island, where abundant
seismic data have been collected and hydrate is inferred to exist in both low
and high concentrations over broad regions. The project supports the training of
an early career scientist.

The electrical resistivity of methane hydrate is four orders of magnitude
greater than seafloor sediment, and sediment resistivity varies smoothly and
monotonically with hydrate saturation. We have developed a deep-towed controlled
source electromagnetic (CSEM) system to image seafloor resistivity and have
validated its use for quantifying seafloor hydrate concentrations off
California, Japan, and the Gulf of Mexico. Typically CSEM studies target known
methane seeps and hydrate deposits, but in this project data will be collected
on a basin-scale to capture the broad distribution, using the Hikurangi
subduction zone as a model to develop an understanding of the global hydrate
inventory by extrapolation to subduction zones worldwide. By combining existing
seismic data with the new CSEM data, through a collaboration with colleagues in
New Zealand, the processes that concentrate hydrate will be examined, how much
hydrate sits at the upper edge of the stability field (and thus vulnerable to
dissociation) will be assessed, the relationships between free gas and gas
hydrate (both resistive but easily distinguished in seismic data) will be
studied, and the background levels of hydrate and the total hydrate inventory of
the Pegasus Basin will be estimated.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.