* 1916663
* Collaborative Research: An in vivo/in silico Approach to Delineate the Effect of Age on Pressure Ulcer Susceptibility
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Manuel Rausch, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2023
* USD 320,447.00

Pressure ulcers, or bed sores, are a debilitating condition that affects more
than 3 million Americans. Today, it is understood that pressure ulcers follow
from continued compression of skin in patients that have lost the ability to
reposition themselves and relieve that pressure. For example, patients in wheel
chairs or patients that have become bedridden frequently suffer from pressure
ulcers. Patients of advanced age are particularly prone to pressure ulcers.
While we understand the behavioral factors that may, in part, explain this
increased incidence, the age-related anatomical and physiological factors that
may contribute to increased risk in patients of advanced age have remained
mostly unexplored and unknown. This knowledge is important, as it may provide a
pathway to age-specific treatment strategies. This project will use a mouse
model of pressure ulcer formation and progression to investigate these age-
related anatomical and physiological factors and their contribution to the
increased risk of pressure ulcers due to age. Furthermore, the research will
integrate these results into a comprehensive computational model that will be a
first step toward predicting pressure ulcers. With such a model it will be
possible to not only design better support systems -- such as wheelchairs,
mattresses, and prostheses -- but also to explore novel diagnostic technologies
and therapeutic strategies. This project will integrate a diverse group of
undergraduate students into the research, using peer mentoring approaches.
Finally, and most importantly, in order to accelerate the transfer of knowledge
from this study to the general public, educational podcasts on pressure ulcers
will be designed that will be disseminated by integrating them into successful,
long-running podcast series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
research is to quantify the effect of age on non-behavioral factors of pressure
ulcer formation using mice as a biological model system in combination with a
novel multi-scale, multi-physics computer model. This goal is supported by two
objectives. The first will determine the non-behavior factors that increase the
risk of pressure ulcer initiation in the elderly. Using young and old mice, the
role of skin compliance in the microvascular collapse and ischemia that occurs
prior to pressure ulcer will be investigated. The second objective is to
determine the non-behavioral factors that increase the risk of pressure ulcer
progression by looking at three contributory factors: ischemic injury,
reperfusion injury, and mechanical injury. For both objectives, the experimental
data will be integrated into a multi-scale, multi-physics model that will then
be able to link matrix-cell and cell-cell signalling to pressure ulcer
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.