* 1916518
* BD Hubs: Collaborative Proposal: Midwest: Midwest Big Data Hub: Building Communities to Harness the Data Revolution
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Inna Kouper, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Plato Smith
* 05/31/2024
* USD 339,997.00

This project builds on a prior Midwest Big Data Hub effort. In 2015 stakeholders
in the Midwest region of the United States formed a consortium of partners and
working groups called the Midwest Big Data Hub (MBDH). MBDH aimed to help member
organizations working in Big Data coordinate current activities and launch new
collaborative projects. The project included stakeholders in the twelve states
of the Midwest Census region (Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan,
Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin)
and six leading universities that support hundreds of researchers,
technologists, and students. This hub provides a basis for collaboration and
outreach that increases the potential for benefitting society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current award is a collaboration among five academic
sites (Indiana University, Iowa State University, UIUC/NCSA, the University of
Michigan, the University of North Dakota, and the University of Minnesota - Twin
Cities). The project focuses on priority areas that are important to the region
and can also be influential on the national stage. &lt;br/&gt; - The five
thematic areas of focus, and the institutional partner leading that thematic
area, are: Digital Agriculture (led by Iowa State); Smart, Connected, and
Resilient Communities (Indiana University); Water Quality (University of
Minnesota); Advanced Materials and Manufacturing (UIUC); and Health and
Biomedicine (University of Michigan). &lt;br/&gt; - Three cross-cutting areas
that are emphasized across the project are: data science education and workforce
development; cyberinfrastructure, data access and use; and communication and
community development.&lt;br/&gt;The priority areas have regional relevance and
also have the prospect for integration into societal contexts at the national
level. The overall goal is to enable the use of existing and emerging
cyberinfrastructure and best practices to improve access to and use of data. The
project plans to reach out to the Midwest community at large and to connect
people, resources, and organizations. Ties to Big Data Hubs in three other
regions provide a means to advance knowledge across these fields at the national
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.