* 1916003
* 2nd International Workshop on the Frontiers of Nanomechanical Systems (FNS/2019)
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 01/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

The Second International Workshop on the Frontiers of Nanomechanical Systems
(FNS/2019) will be held in Palm Springs, California, 10 to 14 February 2019.
This workshop will serve to bring together the international research community
engaged in studying nanomechanical systems and is intended to promote exchange
of ideas, approaches, and techniques. This should advance collaborative, cross-
disciplinary research on nanomechanics and further accelerate the progress in
the field, both in terms of fundamental studies and applications. Graduate
students and research associates are especially welcome at the conference. To
attract them, information about the conference was broadly disseminated, and
colleagues were asked to encourage their students and postdocs to attend. There
are already 32 graduate students participating in the workshop, which is roughly
one-third of the entire participant cohort. The participants are limited to 110
scientists to ensure lively interaction and full participation throughout. The
remaining two-thirds of the participants are roughly divided equally between
postdocs and senior scientists (either professorial faculty, or professional
scientific researchers). The scholarships expected from this grant are intended
to be provided to prospective students and postdocs. This should significantly
increase and enhance the participation of students and postdocs at the workshop.
Steps have been taken to encourage members of the underrepresented groups to
attend as well. A measure of success of this effort is that, along with female
invited speakers, a female graduate student has been chosen to give an oral
contributed talk, which is an exceptional opportunity for a student given the
level of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop FNS/2019 comes from
the challenges that are posed by nanomechanical systems. They include, but are
not limited to, (i) the occurrence of comparatively strong quantum and classical
fluctuations and (ii) the vibration nonlinearity. Along with the invariably
present thermal fluctuations, NEMS are subject to nonequilibrium fluctuations.
Characterizing and understanding these fluctuations, as well as revealing their
consequences is complicated and requires developing new techniques. At the same
time, because of the small system size, vibrations with even comparatively small
amplitudes become nonlinear, with the nonlinearity often coming into play
already for thermal fluctuations. Addressing these challenges requires concerted
international effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.