* 1916645
* Phase I IUCRC at Indiana University:  Center for Bioanalytic Metrology
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Paul Bohn, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 615,359.00

The Center for Bioanalytic Metrology (CBM), a partnership between the University
of Notre Dame, Indiana University, and Purdue University, advances U.S.
competitiveness by working with industry to solve current, emerging, and
industry-relevant challenges in measurement science and technology. The center
has two over-arching objectives: (1) deliver best-in-class molecular measurement
tools and expertise that enable the development of powerful new pre-competitive
technologies and capabilities across the pharmaceutical, biotechnology,
food/nutrition/agriculture, energy and analytical instrumentation sectors; and
(2) serve as a proving ground for applications of new instrumentation to
cutting-edge chemical and biochemical problems. Measurement science, and
associated instrumentation, is a key contributor to the U.S. economy, enabling
advances in everything from drug discovery to materials manufacturing. By
bringing together companies in these high-technology sectors with major
analytical instrument makers, the CBM bridges the gap between the initial
demonstration of new ideas generated through collaboration between academia and
industry and the delivery of practical pre-competitive knowledge that can drive
technology development. Just as important, the CBM provides U.S. industry with
compelling opportunities to invigorate human resources through access to a
diversity of center-trained students and opportunities for continuing education
of existing staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CBM is devoted to tackling important
measurement science challenges, broadly defined. Some of our members are
primarily interested in bioanalytical measurement science, others in problems
relating to small molecule pharmaceuticals or agrochemicals, while still others
are primarily interested in the analysis of foods, petrochemicals, or materials.
The CBM serves these members with research solutions in: (a) ultrahigh
sensitivity assays for trace-level biomarkers and impurities; (b) discrimination
between large biomolecules and their multi-molecule complexes; (c) reduced
volume/materials analysis and experimentation at high throughput and
productivity; (d) analysis of rare/extremely dilute cells/molecules/exosomes,
etc.; (e) massively parallel approaches to chemical cytometry, genetic
profiling, and panel screening; (f) online and near-line in situ measurements;
(g) point-of-use analysis, companion diagnostics, and inexpensive testing in the
field; (h) AI-driven instrumentation, feedback optimization, and driverless
instruments; and (i) enhanced imaging of cells, organisms, and chemical
processes. Indiana University contributes distinct expertise in micro/nanoscale
analytical separations and measurement, mass spectrometry and/or ion mobility
analysis of gas phase ions, computational analysis of multidimensional data,
genomics, proteomics, combinatorial molecular biology for new catalysts and
reactions, two-dimensional spectroscopic characterization of biomolecules,
electrochemical analysis and imaging, and design and construction of
instrumentation and electronics to enable new methods of chemical
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.