* 1916050
* The AGEP California State University Underrepresented Minority STEM Faculty Alliance Model: A Culturally-Informed Strengths-Based Approach to Advance Early-Career Faculty Success
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Monica Palomo, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 287,929.00

This collaborative research project brings together four California State
Universities (CSU), California Polytechnic State University-San Luis Obispo,
California State Polytechnic University-Pomona, CSU-Dominguez Hills, and CSU-
Fresno, with the goal of developing, implementing, studying, evaluating,
disseminating and scaling an AGEP Alliance Model. The project employs a
culturally-informed, strengths-based faculty development approach for advancing
newly hired historically underrepresented minority (URM) faculty in STEM and
STEM Education research fields. The early-career faculty interventions include
trainings about culturally-informed strengths and identity, senior faculty
mentoring, peer coaching and networking, and grant proposal writing trainings.
The primary outcomes of this AGEP Alliance Model project are improved faculty
retention, promotion and tenure for the URM early-career faculty in STEM at CSU
campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California Minority STEM Faculty AGEP
Alliance Model was created in response to the NSF's Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program solicitation (NSF 16-552). The
AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the
professoriate and success of URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
faculty in specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP
Alliances develop, replicate or reproduce, implement, and study, via integrated
educational and social science research, AGEP Alliance Models to transform the
dissertation phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty
advancement, and transitions within and across the pathway levels, of URMs in
STEM and/or STEM Education research careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation
addresses a STEM achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and
graduate students, our universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and
promote URM STEM faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM
students to learn from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that
URM STEM associate and full professors occupy only 8% of these senior faculty
positions at all 4-year colleges and universities, and only about 6% of these
positions at the nation's most research-intensive institutions. The California
Minority STEM Faculty AGEP Alliance has the potential to advance a model to
improve the success of URM early-career STEM, and STEM Education, faculty.
Advancing the careers of these minority faculty ultimately leads to improved
academic mentorship for URM undergraduate students in STEM and STEM Education
research fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated social science research
being conducted by this Alliance examines how URM STEM faculty integrate their
academic discipline, social and cultural identities, and their strengths, into
their faculty identities. The research also addresses questions about how STEM
faculty professional networks relate to sense of belonging, job satisfaction,
academic self-efficacy, teaching evaluations, success and engagement; and it
explores questions about what structural variables of the professional networks
relate to faculty success and engagement within the networks. The project uses
social network analysis methods in a mixed methods study
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.