* 1916581
* Controlling Thermoelectric Properties of Complex Oxide Ceramics by Integrated Design of Grain Boundaries and Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Xueyan Song, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 639,784.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Thermoelectric devices possess the ability to
directly transform temperature gradients into electrical power and generate
electricity from waste heat for various industry, automobile and space
applications. Thermoelectric technology could be more efficient in most
applications if the high-performance thermoelectric materials were made of non-
toxic and earth-abundant elements. The emerging layered cobalt oxide materials
are promising candidates for thermoelectric applications due to their thermal
stability, natural abundance, lightweight, and non-toxicity. The energy
conversion efficiency, for calcium cobaltite, in single crystal form shows
excellent performance that approaches the well-developed conventional
thermoelectric materials. However, the performance of polycrystalline ceramics
remains low and only ~30-60 % of that found for the single crystals. The
objective of this project is to modify polycrystalline calcium cobaltite through
designing the interfaces between crystalline grains, aiming to significantly
improve their thermoelectric performance even over the single crystals. Besides
the direct impact on the development of thermoelectric oxide, the essential
understanding of crystal interface engineering gained from this research will be
instrumental to many other ceramic systems. This project provides the training
to young scientists and graduate students in many disciplines, especially the
newly launched Materials Science and Engineering program at West Virginia
University. Integration of research and education activities in cutting-edge
research in functional ceramics and energy harvesting are further strengthened
through the involvement of undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
including women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: High-performance
thermoelectric materials need to have high electrical conductivity, high Seebeck
coefficient, and low thermal conductivity. The low energy conversion efficiency
of polycrystalline calcium cobaltite with incommensurate character is caused by
the low electrical conductivity and low Seebeck coefficient. In this project,
polycrystalline calcium cobaltite crystal texture and grain boundary density are
both controlled by intragranular doping and especially the appropriate dopant
segregation or depletion at the grain boundaries. While dopants segregating at
the grain boundaries promote crystal texture and facilitate large carrier
mobility and high electrical conductivity, the dopants segregation acts as
carrier filter to decrease the carrier concentration and simultaneously increase
the Seebeck coefficient. Furthermore, this project aims to reduce the thermal
conductivity of ceramics by interface scattering through the insertion of the
approximate secondary phases. The effect of grain boundaries on the mechanical
properties has been extensively investigated in many materials. However, the
understanding of the impact of grain boundaries on both the electrical and
thermal transport properties of most thermoelectric materials is currently very
limited. Successful completion of this project is expected to elucidate the
underlying atomic structure origin and thermodynamic mechanisms that drive the
formation of the crystal boundaries with dopant segregation or depletion, to
understand the carrier transport and scattering along the designed
boundaries/interfaces, and to ultimately utilize such knowledge to tune the
physical properties of electroceramics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.