* 1917340
* Molecular Design and Analysis of Flow Battery Electrolytes based on Redox Deep Eutectic Solvents
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stuart Adler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 485,931.00

Redox flow batteries (RFBs) are large-scale, high capacity energy storage
systems. RFBs work by flowing liquids through cells to insert (i.e. charging) or
to extract energy (i.e. discharging) from the system and then storing the
liquids in large reservoirs. These types of large-scale batteries enable the use
of renewable energy technologies, such as solar and wind power, that may not
always generate peak energy output coincident with demand. Significant
improvements in energy storage capacity, power output and material costs are
still needed to enable wide-scale deployment of RFB technology. This research
project will utilize advanced electrochemical tools, robotics and computational
methods to rapidly accelerate progress in developing the next generation of
liquids as RFB energy storage materials. Students involved in the project will
interface with another NSF-funded project on data science, which will allow them
to take specialized courses in data science and machine learning that are
focused on energy applications. This project also will engage students at all
levels in research activities and help to train future engineers and scientists
to tackle future problems in energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program
will use high-throughput electrochemical, spectroscopic and physicochemical
techniques along with data-enabled discovery and bench-top RFB performance
evaluation to discover new electrolyte materials with improved energy storage
capacity. Specifically, the work focuses on redox-active deep eutectic solvents
(RDES) produced from novel combinations of organic redox active molecules,
hydrogen bond donors, and organic salts. Because of their organic nature, RDES
electrolytes can be produced from abundant and inexpensive raw materials (e.g.
dyes) while at the same time increasing the maximum attainable cell potentials.
High-throughput analytical tools will be used to efficiently sample relevant
properties over a large molecular design space and converge on viable RDES
formulations. Experimental data sets will then be analyzed through the
application of advanced data science algorithms to identify the chemical and
formulation parameters that most effectively correlate to properties and to
optimize electrolyte formulations. Lastly, lab-scale RFB tests will evaluate
performance metrics to determine the viability of these RDES electrolytes in
large-scale energy storage applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.