* 1917536
* Anticipating rates of deglaciation in Alaska: Controls on the mass loss and morphology of the debris covered terminus of Kennicott Glacier, Wrangell - St. Elias National Park
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mark Fahnestock, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 479,008.00

Landscapes in glacial environments change rapidly due to shrinking glaciers.
Many glaciers in Alaska are covered by a layer of rocks and sediment, but there
are very few direct measurements of how these debris-covered glaciers decay and
affect glacier decline. The debris cover is expected to suppress glacier
melting, but studies in the Himalayas have shown that many heavily debris-
covered glacier tongues thin and decay just as fast as similar debris-free
glaciers. The underlying mechanisms for this more rapid than expected glacier
change are not well understood. Very limited observations exist in Alaska, where
many glaciers are heavily debris-covered. A better understanding of these
glaciers is necessary to develop better models predicting how they will melt and
affect landscapes in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to investigate the role of debris cover in modulating glacier surface
and glacier mass change on the declining Kennicott Glacier in Alaska. The
researchers will characterize the debris cover and observe the pattern and rate
of dynamic change of the debris-covered lower reaches of Kennicott Glacier using
field observations and remote sensing, to quantify the effect of debris cover on
the annual mass change of the entire glacier. They will collect field data
including meteorological and mass balance observations to constrain modeling on
both detailed and larger spatial scales. The goal is to develop a model that can
parameterize both melt suppression under thick debris and melt enhancement
across ice cliffs, making it suitable for application on a regional scale. The
project will provide training for several students, and field study examples for
an international class of glaciology graduate students attending a successful
summer school at this site. It also allows the work to be used by several local
educational programs outside glaciology. What is learned about changing glaciers
at this site will be available to visitors of Wrangell-Saint Elias National
Park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.