* 1917747
* Understanding and Prevention of Carbon Membrane Physical Aging
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Balkus, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2023
* USD 396,286.00

Complex and energy-intensive technologies are required to separate the molecular
components of gas in commercial, energy, or environmental applications.
Replacing these technologies with membranes, a sort of molecular filter, could
significantly simplify gas separations by reducing energy consumption and
operating costs. Carbon membranes, obtained from the carbonization of polymer
precursors at high temperatures, have demonstrated exceptional separation
properties. However, the performance of carbon membranes declines over time
because the material is subject to physical aging, wherein the pores in the
membrane collapse. The goal of this research project is to understand the
underlying mechanisms of physical aging in carbon membranes in order to
implement appropriate methods of stabilization. Two distinct methods will be
examined. The first involves increasing the rigidity of the pore structure in
the carbon membrane. The second method embeds small metal pillars to prop open
the pores of the carbon membrane preventing collapse. This project provides
effective strategies to understand and minimize aging in carbon membranes,
addressing a long-standing challenge. Robust carbon membranes can be immediately
deployed in gas separation processes with minimal modifications, benefiting
society through reduced environmental impact, lower energy consumption, and
reduced energy production costs. Students at the high school, undergraduate, and
graduate levels, including women and students from underrepresented groups, will
be engaged in the research project, contributing to the advancement of science.
This research is expected to have a positive impact on the education of students
and the engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gas separations such as
carbon dioxide/methane, oxygen/nitrogen, or methane/nitrogen could significantly
benefit from the implementation of aging-resistant membranes. Carbon membranes
have the desired properties of high selectivity, high permeability, chemical
resistance, and thermal stability to perform these separations under industrial
conditions over other types of membrane materials. One major concern for carbon
membranes is their tendency to age over time. Before the potential of carbon
membranes for gas separations can be fully realized, a fundamental understanding
of the aging process is required. The governing hypothesis of the project is
that physical aging is driven by two factors that can be predicted by the
intensity ratio of the disordered and graphitic bands from Raman spectroscopy.
The first derives from non-covalent pi-pi interactions in large graphitic
domains (intensity ratio &lt;0.7), which provide a thermodynamically-driven
force to restack, leading to pore collapse. The second originates from the
carbonization of high free volume polymer precursors, which yields smaller
graphitic domains (intensity ratio &gt;0.7) with a higher density of sp3
carbons. The open structures of these carbons are not fully connected and
collapse over time. The degree and mechanism of aging can be matched with the
proposed methods of stabilization, that is crosslinking for highly graphitic
carbons or pillaring for high free volume carbons. Thermal crosslinking of the
polymer precursor will be utilized to rigidify the subsequent carbon membrane,
thereby reducing physical aging. Pillaring will be accomplished by evenly
dispersing metal-organic polyhedras (MOPs) into the polymer matrix. Upon
pyrolysis, the MOPs produce metal nanoparticles between the graphitic layers of
the carbon membranes, stabilizing the pore structure. Success of this project
will eliminate a major barrier currently preventing the utilization of carbon
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.