* 1917168
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Future Underground Landscape - Learning from Large Excavations in a Complex Urban Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Anne Lemnitzer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 393,590.00

In megacities such as Los Angeles, San Francisco, and New York, urban sprawl is
no longer a viable or desirable option, so demand for underground space - a non-
renewable resource - continues to increase. A challenge in many urban areas is
in constructing and developing below surface space while limiting impacts to
existing surface and subsurface development in heavily-built environments and
varying soil conditions. New and improved engineering tools are needed to meet
ever more stringent design goals. Despite their capabilities, the reliability of
our available predictive models is limited by the sparse data from construction
projects. Major expansions of the Los Angeles Metro system approved by Los
Angeles voters as part of Measure R and Measure M provide a unique opportunity
to collect and utilize data needed to improve our understanding of excavation
performance. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
collaborative research project brings together personnel from academia, public
agencies and private industry to leverage over-$11-billion-dollar public
investments in large scale excavations to improve the understanding of the
influence of ground conditions and construction processes on excavations. This
project will provide tools and techniques, including modeling, data sharing, and
investigation methods, to enhance the cost-effectiveness of urban underground
construction. The successful completion of this project and the acquired
knowledge provide valuable information that can be applied to large upcoming
underground infrastructure investments throughout the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The targeted excavations, completed or under
construction, are geographically distributed and variable in size and settings,
and provide ideal testbeds for research activities aimed at learning from the
observed excavation performance. We will access 13 large excavations in the LA
Metro system and more importantly, deploy advanced and emerging technologies to
acquire and curate unique time sensitive and perishable data on excavation and
soil response beyond what is currently available in our empirical databases and
numerical models. A novel framework for data sharing, storage and authentication
based on the rapidly evolving block chain technology will be developed for the
first time for geotechnical and construction use. The project will significantly
advance state-of-the-art excavation modeling, through tools that employ
conventional and deep learning-based soil modeling techniques and three-
dimensional city block scale models, as well as the development of empirical
models with application to urban excavations nationally and globally. In
addition, this project will engage undergraduate students, with a special focus
on low-income, first-generation college students from CSULB, to work with
graduate research assistants from UCI and UIUC. There are currently very few
students graduating from US higher education programs with training in
underground construction. Students working on this project will gain invaluable
real-world experience on a major construction project, and will interact with
both researchers and consultants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.