* 1917506
* The Fifth Conference on Computational and Mathematical Population Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Maia Martcheva, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This conference award provides partial support for US-based participants to the
Fifth Conference on Computational and Mathematical Population Dynamics, to be
held in Ft. Lauderdale, FL during May 19 - May 24, 2019. Mathematical population
dynamics was historically the first subfield of Mathematical Biology to be
developed. It continues to grow and expand its influence of understanding nature
on multiple scales, from molecules to ecosystems. Mathematical population
dynamics is a driving force of innovation with applications in many disciplines:
immunology, epidemiology, ecology, and a number of medical sciences (e.g.
cancer, microbiology, and others). This international conference will bring
together senior, mid-career, and junior researchers for a week of intense
exchange of ideas and networking. The conference will contribute to the training
of young researchers in presentation and communication skills, as well as to
initiate new collaborations and state-of-the art new research directions.

The Fifth Conference on Computational and Mathematical Population Dynamics
(CMPD5) is the fifth joint meeting of the Conference on Mathematical Population
Dynamics and the Conference on Deterministic and Stochastic Models for
Biological Interactions, with a history of more than 30 years worth of
international meetings. The goal of this international conference is to bring
together leading researchers to communicate about their current work on
computational and mathematical population dynamics. As the first conference of
this sequence to be organized in the United States, the conference will provide
a unique opportunity for U.S.- based graduate students, postdoctoral fellows,
and junior faculty to interact with leading researchers in the area of
mathematical and computational population dynamics. The funding provided by NSF
will be used to support US-based participants, including minorities and women,
and will provide young scientists and under-represented groups exposure to
current research topics and techniques in the interdisciplinary area of
computational and mathematical population dynamics. The work at the conference
will focus in two main directions: developing the mathematical techniques,
including some novel techniques of machine learning, capable of tackling big
data problems, and developing the applications of the new and existing
techniques to address pressing societal issues, such as health problems,
pollution, invasion of species and control, emergence and reemergence of
infectious diseases, and surging of existing diseases. More information about
this conference can be found at http://www.math.fau.edu/cmpd5/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.