* 1917693
* Collaborative Research: Observing and Understanding Planetary Boundary Layer (PBL) Heterogeneities and Their Impacts on Tornadic Storms during VORTEX-SE 2018 Field Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Zhien Wang, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 325,810.00

High-impact weather phenomena such as high winds, hail, and heavy rainfall have
huge socio-economic impacts. However, forecast for severe high-impact weather
events, especially tornadoes, remains challenging. Historically, tornado
research has been concentrated in the Great Plains while the Southeastern U.S.
commonly experiences devastating tornadoes as well. Significant differences in
environmental conditions over the two regions and frequent occurrence of
tornadoes at night in the Southeast (SE) pose challenges to observing and
understanding the formation and development of tornadoes in the SE. The
Verification of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment - Southeast
(VORTEX-SE) is a research program designed to understand how environments in the
SE affect the formation, intensity, structure, and path of tornadoes in this
region. During the VORTEX-SE field campaign in 2018, unprecedented advanced
measurements from an airplane flying around tornadoes have been collected. Such
observations cannot be done easily on the ground with hilly forest terrain. The
study will utilize the unique observations and advanced computer models to
understand airflow structures of tornadic storms and special environments for
their formation. New knowledge gained from the research will contribute to
improvement of tornado forecasting across the U.S. This project will provide
support and training to graduate students in atmospheric measurement
technologies, data analysis, and computer modeling and prepare them to become
future scientists in severe weather research and
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct observational
data analysis and advanced data assimilation that integrate observations and
atmospheric prediction models. The unprecedented observation includes an
advanced downward-pointing Compact Raman Lidar (CRL), a horizontally scanning
lower fuselage (LF) radar, and dual Tail Doppler Radars (TDRs) onboard of a NOAA
P-3 aircraft. The CRL is capable of measuring high-spatial and temporal
resolution of water vapor, temperature, and aerosol profiles in the atmospheric
boundary layer upstream of moving storms. Together with the P-3's in-situ
measurements and the LF and TDR radar observations, unprecedented
characterization of tornadic environments is expected. In addition, tornado-
resolving numerical simulations will be performed, and variational, and
ensemble-based data analysis and assimilation techniques will be applied. The
primary goals of the project include: (1) characterization of spatial
heterogeneities and temporal evolution of the PBL around convective storms in
the VORTEX-SE domain with CRL measurements; (2) analysis and understanding of
the impact of PBL heterogeneities on tornadic storms by synthesizing P-3 and
other available observations; (3) identification and understanding of key
physical processes involved in the tornadic storms through model simulations
with advanced data assimilation methods. The synergy of airborne radar and lidar
data with high-resolution model simulations will help pave the way for
potentially transformative future process-oriented field
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.