* 1917149
* Collaborative Research: The Magmatic and Eruptive System of Mount Erebus Volcano, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Ronni Grapenthin, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2020
* USD 162,035.00

Mount Erebus, a volcano on Ross Island, Antarctica has been in a continuous
state of open-vent activity for at least 45 years while hosting a long-lived
lava lake at its summit. The volcano's proximity to the United States Antarctic
Program McMurdo Station, its longstanding experimental infrastructure, and prior
studies present opportunities to develop and apply cutting edge imaging methods
to understand a persistently active volcanic system. This project will utilize
data from a renovated five-station near-summit seismic network of Mt. Erebus
plus three additional stations sited on the flanks of the volcano. This wide
aperture network, paired with modern instrumentation and techniques to enhance
seismic signal, will provide unprecedented imaging into the deep volcanic
plumbing system at crustal scale, which will help researchers understand the
volcano's complex structure and processes. Additionally, the network provides
year-round seismic data to be used in temporal monitoring efforts for eruptive
and other activity. All data from this network will be openly available in near
real-time. The real-time data along with an existing catalog of archived data
will be analyzed using recently developed methods to generalize, recognize,
quantify, and catalog eruptive events. The project objectives are to study the
response of the magmatic system to such events and use continuously recorded
background noise and eruption signals to infer concurrent structural changes.
These seismic investigations into the long-term changes of the volcano, tracking
broad phenomena such as the subsidence of Ross Island, will also be complemented
by GPS recordings of deformation. These activities will help test hypotheses
related to the structure of the deeper magmatic system of Erebus and the
properties of the material surrounding this system. The project funds two early-
career scientists and three graduate students, contributing to the development
of the next generation of volcanologists and
seismologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award results in the establishment of a
first-tier monitoring system and catalogues eruptive events using real-time
seismic and infrasound data. Synoptic analysis of broadband signals recorded by
the updated seismic network will allow monitoring and interpretation of pre and
post eruptive response and conduit evolution via measurements of systematic
timing changes of short-period (explosion) versus very long-period (conduit)
seismogram signatures. These observations will be supplemented by the
interpretation of broadband seismic tilt in association with existing UNAVCO-
supported GPS data over time scales from hours to years. Longer-period coda
correlation back projection will be used to refine upper edifice structural
information and teleseismic signals will be analyzed to examine the bulk and
discontinuity structure of the underlying crust. The work includes a reanalysis
of archived TOMO Erebus broadband, as well as extensive short-period data
collected in 2007-2008. This effort will allow new imaging and interpretation of
deeper (e.g., crustal to Moho-or-deeper scale) structure than has been
previously imaged at Erebus in consort with other constraints, such as emerging
magnetotelluric imaging results for Erebus and Ross Island. The researchers will
use the year-round continuous stations to time-lapse interrogate prominent and
repeatable structural/internal scattering features revealed by both ambient
noise and eruption or other signal coda correlations. Joint inversions of H/V
ratios for both coda and ambient noise coupled with dispersion curves assembled
from the fusion of ambient noise (low frequency) and coda (high frequency) will
complement direct imaging of strong near-surface scatterers and will be applied
to archived ETB/ETS data sets. Cutting edge reflection matrix techniques will
continue to be developed in collaboration with independently funded groups in
France to further isolate and define high scattering bodies within the top 10
kilometers of the crust and edifice. This award is cofunded by the Prediction of
and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.