* 1917673
* Discussion Tracker: Development of Human Language Technologies to Improve the Teaching of Collaborative Argumentation in High School
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Amanda Godley, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 765,521.00

Collaborative argumentation - or the building of evidence-based, reasoned
knowledge and solutions through dialogue - is essential to individual learning
as well as group problem-solving. Student-centered discussions and extended
student talk during collaborative argumentation are indicators of robust
learning across disciplines. The ability to engage in collaborative problem-
solving is also a defining characteristic of 21st century workplaces and civic
engagement. However, teaching collaborative argumentation is an advanced skill
that many teachers struggle to develop. The goal of this project is to develop
an innovative technology called Discussion Tracker, a computer-based system for
high school English teachers that uses recent advances in human language
technologies (HLT) to provide teachers with automatically generated data and
instructional guidance on the quality of students' collaborative argumentation
in their classrooms. Discussion Tracker will provide teachers with visual
representations of the significant features of their students' collaborative
talk and tools for instructional reflection and future planning. The project
will improve the teaching and learning of collaborative argumentation in high
schools so that students will be prepared for collaborative problem-solving in
future educational, workplace, and civic settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project leverages recent advances in human language technologies (HLT), data
visualization/ analytics, and teacher learning to advance technology that
provides automated feedback on classroom talk with the goal of improving
teaching effectiveness and student achievement. It will develop novel HLT
methods for detecting three significant features of students' collaborative
talk: argument moves (claim, evidence, reasoning), specificity, and
collaboration (e.g., building on, probing or challenging others' ideas). During
years 1 and 2, a series of experiments will be conducted to test Discussion
Tracker interface options, to explore teacher learning in response to different
types of instructional guidance, and to improve the functionality of the system.
Simultaneously, student talk corpora (both existing and collected from the
experiments above) will be used to computationally model the three features of
student talk by combining relation coding, advances in argument mining,
handcrafted features and neural network models with multi-task training. These
models will then be incorporated into the Discussion Tracker system to promote
teachers' rapid, data-driven reflective practice. In year 3, a large classroom
experiment will be conducted to determine the effects of the fully automated
Discussion Tracker on teacher learning and instruction across time and school
contexts. Generalizable insights will be identified at every stage of the
project to promote transferability to future technologies aimed at detecting
features of student talk and to teacher learning in similar content areas, grade
levels, and language-based learning platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.