* 1917952
* Collaborative Research: A National Assessment of Victimization Risk and Crime Reporting
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Eric Baumer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 76,240.00

The U.S. crime statistics system historically has not incorporated information
about citizenship status, and thus there is little scientific evidence that can
inform whether immigrants are more or less likely than native-born Americans to
be criminally victimized. Such an information deficit also means we do not know
whether immigrants are more or less likely than natives to report crimes to the
police. This project capitalizes on a recent redesign of the U.S. National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS), which adds information about respondents'
citizenship status, to offer the first large-scale comparison of victimization
risk and crime reporting among U.S. native-born citizens, naturalized citizens,
and non-citizens. The results of the project will reveal how citizenship status
shapes personal exposure to crime and decisions about whether to report crimes
to the police. Additionally, the project will examine whether these patterns
vary among individuals from different racial and ethnic groups and among those
who reside in communities with divergent approaches to immigration policy and
law enforcement. The project will benefit policy-makers at all governmental
levels by providing key information regarding patterns of crime victimization
and crime reporting among U.S. residents. Findings will also inform police
leadership regarding these patterns, thus contributing to U.S. safety and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three primary objectives: (1) to
assess the quality of the new self-reported citizenship data in the NCVS for
purposes of developing adjustments (if needed) for any observed nonresponse
bias; (2) to examine the effect of citizenship status on victimization risk and
how it may be conditioned by individual- and community-level factors; and (3) to
examine the effect of citizenship status on crime reporting to the police and
how it may be conditioned by individual- and community-level conditions. The
project will integrate nationally representative individual-level data on
victimization and crime reporting from the redesigned 2016-2020 National Crime
Victimization Survey (NCVS) and community-level data from the American Community
Survey (ACS) and a variety of other sources including reports of state
immigration legislation, LexisNexis, and Immigration and Customs Enforcement
(ICE) documents. Multivariate logistic regression models will be estimated to
achieve project objectives. The results will yield new evidence about the safety
and well-being of native-born citizens and foreign-born persons in the context
of rapidly changing economic, demographic, and political conditions in the US.
The project will which enhance knowledge about the quality of survey-derived
measures of citizenship and will provide the first ever assessment at the
national level of whether immigrant status is associated with victimization risk
and decisions to notify the police about crime incidents. These findings will
inform sociological theories regarding crime, immigration and citizenship
status, as well as criminological theories related to crime victimization and
mobilization of the law, with implications for additional literatures in
political science and survey methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.