* 1917539
* CCSS: Medium: Enabling Access and Topology Optimization of Underwater Networks through an Aerial Units Vehicle
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mohamed Younis, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 479,999.00

In recent years, there is an increased interest in the applications of
underwater acoustic networks (UANs). Currently, floating nodes are used to
interface the UAN through radio links to non-sea-based units and to correlate
the position of underwater nodes to a global coordinate system. However, such an
approach could be impractical for extended missions, ineffective for rapid
response scenarios, and/or undesirable for covert operations. Moreover, little
attention has been paid to mitigating frequent breaks in UAN connectivity due to
node drifts and time varying property of the underwater environment. To address
these issues, this research project promotes the development of innovative
communication mechanisms for interfacing UANs directly to an aerial mobile unit
(AMU) without the need of floating nodes. The outcome can boost the
effectiveness of many civil and scientific applications of a national and
international interest. Examples of these applications include search-and-
rescue, coastal patrol, oceanographic data collection, environmental monitoring,
assisted navigation, and security surveillance. Furthermore, the project will
enrich the undergraduate and graduate curricula in computer networks, wireless
communication, sensor networks, lasers, and embedded and distributed systems.
Outreach to local community colleges and high schools is planned in order to
publicize underwater researches and recruit students to STEM education. UMBC's
the Meyerhoff Scholarship, and CWIT (Center for Women &amp; Info. Tech.)
programs will be exploited to actively recruit female and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project opts to develop a suite of protocols
enabling direct two-way communication between UANs and AMUs. These protocols are
then leveraged to extend the global coordinate system in the underwater
environment to aid in localization and topology management. The specific
technical contributions are: (1) Develop protocols for reliable bidirectional
communication between the UAN and an AMU. The optoacoustic effect will be
utilized to create a downlink where encoded underwater acoustic signals are
generated by directing airborne laser beams to the water surface. The uplink, on
the other hand, is established by means of a laser Doppler vibrometer that will
detect impinging and protrusion caused by an incident acoustic transmission from
an underwater node onto the water surface; (2) Devise encoding and modulation
schemes to suit transmission across the air-water interface. Fundamental
limitations in terms of underwater reach, effective channel capacity, bit error
rate, etc., will be studied; (3) Develop a network discovery and localization
protocol that leverages communication with the AMU to enable the establishment
of underwater global coordinate system. This is accomplished by utilizing the
aerial vehicle in making encoded optoacoustic transmissions to generate
reference points on the water surface linked to a terrestrial global coordinate
system, e.g. GPS; (4) Develop topology management protocols that utilizes the
AMUs in mitigating node drifts and re-establishing broken acoustic links with a
node or an isolated block of nodes. Validation is planned through test-beds and
field experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.