* 1917191
* Collaborative Research: Support for A Cryptotephra Laborators at UNLV and ASU
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Curtis Marean, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 98,418.00

Dr. Eugene Smith of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas and Dr. Curtis Marean of
Arizona State University will operate analytical laboratories that will apply a
new dating method using ash erupted explosively from volcanoes to archaeological
sites in South Africa and Europe. In South Africa, Marean and Smith will
determine when a suite of uniquely human features first appeared in the
evolutionary history and thus help understand when, where and why the human
species evolved. South African Middle Stone Age (MSA) sites have revolutionized
our knowledge of modern human origins by pushing back and enriching our
knowledge of the timing of key features science considers definitive for the
species. In Europe, using volcanic ash, the laboratories will precisely date the
timing of when modern humans replaced Neanderthals. Modern dating techniques and
their application to archaeological sites provide the basis for determining when
key events in early human history occurred. These techniques use complex models
that produce age estimates and not absolute dates. In the past, different
laboratories have used different models that may result in different ages for
the same geologic unit. This has created a dating controversy that reduces
confidence in the timing of key events in early human history. There is general
agreement that the best way of producing robust age estimates is to use several
independent dating techniques. Recently, the team identified volcanic ash in
three archaeological sites in southern Africa, and the best fit of the chemistry
of this ash is to the 74,000-year-old eruption of the Toba volcano in Indonesia.
This discovery provides an independent dating tool that can be used along with
traditional dating methods to resolve the dating controversy and tie the record
of human origins preserved in these sites in southern Africa to the global
record of modern human origins. This project will not only provide a new
independent dating tool for archaeological sites but will help train students
and early career scientists in the techniques of archaeology and
geology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Smith and Marean and their
research team will collect and process samples from archaeological sites in
southern Africa and Europe to identify and determine the distribution of
volcanic ash that may be used to precisely date major events in early human
history and to tie early human history recorded at each of these sites to a
single dating model. Precise dating using volcanic ash will remove any debate
about the timing of key events in early human development. Correlation of
volcanic ash to source volcanoes will be done using the chemistry of the ash.
The ash is in the form of very small (micron-sized) glass grains known as
shards. These grains are analyzed by instruments that focus a small-diameter
electron or laser beam on the shard to determine their chemical makeup. The
chemistry is then compared to a database of known chemistry to identify the
source and age of the ash.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.