* 1917031
* Plugging the preservational pipeline: an integrated approach to tracking taphonomic histories of Cambrian skeletal fossil assemblages
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Tara Selly, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 343,878.00

Not all organisms have the same likelihood of being preserved in the fossil
record. There are a variety of limiting factors (biological and/or physical)
operating in the environment which can filter out more vulnerable forms prone to
decomposition. Typically, only the hard skeletons of animals are preserved (i.e.
bones, teeth, and shells), however does this mean that the skeletal record
itself is reliable? To avoid biasing our view of the history of life on our
planet this project will probe the skeletal record for leaks in the
'preservational pipeline'. This project targets perhaps the most important
period of geological time known as the Cambrian Period (541-488 million years
ago), during which animal life as we know it evolved and diversified. This
project includes a multidisciplinary group of researchers who will sample
Cambrian-aged rocks and small shelly fossils from the Ikara-Flinders Ranges of
South Australia to address the following questions: What proportion of the
skeletal fossil record is missing? What environmental conditions were required
for the preservation of these shelly animals? And how reliable are these fossil
datasets in preserving particular animal groups or for subdividing geological
time? To address these questions the team will use a combination of field and
lab-based sedimentological, geochemical, and fossil data, as well as advanced
imaging techniques (micro-CT and 3D visualization software), to reconstruct past
environments and assess the impact of preservation bias on these fossilized
communities. This integrated approach has the potential to fundamentally change
how paleontologists analyze and track bias in the fossil record. In addition,
the project will include training for university undergraduate and graduate
students with practical, technical, and soft skills relevant to fields of
geology, paleontology, and 3D virtualization. Educational outputs will include
online hosted media in the form of virtual fieldtrips to globally significant
geological sites and trails in the Ikara-Flinders Ranges of South Australia, and
their associated curricular materials. The virtual fieldtrips will be made with
the assistance of a Google Trekker -a backpack mounted with a 360 degree camera-
to make accessible this remote and extraordinary ancient landscape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cambrian small shelly fossil (SSF) assemblages continue to
shape our understanding of early metazoan evolution with respect to phylogenetic
relationships, biotic innovations (i.e. biomineralization), and the rise of
Phanerozoic-style ecosystems. However, to comprehend the biological fidelity of
this skeletal record requires a holistic view of the processes controlling
fossilization through time and space. The Cambrian successions of South
Australia -host to one of the richest SSF assemblages in the world and spanning
various depositional gradients- provide a unique setting in which to investigate
the link between preservational mode and paleoenvironmental variations. This
project will employ a deeply integrated approach combining sedimentological,
geochemical, and fossil datasets in tandem with three-dimensional volume
analysis and paleoecological analyses, in order to better understand sources of
bias that might skew our perceptions of this early fossil record. With a
comprehensive understanding of the variables controlling select preservational
modes, we can better inform previous and future interpretations of the skeletal
record, not just across the Cambrian, but the entire fossil record. As such, the
complimentary data afforded by this research aims to 1) compare skeletal
constituents represented by different preservational modes and quantify
selective bias exerted by common fossil extraction procedures as well as
biological factors (morphology, composition, and affinity); 2) analyze the
physical and geochemical characteristics of ancient sediments from different
depositional systems to reconstruct paleoenvironment, redox conditions, nutrient
flux, and sources of replacive minerals; and 3) quantify and contrast faunal
composition, preservational modes, and paleoenvironment to assess the
reliability and application of SSFs for regional and global dating of
contemporaneous rock successions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.