* 1917166
* Cancer Therapeutics through Theory and Experiment: From Cell Lines to Canine Tumors Grown on the Back of Mice
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Aniruddha Datta, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 534,408.00

The number of cells in an adult multicellular organism such as a human being is
under very tight control and, under normal circumstances, there is a balance
between new cell production and cell death. Roughly speaking, cancer results
when there is excessive cell division or reduced cell death due to some
malfunctioning in the cell number control system. A possible approach to cancer
therapy is to quickly and robustly induce the death of cancer cells, and earlier
work has used an engineering approach to explain the rationale behind the
dramatically successful induction of human cancer cell death by a therapeutic
molecule. The goal here is to extend these results to the domain of canine
cancers by first modeling them and then conducting therapeutic experiments on
canine tumors grown on the backs of mice. Since the work is driven by the goal
of improving cancer treatment, the potential societal benefits of this project
could be enormous. The project will be carried out at the Center for
Bioinformatics and Genomic Systems Engineering (CBGSE) at Texas A &amp; M
University, where widespread dissemination of the research results, imparting
truly interdisciplinary hands-on education to graduate students, and
beneficially targeting minorities and minority institutions, are top priorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The malfunctioning of the cell-cycle control system, an
essential characteristic of cancer, can be attributed to different signaling
breakdowns at many different locations in a signaling pathway. As a result, a
proper design of cancer therapy should first attempt to identify the location
and type of malfunction in the pathway and then arrive at a drug combination
that is particularly well suited for it. Unfortunately, with the notable
exception of the recent attempts at targeted immunotherapy, most of the
approaches to cancer therapy do not follow such a systematic procedure. Thus,
for most of cancers, there is a critical need for precisely identifying the
failure point(s) in the pathway, hopefully leading to a more targeted therapy
with a better likelihood of success. Many of the cancer therapies to date have
mostly focused on blocking the pathways essential to cell proliferation.
However, often, even if the drugs are initially successful in treating the
cancer, the success is usually short lived as the cancer cell can activate some
other pathways not targeted by the drug. An alternative approach to treat cancer
would be to use drugs that are capable of inducing cell death. Chemotherapeutic
drugs targeting cell death also display drug resistance which occurs when the
cancer cells figure out mechanisms to evade the cell death inducing activity of
the drug. If, however, one could identify molecules along the cell death pathway
that can play a decisive role in ensuring cell death, regardless of the upstream
signaling breakdown(s), then targeting such molecules with drugs would provide a
robust strategy for treating cancer. In very recent work, the research team has
utilized mathematical modeling and experimentation to demonstrate remarkable
success in achieving robust cell killing for human breast cancer, pancreatic
cancer and melanoma cell lines. This was done via the modulation of a gene
called STAT3 using drug combination cocktails containing Cryptotanshinone, a
traditional Chinese herb derivative. Motivated by this preliminary success, the
goal here is to carry out similar modeling for osteosarcoma and demonstrate
therapeutic success on cell lines and mice implanted canine cancer xenografts in
a veterinarian's lab. Success with the latter is likely to move the results
closer to the domain of drug development for clinical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.