* 1917681
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Carbon Cycling in Subsurface Hypersaline Environments Near the Abiotic Fringe
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Tullis Onstott, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 01/31/2021
* USD 37,498.00

Deep fractures within Precambrian Shield rock formations host fluids that range
in age from tens of thousands of years for brackish fluid to more than a billion
years for hypersaline fluids. Extensive reactions between the fracture fluid and
surrounding rock lead to the production of helium, hydrogen, methane, short-
chain hydrocarbons, oxidants and likely other compounds and to hypersalinity as
non-hydrous silicates alter to clay in closed systems over time. Whether these
deep Precambrian crust brines began as trapped ocean water and whether they
contain microbial communities that have adapted to the increasing salinity over
time is not known. Although such deep-seated, ancient brines are believed to be
widespread, they have only been accessed in a few locations for scientific
study. These principal investigators recently discovered hypersaline brines at 3
km depth in Moab Khotsong gold and uranium mine as part of an NSF/ICDP-supported
project investigating a recent magnitude 5.5 earthquake. The brine salinity is
10x greater than any they have previously sampled in South Africa. Salinity also
exceeds the known growth limit for methane-producing microbes. The methane-
bearing gas, isotopic data, and fluid inclusions trapped in minerals suggest the
brine could be at least 2 billion years old. This site is unique in the world in
that it provides access to an ancient brine at high temperature (55 degree
Centigrade). Researchers will analyze the chemistry of these unique subsurface
brines, including the sources and amounts of gaseous energy sources and they
will characterize the microbial communities in these ancient brines. If any
extremophiles exist in these fractures, they will likely possess enzymes that
will prove useful for remediating toxic metal- and radionuclide-contaminated
water in the surface tailings ponds that are widespread in the mining districts
of South Africa and elsewhere. If microbial life is absent in these fractures
then they may provide a window into the abiotic processes responsible for the
building blocks of life in the early Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators have characterized the microbial communities of deep brackish
fracture water at nearby mines, which have revealed multi-tier syntrophic
microbial communities that recycle biogenically produced CH4. Halophilic
methanogens and methanotrophs are not known and so either (1) other types of
microbial C cycling must prevail here or (2) C cycling is limited to abiotic
reactions. They successfully installed a packer/inconel U-tube into one
hypersaline brine-filled fracture at 3.2 kmbls. and a steel valve on another at
3 kmbls., but increasing pressure and corrosion are causing both to leak. With
the loss of key personnel at the end of the NSF/ICDP project, the collapse of
the boreholes, and the loss of brine given their finite volume, researchers face
losing an opportunity to sample a world class biogeochemical site. They
therefore propose to return to Moab Khotsong Mine and with help from their South
African colleagues to undertake a comprehensive survey and sampling of these
brines and to take steps to secure longer-term access for future international
researchers. They propose collecting sufficient biomass for metagenomic,
metatranscriptomic and lipidomic analyses, gas for isotopic analyses and dating,
and water for dissolved organic carbon characterization, as well as sealing and
instrumenting other boreholes. The data provided by these brine samples will
test the following hypotheses: 1) Life in the deeper, hotter, hypersaline
fracture fluids is constrained by the energetic cost of combating intracellular
water loss and an inventory of abiotic organic compounds formed by water/rock
reactions over the past billions of years as well as biologically generated
organic matter will be present and characterized for the first time; 2)
Microbial communities present in cooler hypersaline fractures will be
phylogenetically similar to phyla present in brackish fracture water and not
related to the halophiles of existing surface saltpans; and 3) Biogenic
CH4-supported communities found in brackish fluids will be replaced by
communities supported by abiogenic hydrocarbons in hypersaline fluids, with
greater expression of genes involved in osmotic regulation and with lipids whose
composition provide lower membrane permeability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.