* 1917716
* Making With Understanding: Using Augmented Reality to Support Peer Teaching in Makerspaces
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bertrand Schneider, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The project will develop and investigate Augmented Reality-enabled knowledge
exchange tools that enhance the support of collaborative learning in informal
learning spaces such as makerspaces. Makerspaces offer opportunities to tinker
with physical and digital tools, and promote engagement in interest-driven,
inquiry-based learning. Within this context, learners informally teach STEM
concepts to each other, which has a direct impact on collaboration and learning.
Many physical phenomena, such as magnetism, are largely invisible to the naked
eye (e.g. one cannot see the flow of electricity in a wire, or the shape of
magnetic fields around a motor). This limitation creates challenges for learning
and collaboration in makerspaces and elsewhere. Without seeing this content, a
novice will have difficulties understanding when a more knowledgeable peer
offers explanations about the invisible variables. In makerspaces, this
limitation causes students to focus primarily on doing (i.e., assembling a
working prototype, or fixing other students' problems) and less on understanding
(i.e., grasping why something is happening, or teaching the underlying reasons
to less knowledgeable peers). To investigate these issues, the project will
develop and empirically test AR-enabled experiences and tools to augment
invisible phenomena to the naked eye into physical objects built in the
makerspace. The learning tools will involve the development of user-generated
interactive visualizations and annotations that connect physical objects with
invisible variables, to facilitate collaboration and knowledge transfer.
Augmented reality (AR) makes it possible to design activities where learners may
"see" hidden forces as holographic overlays, and peers may communicate by
creating holographic representations on the physical objects they are
discussing. The final deliverable will be tested in a maker spaces and
integrated into a course about digital fabrication in education. The objective
is to develop knowledge-transfer tools that will move students from merely doing
to actually understanding how complex systems work. An open source toolkit will
be generated so that people around the world can use the digital toolkit and/or
expand upon it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The larger goal of this project is to
accelerate knowledge transfer and STEM learning, by providing students with
tools for more efficient communication and learning, and which can potentially
transform misconceptions into correct understandings of complex scientific
ideas. This project will develop AR features that target one-on-one peer
knowledge exchanges. The research studies will investigate their impact on
communication, collaboration and learning in experimental and ecological
settings. The project will conduct several successive studies. In the first
phase of the research, the project will investigate how knowledge-transfer
behaviors occur in traditional maker spaces under the presence and absence of AR
simulations and determine what novel features can be implemented in an AR
toolkit in order to support and improve knowledge exchange. The study activity
will require participants to understand a simple electric circuit that generates
different frequencies into the speaker. In the second phase, the project will
research the effectiveness of knowledge transfer when involved in an activity
typical of makerspaces, such as debugging complex electronics systems. After
doing preliminary research with participants face-to-face, the research will
locate participants in separate rooms (each room containing more specialized
equipment), where they will remotely interact in constructing or understanding a
system where the components of one participant are connected with the components
of the other participant. This will allow for evaluating whether the new AR
tools are effective in improving knowledge transfer. In the final year the
project will ecologically evaluate the effectiveness of the system by
integrating the technology into a maker space, as well as including it into a
4-month class on digital fabrication taught at the Harvard Graduate School of
Education. At the end of the research, the project expects to have a deeper
understanding of what learning tools or features are valuable in a more open-
ended ecologically-valid context, how to effectively integrate such AR tools in
existing maker spaces, and how they are used by students in formal learning
environments and can complement classroom pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.