* 1917383
* EAGER: Curricula Development of a Quantum Programming Class with Hardware Access
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Gregory Byrd, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The project aims to transform the landscape of computing by establishing and
advancing quantum computing as a means of computational acceleration by
developing curricular materials that uses actual quantum hardware. The effort
has the potential significantly advance the knowledge about quantum computing of
the scientific community in general and within the areas of Computer Science and
Engineering specifically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize free
cloud-based access to a gate-based platform to provide hands-on experience with
programming actual quantum hardware. Curricular material will include the
fundamentals in physics and mathematics required to understand quantum
computing, introductory material to the quantum field, and the programming
environment for a cloud-based platform. The PIs will also develop training
material suitable for tutorials at major conferences/symposia across different
fields as well as online courses for faculty, staff and students. As a means to
gauge success, the suitability of the material will be thoroughly evaluated
statistically via surveys at the end of educational units for both classes and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.