* 1917057
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Metals on Disinfection Byproduct Precursor Formation in Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Teng Zeng, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 209,673.00

Potable water supplies must be disinfected to protect human health. However,
disinfectants can interact with organic matter in the system to cause the
formation of byproducts that pose risks to human health. Understanding the
disinfection byproduct formation process is a critical need for water utilities
and regulatory agencies to reduce risk. This project addresses this national
need by investigating how trace metals influence disinfection byproduct
formation in water distribution systems. The underlying hypothesis is that
exposure of biofilm microbes in the distribution system to heavy metals results
in the release of small organic molecules. These molecules can then serve as the
building blocks of disinfection byproducts through chemical reaction with
disinfectants. This project establishes a research and education partnership
between Oklahoma State University and Syracuse University at the interface of
environmental microbiology and environmental chemistry. A STEM educational
outreach program for elementary school students and provide summer internship
research opportunities for high school students. This effort will improve the
scientific literacy of the Nation and increase the capability of the STEM
workforce to meet societal needs for clean and sustainable water.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disinfection byproducts are formed upon reactions of
organic matter with disinfectants during water treatment. Strategies to control
disinfection byproduct formation focus on removing their precursors prior to
disinfection or removing disinfection byproducts after they have formed in the
water treatment plant. Unfortunately, disinfection byproducts continue to form
within distribution systems when precursors released by biofilms in the
distribution system react with residual disinfectant. Bacterial metabolic
processes and cellular regulation are highly sensitive to concentrations of
trace metals, which vary significantly in distribution systems. The overall goal
of this research is to characterize how trace metals affect the production of
disinfection byproduct precursors from biofilms under conditions relevant to
chloraminated drinking water distribution networks. The central hypothesis is
that exposure to varying types and concentrations of trace metals alters
metabolic pathways in biofilm microorganisms, resulting in shifts in the
composition and reactivity of disinfection byproduct precursors released by the
bacteria. The specific research objectives of this project are to: 1) examine
the influence of metals on disinfection byproduct formation potential from
bacterial isolates, 2) characterize the effects of metal exposure on changes in
the composition and reactivity of biofilm-derived disinfection byproduct
precursors, and 3) determine the underlying mechanisms of increased disinfection
byproduct formation potential in bacterial isolates and biofilms through
transcriptomic and proteomic approaches. This research addresses gaps in
knowledge and model formulations with regards to predicting disinfection
byproduct precursor loadings contributed by biofilms in chloraminated
distribution systems. This research will provide a more complete understanding
of the impacts that changes in metal speciation and concentration have on
disinfection byproduct formation potential in full-scale distribution systems.
The team will recruit underrepresented minority students to summer research
positions to increase the diversity of STEM fields and outreach to the public
will take place through seminars on safe drinking
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.