* 1917577
* PFI-TT:  Developing an Efficient Computation Scheme for Modeling Low-Pressure Plasmas
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Thomas Schuelke, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2022
* USD 298,754.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the significant reduction of low-
pressure-plasma modeling time using innovative computation schemes. Low-pressure
plasmas are widely used for the manufacturing of semiconductor integrated
circuits, displays, solar panels, thin film batteries, and coatings. The annual
market of these industry segments exceeds $600 billion. Computer simulation is
an essential approach to understanding the complex plasma characteristics and
developing efficient plasma processing technologies. Unfortunately, current
commercial plasma simulation software requires huge computational resources; it
takes months to model the plasmas in practical scales. The lack of a practical
tool for modeling low-pressure plasmas has resulted in improperly designed
sources, leading to the inefficient processes used today. This PFI-TT project
aims to develop new computation schemes for efficiently modeling certain plasmas
at low pressures. These tools will allow the users to simulate plasmas of
practical scales, using even desktop computers that generate feedback in 24
hours. This project will also train and broaden the participation of graduate
and undergraduate students, and prepare them as future leaders in technology
innovation and entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
combines an implicit algorithm of the motions of charged particles with an
energy conservation scheme to eliminate the spatial and temporal constraints in
the state-of-the-art explicit particle-in-cell/Monte Carlo collision algorithms.
The key advantage of the implicit algorithm is that the high frequency
oscillations of plasmas are damped in the time domain. The energy conservation
scheme ensures that the total energy of the plasma is conserved and the self-
heating due to a large grid spacing (i.e. significantly greater than the plasma
Debye length) is eliminated. The new computation scheme is over 30 times faster
than the state-of-the-art explicit particle-in-cell/Monte Carlo collision
algorithms. The developed modeling tools also have the potential to address
situations where a complete kinetic analysis is not yet available due to the
high plasma density, such as high-power impulse magnetron sputtering and the
plasma instabilities in magnetized discharges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.