* 1917055
* Multiscale Manufacturing for Advanced Energy Storage Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonghyun Park, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2023
* USD 337,884.00

This grant supports fundamental research that contributes new knowledge in the
manufacturing of multiscale three-dimensional structures for applications such
as energy storage devices. This project investigates a combination of three-
dimensional micro-casting and three-dimensional (3D) printing to enable the
fabrication of multi-component, porous structures and devices. Most 3D printing
and micro-casting processes require high temperatures that can cause thermal
damage or part distortion if not properly controlled. This research investigates
room temperature processes thus avoiding damage and distortion. The multiscale
manufacturing approach involves control of the microstructure and macrostructure
in multi-material structures for devices such as advanced energy storage
systems. When made from conductive materials, the three-dimensional porous
structures have applications in energy, healthcare, biomedical, aerospace,
chemical and automotive industries, which benefits the U.S. economy and society.
This research involves several disciplines including advanced manufacturing,
electrochemistry, control theory, and materials science. The multi-disciplinary
approach helps broaden participation of women and underrepresented groups in
research and positively impacts engineering education and training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project studies an electric field-assisted 3D micro-
casting process to fabricate battery electrodes combined with a 3D printing
process to fabricate the separators for advanced energy storage devices such as
Li-ion batteries. This novel process has the potential to overcome the
limitations of anisotropic microstructures, residual stresses, poor inter-layer
bonding, poor resolution, and rough surfaces in conventional manufacturing. This
project studies the mechanisms of porosity formation and particle alignment
during electric field-assisted micro-casting using atomistic simulations,
physics-based predictive models and experimental verification. The team tests
the hypothesis that rheological properties and electric field strengths are the
determining factors for porosity and particle alignment in micro-cast structures
and establishes relationships between process parameters and microstructural
features. The project explores how micro-casting governs the macrostructure and
electric-field governs the microstructure of the particle network, and how this
cooperative multiscale control can improve energy and power density for energy
storage devices. Further, the study investigates how local laser heating
maintains the fine structures and enhances the mechanical integrity of the
constituent materials. The effect of material and geometry on safety and ion
transport in the 3D-printed separator is studied. The project relies on
multiscale understanding and control, enabling transformative change in
electrode manufacturing and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.