* 1917238
* Analytical Modeling for the Effect of Grain Size Distribution on the Critical State of Granular Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ching Chang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,495.00

Natural soil is composed of particles of various sizes. Observed from
experiments, particle size distribution has long been recognized as an important
factor that influences the strength of soil, and consequently influences the
performance and stability of infrastructures founded on soil. Therefore, it is
important to understand how the soil strength is influenced by the particle size
distribution. However, currently there is no analytical model that can
explicitly account for the effect of particle size distribution on soil
strength. This award supports fundamental research to develop the essential
knowledge for modeling the strength of soil with consideration of particle size
distribution using the concept of critical state void ratio. The method
developed from this research will be useful for geotechnical and earthquake
engineering problems, such as landslides in weathered soil, levee failure due to
erosion of fine particles, dam instability due to grain crushing, and
liquefaction of silty sand. Results of this research can be used to reduce
future risks of failures due to natural disasters, and to develop design
methodologies which are safer and more resilient. Thus, results from this
research have potential benefits to the U.S. economy and society. The results
and activities of this research are integrated into courses on soil mechanics
contributing to engineering education and research&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will address the fundamental issue on the role of particle size
distribution in soil strength. The main goal of this research is to develop a
particle packing theory for soils at critical state, considering the mix
mechanism of particles of various sizes. Through the use of this theory, an
analytical model will be developed that can predict the critical state void
ratio of soil based on its particle size distribution. To facilitate the
theoretical development, a series of experimental tests will be performed on
soils with various types of grain size distribution. The intellectual merit of
this research is twofold: (1) This investigation allows us to predict the soil
strength from a fundamental perspective by using a novel approach of particle
packing theory, (2) This investigation pushes forward the knowledge-boundary of
continuum mechanics by providing a methodology for analyzing the behavior of
particle assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.