* 1917074
* Collaborative Research: Engineering biofilm-electrode for organic contaminant degradation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Sanchez, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 210,000.00

Chemicals used in commonly-used consumer items can contaminate water and pose a
threat to human and ecosystem health. It is critical for society to prevent
these impacts by developing effective technologies to remove these chemicals.
Two promising approaches include the use of engineered biofilms (microbial
aggregates growing on surfaces) and electrochemical treatment. This project is a
new approach combining biofilm engineering with bioelectrochemical degradation
for sustainable treatment of chemical pollutants. The focus is on engineering
carbon electrodes and biofilms to degrade the contaminant bisphenol A. Results
will impact other fields such as microbial electrosynthesis, biosensors,
infection control, and bioelectronics. The project will train underrepresented
students to participate in undergraduate research at the Illinois Institute of
Technology and the University of Pittsburgh. Twenty middle school teachers will
participate in a teacher science program. Middle school students will be hosted
at the Energy Inventor Labs in Pittsburgh and the Science Camp and Research Day
programs in Chicago. Together, these efforts will impact over 2,000 students to
broaden participation in STEM and increase the scientific literacy of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioelectrochemical systems for the degradation of
emerging organic contaminants such as bisphenol A depend on a high level of
biofilm control. Sustainable operation requires that conditions on the electrode
surface promote the development of biofilms adapted to the suite of contaminants
to be oxidized. The goal of this project is to achieve this objective by
identifying and tuning the optimal carbon electrode morphology for biofilm-
electrode formation for optimal organic waste decomposition. Biofilm formation
and organic compound degradation via increased electron transfer are often
governed by electrode morphology and biofilm-electrode interactions. We will
investigate the effects of electrode morphology on biofilm-electrode performance
by connecting the physical and electrochemical properties of different carbon
electrodes for robust and conductive biofilm formation, optimizing biofilm-
electrode performance via microbial engineering, and integrating biological
degradation pathways of organic contaminants into the bioelectrochemical
systems. This project will provide a novel understanding of biofilm-electrode
interactions by studying electrode morphology and microbial engineering
simultaneously, which should lead to a new design framework for
bioelectrochemical systems. The project will have an extensive education and
outreach program of undergraduate research, K-12 teacher training, and middle
school student science programs in Pittsburgh and Chicago. Together, these
efforts will impact over 2,000 students to broaden participation in STEM and
increase the scientific literacy of the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.