* 1917367
* Collaborative Research: Fatigue Crack Formation and Growth in the Presence of Reversible Martensitic Transformation in High Temperature Shape Memory Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 243,842.00

Newly discovered high-temperature shape memory alloys can recover large
deformations at elevated temperatures through a reversible transformation of
their crystal structure. This has warranted significant interest in their use as
solid-state actuators in aeronautics, automotive, and energy-conversion
applications. These actuators could potentially provide ultra-high energy
density actuation and would allow multifunctional use, resulting in lower cost
and maintenance due to simplified device designs. The aim of this research
project is to accelerate the development cycle of these materials by elucidating
the life-limiting fatigue mechanisms. The knowledge of fatigue progression in
these alloys will facilitate the wider acceptance of materials exhibiting
reversible martensitic transformation in engineering applications. Furthermore,
through the synergistic combination of experiments and modeling and its
multidisciplinary nature, this research will train the next generation of
experts in multifunctional, phase transforming materials. It will also support
the involvement of underrepresented groups in research and professional
experiences via partnership with the Boeing Company, NASA, and international
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will involve multiscale
thermomechanical testing and microstructural characterization as well as
sophisticated modeling to identify defect kinetics as a function of
microstructural attributes in the presence of reversible martensitic
transformation and associated irreversible processes. While recently discovered
Nickel-Titanium-Hafnium (NiTiHf) alloys will be used as a model material system,
many of the experimental findings and models are expected to be transferable to
other phase transforming materials as well. The experimental work will rely on
in-situ thermomechanical testing in scanning electron microscope and ex-situ
transmission electron microscopy, as well as digital image correlation and
synchrotron X-ray tomography to monitor defect formation/growth and to
characterize microstructure, deformation structure, and fracture surfaces. The
modeling work will be based on a phase field approach to fatigue crack formation
and growth. This approach will provide an advantage over current methods that
rely on self-similar crack growth assumptions of conventional fracture
mechanics, which break down due to the variability of the underlying
microstructure and their complex influence on the mechanical fields close to the
crack tip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.