* 1917556
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Financialization and Urban Development
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2022
* Sylvia Nam, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 24,948.00

As financial activities become ubiquitous worldwide, global inequality is
simultaneously rising, and it is crucial for both policy-makers and the public
at large to understand the effects of financialization across different domains
of social life. Half of the global population lives in cities, making it
particularly important to consider the world's major urban areas, where a
majority of residents face struggles over housing. According to UN-Habitat
estimates, approximately 330 million urban households worldwide lack access to
affordable housing. Within the next six years, 1.6 billion people will be
housing insecure. This research, which trains an anthropology graduate student
in methods of scientifically rigorous and empirical data collection and
analysis, is designed to illuminate the social, political, and technical
arrangements driving global urban transformation and related crises of housing
around the world. The study will help policy-makers, researchers, and the
general public better understand the relationship between finance and urban
development, thus facilitating the design of more equitable urban governance
strategies and outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tariq Rahman, under the
supervision of Dr. Sylvia Nam of the University of California, Irvine, proposes
to study the financialization of land as a phenomenon that is transforming
finance and cities alike. Lahore, Pakistan, located in the agriculturally-rich
Punjab province, is one of the fastest growing cities in the world. This project
will investigate how the social meanings associated with land shape financial
activity and how the financialization of land, in turn, shapes urban space and
life. Research will be conducted in a real estate developer's office where plots
of land are sold, an online mobile chat group where diasporic investors share
information related to projects, and inner-city Lahore where the government is
attempting to replace traditional land revenue officials with a new digital
database. Utilizing interviews, participant observation, and archival sources,
this study will examine how developers, investors, bureaucrats, local residents,
and other stakeholders understand and experience changing notions of value,
knowledge, and governance in relation to the financialization of land. This
research will contribute to theoretical and empirical debates about finance,
bureaucracy, and cities from a range of disciplines, including anthropology,
history, urban studies, media studies, and legal studies. Findings from this
study will provide insight into the cultural histories and norms that shape
processes of financialization, the merging of new e-governance technologies with
local ways of life, and the role of diasporic populations in the world's
economies and cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.