* 1917332
* Accelerated Simulations of Realistic Granular Soils Using PhysX Engine
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Vernon Schaefer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 308,367.00

Granular materials are ubiquitous in nature and in industrial applications; they
include sands/gravels, ores, powders, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and food
products. In geotechnical engineering, sands and gravels are critical
construction materials and their behavior is strongly related to geohazards,
such as landslides and erosion. While numerical modeling of discrete particles
is an emerging tool for the study of mechanical behavior of granular materials,
rapidly generating and simulating a large number of realistic soil particles to
model significant problems is still difficult. This research aims to overcome
this limitation by investigating the accuracy and efficiency of a video gaming
platform, which features high computational efficiency, in simulation of
granular materials. The expected outcome of this research will be a new geo-
simulator, which will improve the simulation accuracy, increase the number of
realistic particles in simulations, and reduce simulation time. The new geo-
simulator can be used in many disciplines and industries that deal with granular
materials. For example, it could be used in construction, mining, and
agricultural industries to optimize earthmoving machinery such as dump trucks,
excavator buckets and harvesters to increase productivity and efficiency. The
geo-simulator may also be used in the pharmaceutical, chemical, and food
industries to optimize mixing, tablet coating, and separating processes to
improve product quality and operational efficiency. With the scale at which
granular material is processed in the US and in the world, large cost savings
are likely to result. This geo-simulator will be integrated as a medium to reach
out to middle-high school students, and the public to increase their interest in
geotechnical engineering and STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research project aims to investigate the accuracy and
efficiency of a PhysX gaming engine for accelerating simulations of realistic
granular soils. The scope of this research relates to five important issues.
First, triangular face tessellations will be used in PhysX to precisely preserve
sharp corners of realistic particles. Second, the effectiveness of the
simplified contacting model in PhysX will be validated by a miniature direct
shear test that can be scanned by X-ray Computed Tomography. Third, an image-
based shape sculpture technique will be integrated into PhysX that can generate
realistic particles based on distributions of particle sizes and shapes. Fourth,
PhysX will be extended and customized to include servo-control and post-
processing functions to develop a new discrete element simulator GeoPhysX for
geotechnical simulations (i.e., laboratory test and landslide simulations).
Fifth, systematic parametric studies will be performed using validated GeoPhysX
to analyze effects of particle shape and gradation on macro, local, and micro
mechanical behavior of granular soils. This project will help to fill the
knowledge gap that links micro particle properties and the macro mechanical
behavior of granular soils, with the potential to enhance our current
understanding of granular soils as construction and load-bearing materials, the
porous matrix for flows and storage, and vulnerable components during failures
and hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.