* 1917908
* RCN: Coordinating and Advancing Analytical Approaches for Policy Design
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Edella Schlager, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 469,534.00

Effective governance hinges on how individuals interpret and respond to public
policies, which are comprised of carefully designed language that conveys who
can do what, when, and how. Adequately understanding the link between the design
of public policies and behavior requires two complementary advancements. First,
scientists must promote intellectual exchange on the development of
generalizable and reliable approaches for studying policy designs. Second, these
same scientists must coordinate with others focused on assessing how behavior
emerges in response to, or sometimes alongside, policy designs. In the former
case, policy design scholars confront a trade-off between detailed small-sample
case studies that capture nuance in particular contexts, and large-sample
studies, which fail to pick up on nuance but generalize across policies and
contexts. In the latter case, behavioral scientists confront a different set of
challenges. Behavioral scientists have advanced understanding of how individuals
interpret and respond to specific instructions embedded in policy designs, but
offer few insights about behavioral responses to different combinations of
instructions, or how policy design and behavior co-evolve. Exchanging insights
with policy design scholars focused on characterizing the language of public
policy allows behavioral scientists to effectively respond to such issues. This
Research Coordination Network (RCN) initiates an interdisciplinary and
international network of policy design scholars and behavioral scientists to
harness and integrate their insights to better understand the interplay between
policy design and behavior. In support of this objective, RCN participants share
and coordinate scientific contributions relating to: (1) theoretical and
methodological development of a broadly applicable approach for dissecting the
content of public policies, called the Institutional Grammar (IG); (2)
development of theoretically informed metrics for evaluating policy designs; and
(3) assessments of actual and simulated behavior in policy governed settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RCN contributions derive from three key focal areas around
which the collaboration evolves: (1) IG-Extract: Development of methods on open
source software to automatically extract rules from rich text (such as policy
documents) and format them into an IG structured database; (2) IG-Analytics:
Identification of theoretically-informed metrics for measuring policy designs
and evaluating the quality of policies coded in accordance with the IG; and (3)
IG-Behave: Exploration of how the IG can be leveraged to support game theoretic,
agent based modeling, and large-n observational research, focusing specifically
on how policy designs influence actual and simulated behavior, and how behavior
evolves in relation to policies. Tools and techniques developed through the RCN
are based on principles of Commons-Based Peer Production (CBPP), which
emphasizes the use of collaborative platforms and innovative licensing for
engaging scholars with common intellectual interests in scientific problem
solving. As a package, the RCN contributes understanding regarding how
institutional analysis, independently or coupled with behavioral assessments,
can be used in the study of policy and governance. Ultimately, the RCN offers
guidance for more effective governance in a wide array of policy domains. This
guidance is valuable for policy designers responsible for constructing the
language of public policies for successfully achieving policy
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.