* 1917704
* Collaborative Research: Puberty and Sociocultural Experiences among Mexican-American Boys
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Lindsay Hoyt, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 114,802.00

Puberty is a time of physical, social, and cognitive changes with direct
implications for adolescents' development and long-term well-being. Although
scientific knowledge of puberty is growing, there remains little information
about how puberty impacts the social and cultural experiences of Latino boys in
the U.S. The goal of this project is to understand how biological and physical
markers of puberty relate to everyday experiences of boys from Mexican-American
families. This is a large and rapidly growing group in the U.S. who are at
increased risk for high school drop-out, substance use, and delinquency. The
study will include interviews with 400 Mexican-American families who have a male
adolescent between the ages of 12-16 years old. The project will investigate how
boys' pubertal development influences social interactions with their parents,
teachers, and friends, and examine how these biological and social factors
together impact their mental health and well-being. The research will provide
critical information to families, community members, and health care providers
about the ways in which puberty shapes the context and development of Latino
boys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adolescents and their parents will complete in-person
interviews that assess puberty, daily stressors, parent-child relationship
factors, and key developmental outcomes: mental health, risky behaviors,
academic functioning, and ethnic identity. Adolescents will also provide saliva
samples to capture biological markers of development measured by levels of
puberty hormones. Adolescents will be followed up one year later to assess long-
term changes in these same outcomes. The goals of the project are to study the
connection between pubertal development and Mexican-American boys' experiences
in school and community contexts; test the association between puberty and
parent-child relationship factors; and examine how the link between puberty and
youths' mental health, risky behaviors, academic achievement, and ethnic
identity is explained by both positive and negative social experiences. The
Latino population of the U.S. is growing, and ethnic-racial disparities in
social and economic well-being continue. Understanding biological, social, and
cultural determinants of Mexican-American boys' development will contribute to
basic knowledge that informs approaches to addressing this critical societal
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.