* 1917914
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Role of New Data Technologies in the Collaborative Development of Accurate Health Measures
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Arthur Kleinman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 25,196.00

Comprehensive measures of global population health provide decision-makers with
an objective basis for setting health priorities, making cost-effective resource
allocation decisions, and assessing the impact of interventions. However,
producing accurate measures of global health outcomes is acutely challenging,
due to both the lack of quality global health data, and the difficulty of
producing universal measures for well-being, cost, and other factors that may
vary by region. In recent years, the world's foremost global epidemiology study,
the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) Study, has initiated global collaborative
efforts to bolster the objectivity and universality of their data and measures.
The research supported by this award investigates the grounded micro-practices
of these global collaborative efforts in order to understand how global experts
use numbers and data technologies to craft scientific consensus and common
understandings across cultural contexts. The findings of this research will be
disseminated in such a way to aid researchers and policy-makers better
understand how large-scale international data collaborations may operate as
venues for forging common understandings, negotiating global social goals and
projects, and improving the universality and accuracy of health measures.

This research uses anthropological methods to investigate the social and
technical micro-practices of global collaboration for the GBD study. The
researcher will conduct participant observation and interviews with researchers
at the institutional home of the GBD study, the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation in Seattle, Washington, as well as with their 3,500 global
collaborators . The researcher will also conduct historical and semiotic
analyses of the quantification procedures used by the GBD study over time in
order to evaluate how experts balance scientific, ethical, and social
considerations and goals while producing and reviewing health data. In addition
to training a graduate student in the methods of social science research, this
research will contribute to interdisciplinary efforts to understand the social
dynamics of global scientific collaboration and the various ways that social
goals and values influence the design and measurement of global health data.
Research results will be used to create education materials that will help the
public better understand the social and scientific significance and functions of
specific measures and data technologies in global health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.