* 1917949
* Cyberlearning: Detecting and Predicting Procrastination in Online and Social Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shaghayegh Sahebi, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 765,766.00

As online education becomes increasingly available and trusted by both employers
and students, many workers are turning to online courses to advance their
education and job prospects. However, online courses demand effective time
management skills, as students are required to plan and set goals, manage their
time, and work by themselves (or in a group), often with less structure than an
in-person course. This increases the risks of procrastination, a key challenge
to time management and success in both work and education contexts. To address
those risks, this project will use computational algorithms to model students'
procrastination behaviors, identify indicators of likely future procrastination,
and detect it early on in both individual and in group work. The algorithms will
learn to predict procrastination according to learners' studying behavior
captured by a time management application and their performance in courses. The
findings of this project can be used to enhance students' learning by helping
them to set goals and plan their work, monitor their progress, and keep track of
what they need to do to successfully accomplish their assignments on time. These
findings can be applied to related areas such as workforce development, and the
data collection tools and algorithms developed will be made available to other
researchers who want to work on related questions at the intersection of
behavior and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines individual and
group procrastination behavior by developing computational models using data on
students' self-reported cognitive, metacognitive, motivational, and affective
processes. Current theories of procrastination will be studied and extended
based on cross-sectional self-report survey data asking for student self-ratings
of procrastination related to academic tasks, and time-stamped trace data of
studying and interaction behavior generated by a mobile app used by students
during their courses. The cyberlearning advancements of this study are (1) a
novel model of individual and individual-in-group (social) procrastination, to
detect procrastination based on both self-report and trace data; (2) a novel
model to predict student performance based on their procrastination, previous
task accomplishment behavior, and previous performance; and (3) exploration of
the most parsimonious combination of self-report and trace data to produce
effective procrastination model. These goals will be accomplished by (a)
developing and updating an application for data collection and survey
administration, (b) deploying the app in several graduate online courses, (c)
analyzing data to understand underlying procrastination processes, and (d)
developing machine learning algorithms to model and detect procrastination. The
project will result in the dissemination of findings and developed algorithms to
the broader field of sequential data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.