* 1917291
* Upgrading the Experimental Capabilities of the Core Fluid Dynamics Laboratory at UCLA
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Aurnou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 464,702.00

With this award, researchers in UCLA's "SpinLab" will upgrade all the essential
equipment in our world-unique geophysical fluid dynamics laboratory. These
upgraded systems will allow the reseacher and his students to expand the
experiments they carry out in order to better understand flows occurring in
Earth's molten metal core that generate our planetary magnetic field. These
upgrades will also provide students in the lab with training in the design and
operation of leading edge laboratory systems. This award will also promote the
continued expansion of the successful science outreach efforts, most recently
developing new do-it-yourself experimental STEAM tools that can be used in
classrooms with students of all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will allow
the researchers to upgrade the capabilities of this world-unique experimental
systems that simulate convection in Earth's core. Through ultrasonic Doppler
techniques and stereoscopic laser velocimetry measurements, these enhancements
will allows them to quantify new aspects of the flow fields that develop in the
lab experiments (e.g., 2D velocity, vorticity and helicity maps), and to explore
new experimental geometries that have not been previously interrogated. Further,
the lab will update the heating and cooling systems, to produce even more
strongly turbulent convective flows relevant to planetary (and stellar)
conditions. These upgrades will allow the lab to conduct the next stage of
experiments and provide bridges between geodynamo models and advanced models of
planetary core turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.