* 1917284
* Advancing U.S. Science, Leadership, and Global Engagement in International Science Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ourania Kosti, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Anne Emig
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,467,488.00

Science today is increasingly international. International scientific
organizations, such as the International Science Council (ISC) and its
disciplinary unions, are a prime locus of international coordination, standard
setting, and policymaking that underpin and are essential to scientific
exchange. The National Academy of Sciences (NAS), through its Board on
International Scientific Organizations (BISO), serves as the U.S. national
member to the ISC and many of its member unions, and supports the critical role
of U.S. participation in these organizations. The international networks and
collaborations related to the ISC and the unions provide our nation's scientists
access to a global infrastructure, a global community of experts, and
international resources. The unions and the U.S. National Committees (USNCs)
also foster international and transdisciplinary research collaboration and
information exchange that lead to global sustainability and the development of
next generation products. Because the flow of information in science is multi-
directional, these venues provide U.S. scientists a way to stay connected to
sources of new discoveries and technologies abroad, which in turn foster
discovery and innovation in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BISO is
responsible for developing and carrying out a robust and cohesive U.S.
membership strategy in these organizations. It will do so through four thematic
objectives that are in line with NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science: 1. NETWORKS: Working closely with the USNCs, BISO will identify and
promote opportunities for U.S. scientists to engage in international networks,
and for U.S. and/or international organizations to work together. Its networks
and close associations allow BISO to be aware of, create, and act on synergies
and emerging opportunities between USNCs and the international scientific
organizations, as well as to guide and influence international organizations. 2.
SCIENCE: BISO and the USNCs will actively promote science and research, both
within and across disciplines. BISO and the USNCs will organize activities
individually and with other partner entities and organizations that explore
areas at the frontier of science and technology, and/or topics at the
intersection of science, technology, and policy. Continued effective leadership
will enable the U.S. and the NASEM to advance science by addressing societal and
global challenges. 3. WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT: BISO and the USNCs will create
opportunities for U.S. students and early career scientists to participate in
fellowships and other opportunities related to international organizations and
programs. These fellowships will involve a diverse group of applicants and
awardees. The programs will also involve opportunities for USNC members and
senior scientists engaged with unions to mentor U.S. early career scientists.
Many U.S. early career scientists who participate in the programs will continue
to be engaged in international programs and collaborations. 4. INTERNATIONAL
MOBILITY: Recognizing that science is global and that both the United States and
the world's scientific community benefit from the international circulation of
scientists, BISO will assist, within the context of our mission, foreign
scientists at all career stages who are experiencing U.S. visa difficulties.
BISO also will promote the United States as a study, meeting, and conference
destination and provide up-to-date advice to visa applicants and meeting
organizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.