* 1917961
* Collaborative Research: Examining Community-based Recovery Initiatives Post-Disaster
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Anne Roschelle, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 217,905.00

After a recent disaster, community-based organizations known as mutual support
centers emerged to organize post-disaster response. This project seeks to
examine communities' perceptions of and response to programs implemented by
these centers. The project asks: How have communities responded to the emergence
of these centers and their projects? What areas of community development have
been affected by these implemented projects? The project is focused on
communities' capacity to assess and develop solutions to their needs through
self-managing community development projects. The project examines how pre-
existing social inequalities, which become particularly salient after natural
disasters, shape the resulting community response. Findings from this project
will provide government agencies, social scientists, and communities with
insights related to response and recovery processes. Such findings can assist
with policy formulation at multiple levels of government to promote recovery
from disasters more efficiently, thus contributing to safety and security in our
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sociologists have identified emergent
organizations as a common occurrence at the intersection of communities'
response to uncertainty and failed communications between impacted communities
and formal agencies. However, the ways in which these emergent actors are
created, and their internal operationalization of response and recovery, are not
well understood. Based on a purposive sampling design, the study will examine
five mutual support centers working in different communities throughout the
affected region. The project uses a qualitative, multi-technique approach that
includes eighty semi-structured interviews with residents of beneficiary
communities where the centers have been established, two sets of focus groups
with residents in each community, including forty-eight respondents, and
ethnographic participant observation in center events, programs and service
centers to draw a comprehensive perception of the organizations and programs.
After data transcription, the project will code the data using MAXQDA
qualitative software by first developing analytical codes followed by lower
level codes reflecting characteristics and patterns in the data. Findings from
the project will inform sociological theories regarding disaster response,
emergent organizations and their communications, and social inequality following
extreme events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.