* 1917727
* Globalizing Cultural Psychology: Varieties of Interdependence Across Four Regions of the World
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Shinobu Kitayama, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 452,333.00

In the increasingly global world, it is important to understand other cultural
groups. Such understanding will be helpful in peacefully addressing world
conflicts, negotiating business deals, and facilitating group interactions.
Westerners see themselves as independent agents, and they are individualistic in
value. In contrast, some non-Western groups, such as people in Asia, and
possibly those in Arab regions, Africa, and Latin America, often see themselves
as interdependent with others in their groups and relations. They tend to be
more collectivistic. This project investigates the ways that different non-
Western groups develop their cultural styles of interdependence by utilizing
different strategies of attaining this valued state. It is hypothesized, for
example, that East Asians achieve interdependence by avoiding conflicts with
others and attain social harmony within their groups. Arab people, on the other
hand, do so by self-assertively resolving conflicts with others and by
protecting their groups. By studying multiple cultural groups, we may be able to
learn more about non-Western and Western cultures. Thus, this project can learn
how Westerners typically assert themselves to express their individuality so
that they can feel more esteemed and independent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test
this framework, six studies will be conducted to identify the nuances involved
in the interdependence-independence construct. The studies will assess three
core features of interdependence vs. independence, including the primacy of
personal versus social goals as predictors of happiness, analytic versus
holistic attention, and analytic versus holistic social cognition. The research
will also assess three pairs of subsidiary features that theoretically produce
different styles of interdependence. In particular, the use of self-effacement
vs. assertion, emotional suppression vs. expression, and dialectic vs. logical
reasoning, can all produce different types of interdependence. Those strategies
often arise from the ecological context of the cultures. Highly populated cites
with greater commerce, for example, should produce more argumentative
interdependence whereas more linguistically diverse areas should produce more
emotional expressivity. The subsidiary features will be measured across a set of
16 cultural groups from South Asia, Central Asia, East Asia, and across the
Middle East, Africa, Western Europe, Latin America, and those groups will be
contrasted to groups in North America. It is expected that there will be a broad
divergence between the groups regarding the strategies they use to achieve their
desired cultural state of independence and interdependence. It is also predicted
that the West will differ from the non-West in core features while the non-West
will be characterized relatively more in subsidiary features. Experimental tests
will include priming manipulations designed to produce independence or
interdependence to test their later effects on the subsidiary features. Results
will shed light on how cultural groups utilize social interaction styles to
produce independence and interdependence. This project will facilitate our
understanding of intercultural interactions and provide a more comprehensive
view of human psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.