* 1917177
* Practical Stability of Networked Control Systems under Uncertainty
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jorge Cortes, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2022
* USD 530,469.00

This project addresses the gap between theory and practice in the control of
networked systems in real-world settings. In many practical systems, like
autonomous vehicles or assisted driving in smart cities, physical inputs from
sensors are converted into digital form and communicated to a controller that
determines the appropriate action to take, at any given time of the system
evolution, based on the current estimate of the state. One of the main issues in
these systems is how to ensure the correct execution of the control task,
despite several uncertainties that are present in the control loop. For example,
the system can be subject to random disturbances, and the communication channel
can be affected by random errors or delays. Despite these stochastic events, it
is required that the system maintains a high level of reliability. This is often
a stringent requirement since it is directly related to human safety. To
successfully merge theory with practice, the project aims at providing a
practically relevant analysis of the probabilistic guarantees that the system
can provide; and at designing systems based on probabilistic safety for given
operating conditions. The study has implications beyond the field of control and
communications, in terms of the introduction of new mathematical methods and
design tools. In laying a theoretical foundation, we expect to draw novel,
synergistic connections between information theory, control theory, and real-
time systems. The framework advocated in this proposal will benefit several
application domains in need of verifiable designs with provably correct
guarantees on performance, such as autonomous transportation, smart power
systems, and robotics. The proposed research will also impact the training of a
new generation of students through undergraduate student involvement, graduate
mentoring and curriculum development, and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are as follows: (i) develop a
theory suitable to a practically relevant description of system guarantees; (ii)
develop system design approaches that embrace probabilistic safety for the given
operating conditions; (iii) provide development strategies aimed at satisfying
the operating conditions that guarantee probabilistic safety. The theory will
include deterministic as well as stochastic analysis, time triggering and event-
triggering designs. It will also account for the information implicit in the
timing of the communication events and for nonlinearities arising in the plant
modeling in the context of event-triggering control. The results of the project
will be tested via software simulations, hardware-in-the-loop validation, and
experiments on a team of aerial and ground vehicles at the UCSD AeroDrome. Core
application areas include autonomy of transportation and smart cities, highly
dynamical systems, convergence of computation, communication, and control,
environment and infrastructure monitoring, and smart power systems. The
intellectual merit of the proposal is to provide sound reliability guarantees on
the operation of networked control systems where communication and control
aspects system are treated in an integrated fashion. The proposed theory will
consider notions of stability that are attractive from a practical perspective.
Depending on the type of communication channel and system disturbances, our
results will range from deterministic, to strong probabilistic, or weak
probabilistic guarantees on the ability to successfully achieve the control
objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.