* 1917169
* Animal disaggregases and amyloid based contributions to early animal development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bryan Phillips, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymatic catalysts capable of
disentangling potentially disease-causing protein aggregates have been proposed
as a therapeutic solution to neurodegenerative disease. Given that all other
forms of non-animal life already have these enzymes, it raises the question of
why have humans lost the ability to express these potentially beneficial
remedies? The answer to animal-specific loss of protein disentangling enzymes
may lie in a potential beneficial role of protein aggregates that is
incompatible with the presence of potent enzymes capable of destroying them. In
this grant, the investigators will test this hypothesis in a comprehensive way
by using the complementary features of two powerful genetic model organisms.
Newly identified and potentially more subtle enzymatic regulators of protein
aggregation will be identified using the yeast model system and then tested for
regulation of the protein aggregates recently found in young, healthy embryos of
the nematode worms. This grant will carry out a comprehensive examination of
protein aggregates and their dedicated enzymatic regulators and seek to
understand how they may serve as novel mechanisms to control key events in early
animal development including the storage of key developmental proteins that can
be released as required. To further connections between science and society,
funds will also be used to develop new initiatives that expose middle school
students, teachers and undergraduates to methods for studying genomes and genome
evolution as well as the genetic analysis of complex
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
processes of amyloid formation and inheritance are historically studied because
of their associated pathologies, normal physiological roles of amyloid-type
aggregates are becoming more appreciated with many examples of beneficial
amyloid functions in species ranging from yeast to mammals. Interestingly, the
potent Hsp100-type disaggregase, which plays a role in aggregate clearance, is
absent in animal genomes. Thus, the central hypothesis of this grant is that
broad-spectrum disaggregases like the Hsp100 class are incompatible with the
evolution of animal multicellularity because protein aggregation and the
maintenance of the amyloid form of specific proteins are required for animal
development. Consistent with this, a surprising abundance of amyloid-type
aggregates is shown during early development of C. elegans embryos. The
objective of this grant is to characterize the role of amyloid aggregates during
development and to investigate their regulation by identifying and
characterizing developmentally expressed candidate animal disaggregases. To
accomplish this objective, research plan capitalizes on complementary and
synergistic experimental advantages of C. elegans and S. cerevisiae. Experiments
will 1) analyze the function and regulation of developmentally important
amyloids by characterizing candidate endogenous animal disaggregase activities,
2) characterize key aggregation-prone proteins and their regulators in C.
elegans development and 3) determine the function of C. elegans amyloidized
protein aggregates. Taken together, this grant will examine how amyloids and
their dedicated disaggregases serve as novel regulators of key events in early
animal development including storage, propagation and distribution of maternal
and zygotically synthesized proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.