* 1917695
* Collaborative Research: What Created the Southern Tibetan Plateau Drainage Divide? Integrated Tectonic and Geomorphic Investigation of the Gangdese Range and Yarlung River
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Adam Forte, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 263,641.00

Collisional motions between tectonic plates deform the Earth's crust, forming
mountain belts over millions of years. This process is most visible along the
boundaries between tectonic plates, but also occurs further away from plate
boundaries, where more subtle features reflect deeper-seated tectonic movements.
This project focuses on the Gangdese Mountains in southern Tibet, which host
some of the highest mountains of the Tibetan Plateau. These mountains are
located 200 kilometers north of the high peaks of the Himalayas, but are
actively rising due to deep-seated faulting related to collision between the
Indian and Asian tectonic plates. This range forms the boundary between the low-
relief, relatively flat interior of the Tibetan Plateau that retains all
precipitation in lakes, and the higher-relief region to the south that is
drained by the Yarlung-Siang-Brahmaputra river. By mapping the geologic
structures, determining when and at what rate rocks were exposed at the surface,
and comparing these data to simulations of erosion due to precipitation and
river incision, the project investigators will determine the details of the
deep-seated tectonic motions and how these motions affected the landscape of the
Tibetan Plateau and one of the largest river systems in Asia. Broader impacts of
this project will include the development of teaching modules based on this
research, the preparation of three PhD students and one postdoctoral researcher
to join the skilled scientific workforce, and outreach to the public through
museum-hosted instructional modules and public research presentations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand how and to what extent
Miocene to Recent tectonics affected the landscape and river systems of the
southern Tibetan Plateau. The project will test the hypothesis that a major
crustal ramp or duplex beneath the Gangdese Mountains drove rock uplift along
the southern boundary of the Plateau, in the interior of the Himalayan orogenic
belt, since at least Miocene time. Research will focus on whether rock uplift
outpaced erosion and established the drainage divide that currently separates
the expansive internally-drained region from the Yarlung-Siang-Brahmaputra river
system to the south. To address this hypothesis and other alternative
hypotheses, the researchers will conduct an integrated study involving field-
focused structural geology, thermochronology, landscape evolution modeling, and
detrital cosmogenic radionuclide dating. The hypotheses provide a set of
testable predictions for the geometry of rock exposures and the history of
deformation, timing and rates of rock cooling, expected landscape evolution in
response to various tectonic and/or climatic drivers, and millennial-scale
erosion rates for catchment basins. If a tectonic driver for establishment of
the southern drainage boundary is supported by the data, then tectonics is also
implicated in the evolution of the Yarlung-Siang-Brahmaputra River system, one
of the largest in the world. This research will advance our collective
understanding of how mountain belts and plateaus form in response to tectonics,
how mountain landscapes evolve and respond to variable tectonic influences, and
how major river systems develop during million-year to millennial
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.