* 1917993
* A New Dataset and Field Experiment on Television News Consumption and Political Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Joshua Kalla, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 666,276.00

Does left- and right-leaning partisan media undermine democratic accountability
and contribute to polarization? Could nudges to promote more balanced media
diets stick and, in the long run, increase democratic accountability and reduce
polarization? This project will investigate these questions using a novel
dataset matching panel survey responses to TV viewership data and a randomized
field experiment. This new dataset and research design will advance prior work
by encouraging changes in media viewership and not relying on self-reported
media consumption. Findings from this research will deepen the understanding of
how citizens from across the ideological spectrum consume media and speak to the
feasibility of a range of potential strategies to encourage citizens to form
more balanced media habits. This will help catalyze the development of new
interventions that could also be applied in the context of TV news, social
media, and internet news.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PIs will
conduct a randomized field experiment to investigate whether a temporary
intervention can cause people to permanently broaden their media diets -- and
whether this broader exposure increases political knowledge and decreases
polarization. In the experiment, the PIs will incentivize current viewers of
partisan media from across the ideological spectrum to consume substitute news
for several weeks. The PIs will behaviorally track whether media consumption in
the treatment group changes even after these incentives cease -- as citizens
form new, lasting habits -- by using TV viewership data. To measure opinion
change, the PIs will also conduct a series of panel surveys to measure both
short- and long-term effects. Data from this project -- including the stimuli
and the survey data matched to the TV viewership data -- will be made publicly
available to promote future scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.