* 1917982
* Collaborative Research: Open Player and Community Modeling as a Learning Tool
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Magy Seif El-Nasr, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 02/28/2021
* USD 493,917.00

An active research area in intelligent tutoring systems and game-based learning
is personalized learning. In these environments, the computer analyzes learner
behaviors in real time and builds individual models of critical aspects of
learning (e.g., level of engagement, knowledge acquisition) to adapt the system.
While these player models capture essential elements of a learner, the valuable
information they contain is usually opaque and hidden from the learners. As a
result, players of adaptive learning games do not know how the game categorizes
them and why the game changes. This then affects their learning, especially when
learning complex concepts. To address this, the project will investigate a novel
approach to personalized learning environments by providing learners with a
toolset, called Open Player and Community Model, which allows learners to see
their actions, tactics, and strategies as well as those of others. A playback
system with a labeling toolset will also be created to allow teachers and other
learners to annotate patterns they see others use, which will shed light on
strategies and mental models of solutions, errors, corrections, and
misconceptions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will explore how students
learn problem-solving with tools that allow them to reflect on their practices
and on how others solved similar problems. The research will study two
questions: First, how do people engage with user/player models when they are
made transparent and used to reflect on learning? Second, how can designers
create meaningful visualizations for learners and instructors to support
reflection on user/player models and crowdsourced annotations of problem solving
behavior? Tools to support collecting and visualizing open player and community
models will be developed and made available to the public. Studies of the tools
will be conducted to determine how they support learning in complex
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.