* 1917288
* Doctoral Symposium at the 2019 Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Conference (MICCAI 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Tianming Liu, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2021
* USD 10,000.00

This grant partially supports the participation of students from US-based
institutions in the Doctoral Symposium at the 2019 Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI) conference. MICCAI is the annual
conference of MICCAI society with expected over 1,000 attendees in 2019 from all
the world. This grant will help the career development of some of the brightest
junior researchers in MICCAI fields attending the conference, contributes to the
research community in general by drawing attention to an important aspect of
graduate student development. The doctoral symposium committee will select
awardees, with priority given to those from underrepresented racial and ethnic
groups, individuals with disabilities, individuals from disadvantaged
backgrounds.

The requested funding will partially support travels for 10 US-based students to
attend MICCAI 2019 and participate in the doctoral symposium. The proposed
symposium will feature both invited and selected research presentations that
focus on MICCAI topics. The MICCAI Society is dedicated to the promotion,
preservation and facilitation of research, education and practice in the field
of medical image computing and computer assisted medical interventions including
biomedical imaging and robotics. The multidisciplinary nature of these emerging
fields brings together clinicians, bioscientists, computer scientists,
engineers, physicists, and other researchers who are contributing to, and need
to keep abreast of, advances in the methodology and applications. This doctoral
symposium provides an opportunity to students including students from US based
institutions to present, discuss, and receive feedback on original research
within the broader community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.