* 1917851
* Networkable Diode Laser Based Differential Absorption Lidar (DIAL) for Temperature Profiling in the Lower Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Kevin Repasky, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/2023
* USD 230,517.00

Weather forecasts, especially for short-term events, critically depend on the
knowledge of the lower atmosphere temperature and moisture structure. Currently,
the main method to obtain those measurement is through infrequent and sparely-
situated weather balloons or high-powered laser-based systems that are
impractical for long-term use. This project will build upon a series of awards
that have resulted in a set of lower-power, laser-based instruments that can run
unattended and retrieve water vapor in the lower atmosphere. This award will
expand upon current techniques to allow for a system that can also retrieve
temperature in the lower atmosphere at low-power, a capability that does not
currently exist. If the work proves successful, it could have a significant
impact on weather forecasting, especially for severe weather and precipitation.
The project also includes a training component for the next generation of remote
sensing scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop and
demonstrate the ability of the differential absorption lidar (DIAL) technique to
profile temperature in the lower atmosphere. The DIAL technique has been
successfully applied to water vapor, but additional work is required to
demonstrate the capacity to retrieve temperature. The advantage that a DIAL-
based instrument has over other current techniques to retrieve temperature
profiles is the time and spatial resolution of the measurements and the
potential for unattended, low-power operations. The long-term goal of this line
of research and development is to produce networkable, low-cost, ground-based
remote sensing instruments that can close the observational gaps in lower
tropospheric thermodynamic profiling needed by the weather and climate
communities. The main steps in the project will be to: 1) choose the appropriate
oxygen absorption feature to work with, 2) build the new system using existing
diode-laser-based (DLB) architecture, 3) develop the final retrieval algorithm
and associated data acquisition software, 4) perform initial field testing of
the instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.