* 1917668
* Simulating Challenging Social Situations with Intelligent Agents to Support Novice Computer Science Teachers in Self- and Social- Regulation Strategies
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Carolyn Rose, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 747,743.00

Effective educators must often engage in difficult conversations that require
emotional self-regulation (strategies of managing oneself) and social-regulation
(strategies of managing the interaction between oneself and others) to have
successful outcomes. In dealing with angry parents, confused students, or
frustrated colleagues, educators must address stressful situations while
remaining calm, attending to student needs, and simultaneously deploying
effective teaching practice. When these conversations engage issues of identity,
self-esteem, or sense of belonging, the consequences of educators' words and
actions can make a significant impact--for good or for ill--on the lives of
young people. In this project, the team builds upon an existing mobile web
application for digital simulations, Teacher Moments. Novice teachers will be
immersed in vignettes of classroom life presented in text, animation, and video.
Participants provide improvised text and audio responses to scenarios involving
students, parents or other school personnel. The project will develop
intelligent agents within the system to analyze participant audio data for
emotional and sociolinguistic cues to help assess whether novice teachers are
practicing effective self-regulation and social-regulation strategies that may
lower the level of tension within the interaction. These "regulation sensors"
will be combined with intelligent, personalized interventions to support novice
teachers through scaffolded reflection and feedback, while supporting teacher
educators with data for coaching. If successful, the models can be adapted to
other fields--such as social work, pastoral care, law enforcement, and medicine
--where practitioners must effectively manage difficult conversations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is implemented as a research-
practice partnership combining the expertise of learning scientists,
computational linguists, and teacher educators. The team will recruit a cohort
of ten Fellows, teacher educators who train and support computer science
teachers. Regarding specific activities for the learning and educational
research, the team will: (1) co-design and field test new scenarios in Teacher
Moments that reflect high-leverage, high-equity computer science practices; (2)
determine the baseline affective experience of and conversational strategies
employed by preservice computer science teachers in responding to difficult
teaching conversations in a digital simulation; (3) use technology to support
preservice computer science teachers in affective self-regulation with the aim
of a positive impact on students; (4) support preservice teachers' use of
effective conversational strategies during difficult teaching conversations in
the simulation; and (5) foster metacommunicative awareness in preservice
computer science teachers. With respect to technology research and development,
the project will: (1) develop sensors based on natural language processing that
can identify more and less effective emotional and social regulation; (2)
develop instructional scaffolds that can support novice teachers in emotional
regulation, social regulation, and teaching practice; (3) personalize the
deployment of appropriate scaffolds--directly to novice teachers and through
teacher educators--based on data collected by regulation sensors; (4) evaluate
how digital clinical simulation systems with regulation sensors and
instructional scaffolds need to be adapted to diverse teacher education
contexts; and (5) support technical foundations for an intelligent teacher
feedback system for novice educators with potential for applications in other
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.