* 1917106
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Settlement Transformation and Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Marcello Canuto, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 15,662.00

Researchers across the social and environmental sciences are intensely
interested in understanding how complex societies respond to environmental
change, and narratives drawn from archaeology are central to the way researchers
and the general public think about this topic. Most such narratives about how
past human societies have dealt with environmental change conflate political
stability with social stability, assuming that if a political entity survives it
means that the society has successfully adapted. But the interests of polities
and of the individual communities they administer do not always align, and
maintaining political stability in a rapidly changing world comes at the cost of
at least some political subjects who must bear the costs of "adaptation." Luke
Auld-Thomas, a Ph.D. candidate at Tulane University, will conduct archaeological
research under the supervision of Dr. Marcello A. Canuto to investigate the
reorganization of communities in the hinterlands of El Achiotal, an ancient Maya
polity that survived a period of severe environmental change with its political
institutions intact. This project advances understanding of the processes that
occur within polities beset by environmental change, asking whether political
stability in the context of environmental duress is underwritten by the
reorganization of other aspects of social life. Such considerations are
fundamental as the contemporary world absorbs the effects of environmental
change and policymakers grapple with how to distribute the costs of maintaining
social and/or political stability, and this research will shed light on the
internal social transformations that allow polities to endure. Moreover, the
research location in northwestern Guatemala is an area under extreme
environmental and political pressure tied to narcotics trafficking, illegal
ranging, and deforestation, and the project plays a stabilizing role by helping
to strengthen local stakeholder institutions with an interest in maintaining the
forest and building legal and sustainable livelihoods, specifically
archaeological tourism. The project will train Guatemalan undergraduate students
in the use of remote sensing technology in archaeology, increasing local
capacity for documenting and preserving cultural heritage resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Auld-Thomas will utilize airborne laser scanning
(lidar) to rapidly document the distribution of archaeological features
underneath forest canopy, which allows researchers to move directly to targeted
excavations instead of spending years locating archaeological remains through
traditional ground survey. The project develops a rigorous methodology for
rapid, lidar-assisted settlement survey and excavation that is easily adaptable
to other forested regions, ultimately allowing archaeological research in these
areas to proceed more efficiently in terms of both time and funding. Through
test excavations of a large sample of both residential and public buildings
(totaling about 50 sampled buildings) distributed across four intensively-
surveyed ~1km2 settlement zones around El Achiotal, this project will document
changes in where people lived and in the types of settlements they inhabited
through time, allowing for a reconstruction of broad-scale social changes in the
hinterlands of the El Achiotal polity as it coped with a changing
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.