* 1917969
* Labor webs and the transformation of local transportation infrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Tarini Bedi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 126,001.00

A key challenge for urban planners worldwide is to address how best to enhance
mobility and transport infrastructure for urban dwellers. As transport options
are rapidly changing and as new transport infrastructures are being planned in
cities across the world, we still know very little about how these changes to
transport systems are affecting those who work in the transport industry and how
economic, political, and labor relationships in cities are being affected by
these changes. This anthropological project will address this gap. Through a
fine-grained study of the transport industry the project will seek to understand
how changes in transport infrastructure can have impacts on many aspects of life
in a city. The data gleaned from the research would also inform and advance
policy in urban planning by offering researchers, planners and public officials
insights into the factors that enable and inhibit urban mobility. The project
specifically includes dissemination activities targeted at transport policy-
makers and urban planners in the United States and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Tarini Bedi of the University of Illinois at
Chicago will explore how stakeholders, including urban planners, transport
labor, and urban citizens engage with the changes in urban transport
infrastructure. The research will be conducted in two cities, the Indian city of
Mumbai and the Southeast Asian city of Singapore. These cities are both ideal
laboratories for exploring questions of transport infrastructure because of
several new major transport infrastructure initiatives and investments in Mumbai
and because the city of Singapore's transport planning has become a model for
cities in Asia, Europe, and the United States. The researcher will conduct
twenty-four months of research across these two cities using a range of
ethnographic data collection and analytical techniques, including participant
observation and interviews with urban transport planners, transport labor,
municipal officials, and investors in transport and road infrastructures. The
project will make important contributions to debates in anthropology, transport
policy, labor studies, and political economy more broadly. The data will allow
the researcher to better understand the challenges of urban mobility by
exploring the possible relations among urban planning, urban mobility and
infrastructure, and the experiences of transport
labor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.