* 1917537
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Implicit One-handed Mobile User Authentication by Induced Thumb Biometrics on Touch-screen Handheld Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Lina Zhou, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 626,030.00

People often store private and sensitive data on their mobile devices, and the
security of these devices is essential. This project advances and develops a new
process for verifying a user's legitimate right to access a mobile device.
Existing research has not made this process very usable for many people who lack
dexterity or the use of both hands. This research aims to design and develop a
method for one-handed authentication on a touch-screen mobile handheld device.
The objective is to improve both security and usability of authentication. The
proposed methods also will detect unauthorized access to a mobile device in a
continuous manner, even if the password is stolen. The interdisciplinary nature
of this work will promote teaching, training, and education in mobile security
and privacy, human-computer interaction, mobile accessibility, machine learning,
and behavioral science. The researchers will actively engage students at both
graduate and undergraduate levels in their research activities, and make a
strong effort to engage women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support one-handed mobile
authentication on a touch-screen mobile handheld device by inducing thumb
biometrics and by enabling one-handed text entry based on thumb strokes. This
project will advance authentication research and practice by: (1) laying the
groundwork for one-handed authentication in support of both point-of-entry and
implicit continuous authentication; (2) introducing a new venue for improving
the security of one-handed authentication by inducing and fusing thumb
biometrics from user interactions with a touch-screen mobile device; (3)
creating new design principles for improving the usability of mobile
authentication; and (4) addressing accessibility challenges for users with
situational or visual impairments via the support of keypress-less text entry on
a mobile touch screen. This project will lend itself to a new solution that can
address the common security-usability tradeoff of mobile authentication methods.