* 1917786
* MRI: Acquisition of Gel Permeation Chromatograph with Multiple Detectors to Expand Capabilities for Macromolecular Characterization
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Melanie McNeil, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 116,295.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Madalyn Radlauer from San Jose State
University and colleagues Melanie McNeil, Chester Simocko and Eric Tillman are
acquiring a gel permeation chromatograph (GPC) equipped with refractive index,
ultrviolet and multiangle light scattering detectors. In general, gel permeation
chromatography is used to separate compounds based on molecular weight, size,
and shape. The technique is commonly employed for the analysis or purification
of polymers. The award support collaborations in polymer science between San
Jose State University and Santa Clara University which promote research
experiences for their large and diverse undergraduate student bodies. Summer
research students are recruited from nearby community colleges thus expanding
research training. The instrument gives students experience using vital
instrumentation that they carry with them into their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award provides gel permeation chromatograph
instrumentation useful for examining polymers used as catalyst scaffolds as well
as for studies of precision polymers used for ion transport and energy storage.
The GPC is employed in evaluating the effect of additives on the morphology and
performance of polysulfone water purification membranes and for studying post-
polymerization reactions leading to topological architectures such as cyclic
polymers, star polymers, and branched polymers. The instrument is helpful for
investigations of redox-active polymers used in organic batteries and other
charge storage devices. Other uses of the GPC are for determining structure-
property relationships of recycled polymers and composites. Finally, the
instrument is used for studies of the effects of irradiation-based sterilization
techniques on the properties of polymers used in implantable
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.