* 1917105
* CAREER: Wireless Flexible Micro-sensors to Monitor Cardiac Phenotypes in Zebrafish Models of Heart Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Hung Cao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/28/2022
* USD 366,636.00

PI: Cao, Hung&lt;br/&gt;Proposal #: 1652818&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heart diseases
are the leading cause of death in the developed world due to failure to
adequately replace lost ventricular myocardium (heart wall) damaged by loss of
blood flow due to blood clots or other forms of obstruction. This failure is
attributed to the limited ability of adult mammalian ventricular cardiomyocytes
(CMs = heart muscle cells) to divide and regenerate the lost myocardium. In
contrast, zebrafish hearts fully regenerate after 20% ventricular removal and
thus provide a genetically tractable model system for heart regeneration
investigations. While the zebrafish heart has been extensively assessed using
immunohistochemistry and DNA and protein analyses to study the roles of
different signaling pathways in cardiac development and regeneration, which is
thought to have relevance for developing mammalian regeneration therapies,
current approaches cannot elucidate the progress of the process (i.e.,
regeneration) of the same samples over time. The objective of this project,
which builds on the PI's demonstrated ability to obtain quality (favorable high
signal to noise ratio) electrocardiogram (ECG) signals in sedated animals, is to
provide revolutionary polymer-based wireless devices for long-term acquisition
of intrinsic ECG in freely swimming zebrafish models of heart regeneration.
Broader society interests include the promise 1) to enable novel cardiac
therapy; 2) to reduce cost and time of drug screening; and 3) to pave the way
for numerous comfortable patch-based healthcare wearables for both patients and
healthy populations. Integration of research with education activities are
designed to help close the gap of engineering education and biomedical research,
including efforts to 1) inspire and train students from different disciplinary
and levels to follow higher education and a bioengineering career; 2) to nurture
K-12 students directly and indirectly through their teachers by broadening
knowledge in state-of-the-art hi-technology applied in bioengineering and
medical research; 3) to translate cutting-edge technologies used in rigorous
research to real world devices directly supporting society; 4) to engage
multidisciplinary personnel from engineering, science and medicine to tackle
unmet bioengineering challenge; and 5) to establish international collaborations
to exchange innovations as well as to address global issues such as water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike mammalian hearts, which have limited
ability to regenerate myocardium after ischemia induced infarct due to the
limited capacity of adult cardiomyocytes (CMs) to divide and proliferate,
zebrafish (Danio rerio) hearts fully regenerate after 20% ventricular resection.
The central theme of this project lies in the applications of flexible and
stretchable microelectronics and wireless power transfer to carry out heart
regeneration studies in freely swimming zebrafish models. The project involves
three milestones: 1) Development of flexible and stretchable micro-electrode
array (MEA) membranes for long-term recording of electrocardiogram (ECG) in
zebrafish models of heart regeneration: Four working electrodes approximately
200 um in diameter will be placed near the heart and a reference electrode will
reside on the body. 2) Design and implementation of a wireless system (an "ECG
Jacket") including wireless powering (inductive coupling or ultrasound) and data
communication for remote and continuous electrocardiac monitoring of freely
swimming fish (multiple fish monitored simultaneously) in a circular tank under
biological investigations. 3) Deploying the system to elucidate the roles of
specific genes towards myocardium regeneration in zebrafish (multiple mutant-
like models with injuries induced by either amputation or a cryogenic approach)
with potential translations to humans and to demonstrate the translational
potentials for i) drug screening (zebrafish will be treated with well-known
drugs that affect cardiac activity, e.g. amiodarone and verapamiland) and ii)
physiological monitoring in humans with comfortable (flexible and stretchable)
and unobtrusive patch-based devices (e.g., ECG, EEG, EOG, EMG, and blood
pressure) in the home setting. The technologies developed will enable long-term
(up to 2 months) ECG recordings of specific myocardial sites and thus uniquely
determine the overall functionality of the area under investigation without
effects of sedation. The conventional view of mammalian hearts as having
virtually no regenerative capacity is now questioned by recent animal and human
studies, in which new CMs may arise from existing CMs and progenitor or stem
cells. The discovery of specific genes' roles towards heart regeneration in
zebrafish studies would suggest methods to activate limited regenerative
capacity in the human heart, garnering optimism about potential cardiac
therapies.