* 1917298
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Data Collection on Wildfire Urban Interface (WUI) for Schools and Hospitals Following the 2018 California Camp Fire
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Sara Hamideh, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 09/30/2020
* USD 38,110.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) team is assessing the impact of the Camp
wildfire on schools and hospitals in Paradise, CA. These evaluations will have
important implications for understanding the effectiveness of mitigation
practices. The outcomes of this research will include a database, recorded using
the advanced technologies of the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Natural Hazards Reconnaissance Facility
equipment, of the performance of schools and hospitals throughout the town of
Paradise, California, the efficiency and effectiveness of sustainable Wildfire
Urban Interface (WUI) mitigation practices, and the impact of damaged schools
and hospitals on the surrounding region after the wildfire. The data collected
from this investigation will be used to advance computational models for the
predication of community performance in a WUI fire hazard, and post-event
functionality rates. The results of this research will also enable decision-
makers to better understand the impact of mitigation techniques and the holistic
impact on a region due to damage in one town and will assist in planning and
investments to reduce WUI fire vulnerability. This scientific research
contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and
to advance our national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to
assist recovery after wildfires.

In this RAPID project, the team will investigate the performance of wildfire
mitigation techniques as they apply to schools and hospitals, and to
qualitatively investigate the direct impacts of damage to Paradise schools and
hospitals on the surrounding communities. The objectives of this project are to:
(1) observe and document damage to schools and hospitals due to fire impacts of
the Camp Fire in the town of Paradise, CA (2) document mitigation strategies for
fire hazards implemented prior to the California Camp Fire, based on pre-fire
mitigation plans regulated by Butte County and the town of Paradise, (3)
qualitatively investigate the additional burden that damage to schools and
hospitals in Paradise has on the networks of the surrounding regions, and (4)
use the data collected from Paradise, California and the surrounding area to
inform mitigation and better design criteria for communities located in regions
vulnerable to fire hazards. The collected data will be used to establish a
holistic performance of facilities that are critical to the recovery of a
community after a disaster. The collected data will be archived and made
publicly available in the NSF-supported NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.designsafe-ci.org/). This project will train a graduate student and
promote collaboration between U.S. colleagues working together on enhancing the
resilience of communities with fire hazard risk. The findings of this project
will be disseminated through a public webinar as well as podcasts on the NHERI
web site (https://www.designsafe-ci.org).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.