* 1917560
* Collaborative Research: Improving research coordination for Summit Station and the Dry-Snow Zone of Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Von Walden, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Renee Crain
* 07/31/2022
* USD 109,985.00

Summit Station (72N, 38W, 3250 m.a.s.l.) hosts the Greenland Environmental
Observatory, a cooperation between the National Science Foundation and the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with permission from the Danish
Commission for Scientific Research in Greenland to provide long-term
environmental measurements. Summit is the only year-round, high-elevation, free-
tropospheric, inland environmental observatory in the Arctic, and fills a unique
niche in the international scientific community's global observing system. The
Summit Station Science Coordination Office is an advisory body that serves the
scientific community, the National Science Foundation's Arctic Research Support
and Logistics Program and the Arctic Research Support &amp; Logistics Services
contractor by making recommendations about ways to accommodate or mitigate
conflicting requests from different science teams working at Summit and
suggesting ways that projects might reduce their logistical footprint. The
Science Coordination Office also suggests science-based priorities for capital
investments by the National Science Foundation at Summit. The Science
Coordination Office strives to develop a true community of Summit users through
open communication and by encouraging shared use of resources and key data sets.
It also endeavors to focus the Summit community on the transformative questions
identified by the participants at the Summit Station Science Summit in March
2017 and encourages the community to synthesize available data to identify
innovative approaches to address these knowledge gaps.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Science Coordination Office advances discovery and understanding of processes
acting across the interior of the Greenland Ice Sheet while promoting teaching,
training, and learning. New features of the GEO Summit website, aimed
specifically at new Principal Investigators, will provide rich web content for
interested students and the general public. Over the next three years
opportunities to interface with the new Greenland Climate Research Centre in
Nuuk and add website content tailored to Greenlandic students and researchers
will be actively pursued. The ability to quickly link to content about Summit
Station will enable outreach programs by Summit researchers to increase their
impact. Much effort in this project will be placed towards encouraging broad
dissemination of results to enhance scientific and technical understanding. This
will be accomplished by continuing to provide a clearinghouse for accessing
Summit data, an extensive Summit bibliography, and a detailed list of planning
activities to avoid duplicate collection of data at Summit. The Science
Coordination Office will also provide greater visibility to the broader
community by chairing sessions at international meetings and hosting data
workshops that focus on Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.