* 1917159
* Securing Legacy Seismic Data to Enable Future Discoveries: Albuquerque, NM - September 2019
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Lorraine Hwang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop will bring together stakeholders from federal agencies, national
labs, and universities who are data, domain, and computational scientists to
advance community goals for creating the framework for digital preservation and
access to developing digital collections. Discussion will also include the tools
necessary to make these data ready for research usage. Invited keynote speakers
will frame the discussions and all participants will have a chance to contribute
through breakout groups, interactive polling, and poster sessions.The writing
group will summarize the discussions in a document addressing the two broad
goals of the workshop: Goal 1: Work towards developing the framework for
preservation of longitudinal seismic data. This includes recommendations for
prioritizing scanning efforts, defining metadata and data imaging standards to
improve discovery and (re)use, and identifying the associated technical and
social challenges. Goal 2: Create an interdisciplinary network of data, domain,
and computational scientists to facilitate management, access, and use of
digitally imaged legacy data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New seismological data mining
methods are supporting discoveries and cross-disciplinary research across Earth
system science. Such research is challenged by the relatively short time period
of observation for which digital records are readily available. Historical data,
recorded on paper and other physical media, potentially extend the time period
of Earth observation to many decades. However, if such dark data are to be
preserved and made available digitally to harness the data revolution, there are
compelling challenges. The historical data are largely siloed; data are only
available to scientists who can commit to traveling to specific archives or from
archives capable of serving data requests. In addition, some of the physical
media have been damaged or lost and/or at risk of losing stewardship. Hence, it
is imperative that the community organize to preserve as well as make available
these irreplaceable collections. The workshop will provide support for early-
career and participants from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.