* 1917868
* WORKSHOP: 2019 ACM Conference on Creativity and Cognition Graduate Student Symposium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Julie Hui, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This is funding to support participation by students and faculty based in U.S.
educational institutions in a Graduate Student Symposium (workshop) to be
organized in conjunction with the 2019 ACM Creativity &amp; Cognition (C&amp;C)
conference, which will take place June 23-26 in San Diego. Creativity is the
cornerstone and the fundamental motive of both the aesthetic and engineering
disciplines. It is a critical element of our economic and social prosperity, as
a precursor to scientific discoveries, technological advances, and new forms of
cultural and aesthetic experiences. Held every other year in an international
location since 1993, C&amp;C serves as a gathering place for the diverse
communities of researchers, designers, engineers, and artists who provide an
innovative and cross-disciplinary perspective on creativity and cognition as
well as technological innovation. C&amp;C is the only ACM-sponsored conference
in which human creativity is the central focus, and as such it provides pathways
for substantially different kinds of work including interactive art pieces, user
studies of creativity support tools, and new sensor technologies for creative
practice. It serves as a premier forum for presenting the world's best new
research investigating computing's impact on and ability to promote creativity
in all forms of human experience. The conference particularly values research
that explores new, synergistic roles for computing and people in creative
processes, or that addresses situations where computing, as contextualized in
sociotechnical systems, may sometimes have an undesirable impact. More
information about the 12th conference may be found online at
http://cc.acm.org/2019/. The GSS will bring together up to 12 promising doctoral
students (8 of whom will be eligible for funding) and 4 distinguished
researchers from academia and industry as mentors, in a day-long event that will
be held on June 23, 2019, the day before the main C&amp;C conference. The
student submissions will appear in the C&amp;C Proceedings, and they will be
indexed in the ACM Digital Library. The students will also be invited to present
their work at the main conference during the poster session, which will give
their work wider visibility in the community while also affording an opportunity
for them to talk one-on-one with peers and other senior researchers. To promote
diversity, no more than two graduate students will be accepted from any one
institution, and if there are two then at least one of them must be
female.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GSS will provide graduate students with a
unique opportunity to present early stage research and receive feedback from
mentors with different disciplinary backgrounds. They will gain experience and
skills in communicating their own work and critiquing the work of peers. They
will come away with new research insights and possible directions, with better
understanding of prior work and of the field overall, and with new awareness of
potentially useful methods that draw from different disciplines. And they will
have the opportunity to build professional and social connections that transcend
the event, and to gain awareness of potential career paths in both academia and
industry. During the morning, each student will briefly present his or her work
in a short formal talk. Mentors will lead a brief discussion of the work,
including the research question, method of addressing the question, possible
results and findings, significance of the work, and pointers to related work and
research areas. The mentors will also offer a critique of each student's written
and oral presentation. These discussions will continue through a working lunch.
In the afternoon the mentors will lead a broad discussion that relates the
presentations to one another and to the other work in the field. They will
attempt to highlight common themes that emerged across the individual student
works, and note differences and similarities in research methods both across
individual research projects as well as across diverse intellectual threads
within the creativity and cognition field as a whole. In the last portion of the
day, the mentors will lead a discussion on pursuing a career in this
interdisciplinary field and what the opportunities are from different
disciplinary perspectives (e.g., arts and design vs. technology, or academia vs.
industry). The GSS will conclude with a working
dinner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.