* 1917404
* Incorporation of Near Surface Geophysical Methods to Household and Village Survey
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Colin Grier, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 198,101.00

Dr. Colin Grier, along with an interdisciplinary team of scholars from
Washington State University and the University of British Columbia, will conduct
research to establish the footprint and internal organization of ancient cedar
plankhouses in the Salish Sea region of the Pacific Northwest of North America.
These large houses, and the complex multifamily households that resided in them,
have been the economic engines of the society and the scale at which resources
were managed and maintained over the last five millennia. Investigations of
plankhouses will therefore provide foundational data for understanding how
small-scale societies can effectively organize economics, people and resources
in ways that promote sustainability and resilience at the local level. The study
of Northwest Coast lifeways, with its emphasis on local management of resources
and decentralized decision making, can reveal potentially new strategies and
options for reshaping current social practices towards greater sustainability.
Archaeology is particularly suited to address these goals because it considers a
range of societies with multiple different organizational principles. The
project will provide cutting-edge training for graduate and undergraduate
students in these increasingly important geophysical techniques. Moreover, in
the face of rising sea levels, the methodological advances that will result
offer a mechanism to expediently collect critical archaeological data from the
globally-threatened coastal archaeological record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Grier and his team will employ geophysical prospection methods, a set of
techniques used to visualize the subsurface of archaeological sites without
excavation. Traditional archaeological excavation is both costly and time
consuming, which has resulted in a very limited sample of well-documented houses
and villages for the region. Geophysical methods can provide a low-impact
alternative, but they have been applied only in a limited way on the Northwest
Coast. The researchers will develop a rigorous methodology for connecting the
signals generated by geophysical techniques, such as ground penetrating radar
and magnetometry, to specific buried archaeological features. They will generate
a predictive model and evaluate predictions using limited "ground-trothing"
excavation. Archaeological sites are a non-renewable resource, and geophysical
methods, if systematically applied, can provide a means to acquire substantial
data with minimal impacts, an approach consistent with the interests of First
Nations/Native American Tribes, and useful for Cultural Resource Management
practitioners and Public/Federal land managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.