* 1917994
* Exploring Social Learning in Collaborative Augmented Reality with Virtual Agents as Learning Companions
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Scotty Craig, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 797,242.00

In the context of medical student education, this Cyberlearning project will
investigate how to design rich social learning experiences that integrate real
and virtual features (objects or people) to enhance the learning process. To
simulate a role-playing experience for patient communication, the project will
incorporate augmented reality, a 3D technology that enhances perception of the
real world through a contextual overlay of virtual objects/information onto
physical objects in real time. This project mirrors how medical students may
work in a future telemedicine environment where intelligent virtual entities and
human teams seamlessly interact for patient care. Results will inform the design
of virtual agents/humans to support learning in a variety of educational
domains. The research will provides powerful new tools for medical education
including communication with patients which will foster lifelong, and just-in-
time training and will contribute to advancing national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research employs a human-like, artificial
intelligence-driven, high-fidelity, Emotive Virtual Patient that has life-like
emotions and nonverbal expression with conversational and assessment capability
using natural language processing. This is integrated within the Microsoft
HoloLens to allow a remote participant to review a student's performance and
provide feedback through text, audio, and video. Through iterative design-based
research, the research will investigate: 1) how students learn by proxy through
observing co-located and remote virtual and real collaborators; 2) whether
students prefer to receive educational feedback from a co-located or remote
peer, virtual peer, or a virtual professor; and, 3) the effects of collective
agency when students can choose to learn socially from combinations of real or
virtual learning companions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.