* 1917625
* Collaborative Research: Parent-EMBRACE: An Embodied ITS for Improving Comprehension during fParent-Child Shared Reading
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Erin Walker, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2023
* USD 226,036.00

Young Latino dual language learners are a growing segment of our society.
Unfortunately, many of these children struggle with reading comprehension, and
their parents do not always have the tools to support them. That is, the parents
are often recent immigrants who are also poor readers in both Spanish and
English, and thus read infrequently with their children. When these parents do
engage in shared reading, they do not ask the sorts of questions that promote
comprehension. This project will build upon the already-developed iPad
application, EMBRACE, which helps dual language learners become successful
readers of English. EMBRACE will be modified to encourage parent/child shared
reading; to train the parents on how to ask questions that enhance
comprehension; and to promote reading in both languages since reading skill
transfers between languages. Thus, the work will potentially impact society by
improving reading skills and educational achievement of both parents and
children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to three areas of
science. The first contribution is to the study of human-computer interaction.
EMBRACE will be modified with the first intelligent tutoring system designed
specifically for parent-child use, thus uncovering design principles for the
creation of intelligent learning environments that are sensitive to how they are
being used and by whom. Second, experimental testing of the new EMBRACE system
with families will contribute to understanding the processes that enhance
bilingual education and how interventions can positively influence these
processes. Third, a component of the testing includes the use of
electroencephalography to trace changes in brain activity produced by the
intervention. Thus, the research contributes to the cognitive psychology and
neuroscience of reading comprehension by using a combination of process data,
outcome data, and neurocognitive data from both the children and their
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.