* 1917550
* Collaborative Research: Immersive Virtual Reality with Haptic Feedback to Improve Safety Hazard Recognition, Assessment, and Decision-Making Among Construction Professionals
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jeremi London, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The construction industry accounts for hundreds of fatalities and hundreds of
thousands of non-fatal injuries annually. The current modes of safety training
do not effectively prepare practitioners to build safely. Research shows that
safety learning occurs to a great extent through experiential learning -
especially when individuals experience or witness an injury firsthand. While
these experiences may be impactful for learning, it is impossible to wait for
all practitioners to sustain (or witness) a serious injury in order to learn
safe construction practices. Therefore, this work aims to explore the use of
increasingly affordable virtual reality and haptic feedback technologies to
provide realistic, yet safe, learning environments that aim to replicate the
types of situations where injuries have historically occurred onsite. The
research team will develop construction site training modules where participants
may navigate a virtual job site with the aim of identifying safety hazards.
Unlike prior virtual-reality-based safety training, when hazards go unnoticed,
users will see, hear, and feel haptic feedback to simulate the ramifications of
the missed hazard. The research team will collect data before, during, and after
experimental treatments to determine the extent to which this mode of simulation
supports safety learning among users. The team envisions this work providing
evidence to guide both researchers and practitioners interested in using
enhanced safety training simulations by studying how immersive virtual
experiences can impact learners on a psychological level to make them care about
safety in order to catalyze learning related to safe construction
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research are to (1)
create a novel and fully immersive Virtual Reality safety education environment
that provides haptic feedback to users when hazards go unrecognized and
unaddressed; (2) measure the extent to which instruction in this environment
enhances learning outcomes in construction safety compared to traditional media;
and (3) measure and explain the psychological mediators of cyberlearning in this
multimedia-rich environment. The following research questions guide this study:
How can haptic technology be incorporated with Virtual Reality technology to
create an immersive visualization experience for construction safety education;
and to what extent does Virtual Reality with haptic activate emotional arousal,
generate situational awareness, and foster meaningful safety learning through
multimedia? The experiment defined in this work will enable testing of
explanatory hypotheses that examine the mediating roles of emotional arousal and
situational interest in the cyberlearning process. Qualitative findings
regarding multimedia learning will be explained using open-ended constructive
interviews with the research subjects. This work will provide a novel approach
for developing and using immersive cyberlearning experiences aimed at improving
construction safety training. This will advance the body of knowledge related to
designing cyberlearning environments, and will also provide empirical evidence
of the ways in which this mode of education impacts safety learning. In terms of
broad impact, this work directly aims to teach behaviors that will reduce
injuries and save lives in construction. Furthermore, this work aims to target
this form of learning using a scalable and cost-effective medium, which may
broaden access to this critical form of cyberlearning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.