* 1917488
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Sociolegal Analysis of the Discourse of Competing Affirmative Rights Claims
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Angela Jenks, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 24,982.00

Today, important social and legal decisions are increasingly made based on
arguments about rights. Yet as opposing sides of contested social issues both
adopt the language of rights to make their claims, how do societies prioritize
and respond to competing understandings of who has rights? Government officials,
religious institutions, legal systems, and various stakeholders may strongly
assert affirmative rights claims that inherently conflict with one another. This
creates problems for policymakers who must determine whose rights to protect,
and also consider the impact of these decisions on the lives of citizens. The
research supported by this award uses intensive ethnographic methods to better
understand the social and legal contexts in which multiple perspectives and
declarations of rights emerge, and the meaning of these claims for experiences
of citizenship. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection
and analysis, the project would enhance scientific understanding by broadly
disseminating its findings to organizations invested in discovering more
effective methods for communicating science to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted by University of
California, Irvine, anthropology doctoral candidate Emily Matteson, with
guidance from Dr. Angela C. Jenks. The research will take place in Valparaiso
and Santiago, Chile, where recent changes in health policy have raised questions
about how different kinds of rights are practiced, prioritized, and protected.
The researcher will work with stakeholders, NGOs, doctors and public health
officials, patients, and policymakers, to examine how these diverse actors make,
relate, and enact rights claims in the context of shifting policies. Data will
be collected through participant observation, interviews, mapping, and archival
research. Findings from this research will produce the rich, multi-perspective
data needed by policymakers and social scientists to understand the competing
rights-based frameworks that impact both experiences of citizenship and access
to healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.