* 1917148
* Rehearsing Disaster: Understanding Earthquake Preparedness Behavior in an Interactive Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Safran, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 575,617.00

Through experiments and focus groups, this project uses interactive digital
environments to investigate the mechanisms through which earthquake disaster
preparedness behaviors are adopted and maintained. It explores novel
communication tools for promoting those behaviors in the hard-to-reach
demographic: 18-29 year-olds. Insights gleaned from the project will help shape
communication strategies to solve the urgent societal problem of disaster risk
reduction. The study location in the Portland, Oregon Metropolitan Area
anticipates a potentially devastating earthquake on the Cascadia subduction
zone. Digital media developed as research tools in this project will be released
as outreach products, contributing directly to national welfare via resilience-
building in the Pacific Northwest. Collaborations with local emergency managers
ensure that communication tools developed for this project promote essential
priorities and that research findings are delivered to the agencies that will
benefit most from them. This scientific research contribution thus supports
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national
welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve earthquake
disaster preparedness, which will save lives, economic losses, and reduce panic,
anger and confusion during a future event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses key gaps in current understandings of how social cognitive
perspectives apply to disaster preparedness. Specific research objectives are
to: 1) characterize the effectiveness of interactive environments for promoting
multiple solution pathways and problem-solving related to earthquake
preparedness; 2) evaluate the relevance of different approaches to observational
learning related to earthquake preparedness; 3) quantify the effects of
cooperation on confidence in and inclination to take preparedness action; and 4)
assess the effects of social processing through digital networks on behavior
adoption inclination and critical awareness. These objectives will be
accomplished through four experiments using interactive digital media, supported
by focus groups that ensure salience of the media to target audiences and add
depth to experimental result interpretation. Pathways linking experimental
variables, possible mediating variables, and key dependent variables including
self-efficacy, outcome expectations, intent to act, and preparedness action will
be elucidated via structural equation modeling. Extending the study of social
influences on preparedness behavior into the digital arena is an innovation that
resonates with the media consumption habits of the target audience. While most
applications of social cognitive theory to the disaster preparedness context are
cross-sectional studies, use of interactive digital environments permits an
experimental approach with which to test and extend current understandings. The
project also directly engages dozens of undergraduates in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.