* 1917885
* Intelligent Support for Creative, Open-ended Programming Projects
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,920.00

Introductory computing curricula increasingly motivate students with creative,
open-ended projects, such as making apps, games, and simulations. Advanced
Placement (AP) exam results from the Computer Science Principles exam indicate
that students need more support in solving open-ended problems. Current research
on automated help systems can provide hints but cannot provide much information
at higher abstraction levels. This project will provide technologies to support
novices in open-ended program design and construction. The longer-term promise
of this research is that it can be extended beyond novices' learning of
computational thinking skills to a wider range of learning tasks to better
prepare the workforce of the future. Additionally, the research contributes to
computer science research by using novel data-driven technologies to identify
the higher-level advice provided to the students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the researchers will develop and evaluate techniques to adaptively
support project planning and implementation, relate plans to code, generate
data-driven support, and interactively refine plan and code suggestions. These
features will be added to the Snap programming environment which is a block
driven, browser-centric programming environment inspired by the Scratch
programming environment. Student learning will be evaluated through a series of
experiments to explore how students approach creating open-ended apps, games,
and simulations, and how to best support them. The data-driven aspect of this
project comes through the use of a large set of programming scripts that are
data mined to provide appropriate advice to the novice programmers. This will
provide insight into how to build intelligent, collaborative systems to support
people solving large complex problems. The innovative aspect of the project is
the automatic assisting of students in creating projects where no correct
solution is known because students help to define the problem based on their own
programming goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.