* 1917069
* Unraveling the Runaway Electron Distribution Emitted by Lightning and Laboratory Discharges
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kenneth Eack, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 343,976.00

One of the most fascinating discoveries in atmospheric physics is that
thunderstorms may work as particle accelerators, producing intense fluxes of
energetic radiation, which take different forms, such as: X-ray flashes emitted
from the descending lightning channels, bursts of gamma rays observed at
satellite altitudes known as terrestrial gamma-ray flashes (TGFs), and minute-
long gamma-ray glows that terminate with a lightning bolt. All of these
phenomena are different manifestations of bremsstrahlung emissions of the so-
called runaway electrons, which are accelerated to high energies despite the
collisions with air molecules. It is theoretically plausible that electron
acceleration up to runaway energies (via the so-called thermal runaway electron
mechanism) can happen at the tips of lightning channels where strong electric
fields exist, but a number of questions about the detailed physics and its
implications have puzzled researchers in recent years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the key role of runaway electrons in atmospheric
electricity has been recognized, to date it remains unsettled whether runaway
electrons influence the propagation of lightning and laboratory discharges. It
also remains unclear if runaway electrons emitted by lightning leaders can seed
TGFs. In some instances, X-ray emissions are observed on the ground and
correlated to runaway electrons at the tips of descending lightning leader
channels. But in some other occasions, powerful ground TGFs are detected
instead. It remains a mystery what kind of lightning discharges produces the
more energetic gamma emissions (instead of X-rays) and whether the mechanism
involves thermal runaway electron generation. The main project goal is to
address this knowledge gap with a robust methodology to infer the flux and
spectral energy distribution of runaway electrons emitted by lightning and
laboratory discharges. This is a 3-step approach that involves: (1) measuring
X-ray emissions from short laboratory discharges that efficiently produce
runaway electrons, are repeatable, and the electrical properties can be
controlled; (2) developing scalable Monte Carlo simulation codes that can unveil
the flux and spectral distribution of runaway electrons when driven/validated by
the rich dataset collected in step (1); and (3) performing X-ray observations at
the Langmuir laboratory mountain-top facility, leveraging the knowledge acquired
from steps (1)-(2) to infer the properties of runaway electrons emitted by
natural lightning. Additionally, the project has also an educational aim - the
research team will develop a freshman-level classroom module to teach basic
concepts of electrical breakdown in air via demonstrations with electrical
discharges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by NSF Physical
and Dynamic Meteorology program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.