* 1917902
* PFI-TT: The Development of Flow-Through Sensors for the Detection of Bladder Cancer in Urine Samples
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* James Roussie, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2022
* USD 249,435.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project concerns the benefits of non-invasively
detecting cancer in small samples of accessible bodily fluids (blood, urine,
saliva). All biofluids are abundantly populated with small sacs that express
specific indicators (biomarkers) when cancer is present. The ability to sample
biofluids and detect these indicators is the basis of the "liquid biopsy"
concept. A liquid biopsy for blood could be incorporated into routine laboratory
tests and catch cancer in its earliest stages where intervention is most
impactful. A liquid biopsy in urine could be used to replace highly invasive
procedures currently used to routinely surveil for recurrence of bladder cancer.
This PFI-TT project seeks to hasten the arrival of routine cancer screening
through liquid biopsy by fundamentally advancing the way biosensors are used in
these assays to make them faster and more sensitive. Educationally, the project
will train two talented post-graduate scientists in the key elements of
technical entrepreneurship. The project will also maintain several opportunities
for undergraduates to conduct academic research including programs supporting
under-represented groups and individuals unlikely to otherwise be exposed to
research in college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the
concept of the liquid biopsy by developing flow-through sensors that detect
cancer biomarkers on extracellular vesicles (EVs) in urine. Current biomarker
detection schemes require the analyte to diffuse from the sample to the sensing
surface, resulting in slow and often incomplete, responses. The project will
emphasis a different paradigm where the sensor is built on a highly permeable
membrane and EVs carrying the biomarkers pass through the membrane where they
are captured and revealed through enzyme-based detection. The team will develop
and optimize the chemistries for capture of biomarkers and development of signal
on the ultrathin silicon nitride membranes with precision slit-pores. The team
will also develop mathematical models of flow through slit-pore membranes and
the EV capture process. Finally, the team will compare our experiments and
models to results with diffusion-limited sensors. This will directly test the
hypothesis that the flow-through configuration enables more sensitive and faster
responding devices that can improve detection of cancer in liquid
biopsies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.