* 1917860
* MRI: Acquisition of an Automated, Variable Temperature and Magnetic Field Multi-property Measurement System
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eric Toberer, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 675,661.00

The response of materials to changes in temperature and exposure to magnetic
fields can provide insight into the origins of interesting properties and access
conditions under which materials become technologically useful. For example,
superconductors conduct electricity very efficiently, but only when cooled to
very low temperatures. Additionally, some devices only operate effectively at
low temperatures: examples include next-generation computing components and
detectors for national security applications. Furthermore, materials designed
for motors, power generators, and certain types of computer memory inherently
operate in magnetic fields, and improving their performance requires a better
understanding of how magnetic fields affect their properties. To study the
effects of temperature and magnetic fields on properties of newly developed
materials, the Colorado School of Mines (Mines) is acquiring a variable
temperature and magnetic field multi-property measurement system. This uniquely
versatile, turnkey system supports research and education in multiple
departments and institutions in the Front Range. Experience with this instrument
and the research it enables provide students with training, experience, and
skills that are highly desirable for the current and emerging job markets,
including in sensing, energy, semiconductor, and computing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument consists of a cryostat
(1.65-300 K) containing a 12 T magnet, a probe for electrical transport
measurements in controllable applied magnetic field orientations, a cutting-edge
quantum transport measurement suite for signal control and readout, and a
magnetic force microscope to measure nanoscale magnetic domains. It enables
research spanning a range of systems, including superconductors, magnetic
materials, nanostructures, semiconductors, and ceramics. For example, it is used
to reveal fascinating regions of the phase diagram in which quasiparticles
emerge that can be leveraged in device applications (such as skyrmions for next-
generation spintronic devices). Additionally, it supports research on vortex
dynamics in superconductors, development of cryogenic solid-state coolers and
devices for neuromorphic computing, the impact of nanostructure on the magnetic
response of ceramic materials, and exotic quantum states such as the spin liquid
and spin ice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.