* 1917510
* Collaborative Research: Secondary Production of Ice in CUmuLus Experiment (SPICULE)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* R. Paul Lawson, SPEC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 699,721.00

Clouds can contain liquid droplets, frozen crystals, or a mixture of both.
Whether a cloud is mostly liquid or mostly frozen has a significant impact on
the potential for precipitation and the interaction of the cloud with radiation.
Certain clouds can change from mostly liquid to entirely frozen in a
surprisingly short amount of time, a phenomenon known as glaciation. The speed
at which clouds glaciate is dependent on the phenomena of secondary ice
production, where the freezing of some droplets affects others in a cascading
fashion. The exact mechanism for efficient secondary ice production is still up
for debate in the scientific community. This project will consist of two
research aircraft making measurements of the same cloud at different heights to
provide additional data on secondary ice production. The main societal impact of
the award will be through the improvement of the representation of ice processes
in numerical weather models, leading to better weather forecasts and climate
projections. Student involvement will ensure the education and training of the
next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
conduct a summer 2020 field campaign in the western Great Plains to improve
understanding of the processes involved in ice initiation and secondary ice
production in cumulus clouds. The investigators argue that the well-known
Hallet-Mossup process is not able to explain the observed rapid glaciation of
cumulus clouds, and they offer the alternative hypothesis that the development
of supercooled liquid droplets at the -5C level in strong cumulus updrafts leads
to a spicule production/drop fracturing secondary ice production and rapid
glaciation by the -20C level. The study is designed to provide improved
quantitative measurements with dedicated flight profiles that will minimize
ambiguity associated with primary nucleation and contamination from older
clouds. The NSF/National Center for Atmospheric Research C-130 aircraft would
target the below cloud region through the 0C level and the SPEC LearJet would
penetrate the cloud from the 0C level and up in altitude. Important instruments
include the Colorado State University suite of ice nuclei probes, the SPEC
3V-CPI and the University of Wyoming W-band cloud
radar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.