* 1917026
* An Industry Perspective on STEM Education for the Future: Workshop
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Louis Freund, International Society of Service Innovation Profes
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 87,464.00

This workshop aims to synthesize an industry perspective about the structure and
content of STEM education that will be needed by the nation's STEM workforce in
the future. The project responds to the accelerating disruptive changes to work
behaviors and business models, which are expected to affect the nature of work,
the skills needed on the job, and the composition of the nation's workforce. The
project will explore challenges to meeting current and future industry demands
and will seek to identify shortcomings in the effectiveness of current STEM
degrees in supporting development of competencies and skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to inform the national
discussion about STEM education for the future, and to motivate needed changes
in the structure and content of STEM education nationally. The project will
focus on the future work environment and work rules, the types of expertise
needed on the job, and preferred formats of development. It will examine
industry-driven certification systems, including standards, benchmarks, and
badging, as well as industry practices of skills validation. The project will
also examine talent pipelines used by industry today and the trends for the
future, such as internships, apprenticeships, onboarding, continuing
professional development and life-long learning, industry leaves for study, and
leveraging senior workers' knowledge and experience. This project will examine
student development in terms of both technical skills and soft skills that are
needed regardless of discipline. It will also examine how academic institutions
view the value and credit-worthiness of industry preparation such as
certification and badging versus academic courses. This project will engage
industry experts and research faculty with deep industry experience to provide
industry perspectives on workforce re-skilling and educational trends.
Activities will include conducting a broad survey of industry, a convening of
industry thought leaders to identify topics in need of exploration, one-on-one
interviews with a subset of participants to validate the survey results and
subsequent analysis, and compilation of results into a formal published report.
This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education
Program (IUSE): Education and Human Resources (EHR). The IUSE Program supports
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.