* 1917492
* Role of a conserved gene cluster family in promoting motility behavior in proteobacteria and in mediating host interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Alessandra Eustaquio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 546,571.00

Collective behavior is a common feature of living systems, from schools of fish
and flocks of birds to swarms of bacteria. Collective behavior likely
contributes to the survival of the population. However, precisely how collective
behavior is orchestrated remains poorly understood. Bacteria contribute to the
function and health of higher organisms such as plants, animals, and humans. The
ability of certain bacteria to move collectively facilitates colonization of
their hosts. This project will investigate how certain bacteria coordinate their
collective movement by releasing specific chemicals that are likely used as
signals by the members of the population. This project will also investigate
whether these chemicals are important for host colonization. A bacteria-marine
sponge model will be used in these studies. Marine sponges are among the most
ancient animals and are a dominant component of oceans worldwide. Work on this
project will facilitate training new scientists because it will involve
undergraduate and graduate students. This project will also encompass a major
outreach effort. Specifically, science workshops will be designed and conducted
for an after school program which serves students grades 6-8 in a predominantly
Hispanic and African-American neighborhood next to the University of Illinois at
Chicago campus. The main objective of the workshops will be to engage middle
school students in scientific research by illustrating how bacteria are an
essential part of life on Earth and how chemicals are used as a form of language
that allows bacteria to communicate with each other and with higher
organisms.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Many questions remain to be answered regarding
bacterial motility and host interaction. One key question is which specialized
metabolites mediate these processes and how they do so. A link was identified
between bacterial motility and a conserved nonribosomal peptide synthetase
(NRPS) gene cluster family which encodes modified peptides that are likely
secreted. The NRPS gene cluster family is conserved in alpha- and gamma-
Proteobacteria of the Pseudovibrio and Pseudomonas genera, respectively, which
are known to establish beneficial and antagonistic interactions with eukaryotic
hosts as diverse as marine sponges (Pseudovibrio), plants and insects
(Pseudomonas). Inactivation of this gene cluster in Pseudovibrio brasiliensis
impairs swarming and swimming motility. It is hypothesized that the nonribosomal
peptides function as previously unknown signaling molecules to promote motility,
improving survival and enabling host colonization. During work on the project,
mutational, transcriptomic, structural, imaging, relative fitness, and host
colonization studies will be integrated to unravel the role of the NRPS gene
cluster family using the Pseudovibrio-marine sponge interaction as a model. In
addition, mutational, structural, and imaging studies will also be performed
with representative Pseudomonas spp. This project is expected to shed light on
the conserved mechanisms that Proteobacteria employ to coordinate motility and
to colonize eukaryotic hosts, ultimately expanding current knowledge of
collective behavior of single cell organisms and of prokaryote-eukaryote
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.