* 1917671
* The Interaction of Warfare and Agricultural Intensification
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Andrew Scherer, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 177,504.00

There is abundant archaeological research focused on understanding ancient Maya
dynasties, conflicts between competing royal courts, and daily life ancient
cities. But how did communities in the countryside experience vacillations
between security and insecurity, resulting from alternating episodes of peace
and conflict, and decades of climate stability followed by periods of drought?
Drs. Charles Golden (Brandeis University), Andrew Scherer (Brown University),
Timothy Murtha (University of Florida) together with colleagues in the United
States, Canada, and Mexico, will address this fundamental question. To address
this question they will focus on the relationships among climate warfare and
agricultural intensification. The research will provide a first step towards
understanding the entanglement (or lack thereof) between war and the
agricultural economy in the western Maya lowlands, with implications for
understanding human-environmental and political dynamics more broadly. The
natural and cultural resources of the Usumacinta River Basin in which the
research will take place and other areas of the neotropics are being devastated
by looting, illegal logging, slash-and-burn agriculture, and livestock
management practices that can result in devastating wildfires in a landscape
plagued in recent decades by drought. Understanding long-term uses of the
landscape will help to address contemporary land use issues and assist in
planning for sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research continues the
investigators efforts to enhance understandings of ancient Maya defensive
features and warfare generally and represents a new attempt to identify the
potential economic causes and consequences of war for the ancient Maya. The
western Maya lowlands is an ideal case for the study of the relationship between
social strife and agricultural production. With a robust epigraphic record and
decades of archaeological fieldwork, the region hosted a diversity of polities
in terms of their strategies of governance and socio-political integration. The
proposed research will also advance understanding of ancient Maya agricultural
systems. The study area is the wettest region of the Maya lowlands, where little
work has considered agricultural dynamics over the long term. Such regional
comparison is critical for synthetic statements about agricultural regimes that
are often based on research conducted in the distinct ecological zones of the
Central Peten, Belize, and northern Yucatan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.