* 1917258
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO:  Understanding the origin and evolution of metabolic interactions using synthetic microbial communities
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Wenying Shou, FRED HUTCHINSON CANCER CENTER
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 03/31/2023
* USD 998,981.00

Microbial communities are critically important for many environmental processes
such as the release of nutrients from the degradation of dead organic matter.
Microbial communities are also important for health, as beneficial microbes help
digest food, modulate immunity, and fend off intruding pathogens. Each species
of microbe in the community uses certain compounds available in the environment
and often the microbes release new compounds that other members of the community
can use. These "metabolic interactions" impact the survival of individual
species and the stability of the microbial community as a whole. The goal of
this collaborative project is to better understand how these interactions
develop and change depending on the environment and microbial species in the
community, and how these interactions change the stability and composition of
the communities. Ultimately, this project aims to reveal principles for the
design of microbial communities for purposes such environmental remediation.
Participants on this project will include high school teachers, underrepresented
minority high school students, and underrepresented minority undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial communities are ubiquitous, and are critical
players in mediating host health and disease and in the cycling of elements in
ecosystems. Metabolic interactions between species impact community function and
stability. However, the emergence and evolution of metabolic interactions is
poorly understood. The laboratories involved in this project will take advantage
of tractable synthetic yeast communities and mathematical modeling to
experimentally and theoretically study the origin and evolution of metabolic
interactions. They will undertake a fully integrated, collaborative approach
that combines the expertise of both groups on metabolic modeling, synthetic
biology, and microbial ecology and evolution. First, statistical thermodynamics
and differential equations will be used to model metabolic overflows. Next,
metabolic overflows as well as key cellular parameters will be experimentally
characterized using targeted metabolomics, fluorescence microscopy, and single
cell electrochemical measurements. These experimental measurements will be used
to constrain, test, and refine the model. The tested model will be embedded
within an in silico evolution framework to simulate evolution, and to predict
how initial community conditions (e.g. nutrient environment, genotypes, and
species interactions) might affect the evolution of new metabolic interactions.
Finally, model predictions will be tested by evolving synthetic yeast
communities from different starting conditions in chemostats and turbidostats,
and emerging metabolic interactions will be
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.