* 1917300
* Modeling, Identification, and Estimation of Distributed Parameter Systems Using Mobile Sensor Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Wencen Wu, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 298,157.00

This project will formulate a general purpose mathematical framework using
mobile sensor networks (MSNs) that will allow an efficient and accurate
prediction of information about behavior of complex real world systems such as
weather forecasting, wildfire control, disaster recovery, explosive materials
detection, etc. Such systems are known to be distributed parameter systems (DPS)
and modeling of such systems and accurately predicting their behavior in real-
time is highly complex and computationally challenging. The current state-of-
the-art techniques use static sensor network to help obtain solutions from
complex mathematical models which are often inaccurate and cannot provide timely
information. The mobility and adaptability of MSNs make them great candidates
for overcoming these challenges. This project will develop a unified framework
for modeling, identifying, estimating and predicting behavior of such
distributed parameter systems. The project will also develop a strongly
integrated research, educational, and outreach program by providing graduate
students with interdisciplinary and challenging research experiences, by
providing undergraduate students with the opportunity of early involvement in
research activities through algorithm development and test-bed experiments, and
by motivating K-12 students by giving them hands-on experiences through
university's Engineering Ambassadors(EA) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
outcomes of this project are expected to advance the modeling, identification,
and state estimation techniques for distributed parameter systems, offer
comprehensive scientific understanding of the connections between DPS and mobile
sensor networks, and contribute to generic engineering principles for designing
cooperative control and distributed sensing strategies for mobile sensor
networks. In particular, the work will: develop novel approaches for online
parameter identification and state estimation of DPS using mobile sensor
networks with reduced computational and communication cost compared to existing
methods developed for static sensor networks; determine information-rich and
energy-saving optimal trajectories of mobile sensor networks moving in DPS for
simultaneously system identification and state prediction; and design a multi-
robot test-bed with controllable advection-diffusion fields for the validation
of the strategies, and conduct field experiments to test the strategies under
realistic uncertainties and variations. The project also offers great
educational opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, as well as K-12 students.