* 1917635
* Microstructure and strain effects on ferroelectric and transport properties of hafnium oxide thin films
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Alexei Gruverman, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 06/30/2022
* USD 519,740.00

Nontechnical: &lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectrics such as hafnium oxide have promising
applications in data storage and memory processing. These materials have a
spontaneous electrical polarization that can be switched by applying an electric
field, akin to ferromagnetism. The PIs will study the fundamental properties of
hafnium oxide and the performance of hafnium oxide-based devices. The ultimate
aim is to develop ferroelectric memory devices with superior performance.
Graduate and undergraduate students will benefit from education and training in
the science and technology of ferroelectric materials and devices. Students from
underrepresented groups will be provided valuable educational experiences that
enrich their professional development. Outreach programs aim at K-12 students
and Nebraska residents through open public events, such as the State Science
Olympiad and Nanocamp. These activities will integrate research with community
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of
ferroelectricity in HfO2 films has recently attracted enormous interest due to
its best compatibility with CMOS technology among known ferroelectrics. Thin
films of HfO2-based ferroelectric materials exhibit robust switchable
polarization and low leakage, and thus have a huge potential for being used in
nonvolatile memories and ferroelectric field-effect transistors with enhanced
performance. To realize this potential in practice, systematic studies of the
structure-property-device performance relationship in these materials are
required. In contrast to conventional perovskite ferroelectrics, the mechanism
of ferroelectricity in HfO2-based films is far from being understood. The
microstructure and strain conditions likely control the formation of the
ferroelectric phase in polycrystalline HfO2 films, but there is no clear method
for stabilizing it in a monocrystalline film. This proposal aims at achieving a
comprehensive understanding of how the interplay between the film microstructure
and interfacial stress affects the stability of the ferroelectric phase,
polarization reversal dynamics, electronic transport behavior, and the related
device performance. This project studies (1) theory-driven fabrication of the
HfO2-capacitor structures with controlled microstructure and electromechanical
boundary conditions stabilizing the ferroelectric state; (2) the effect of film
microstructure on the polarization reversal mechanism in the epitaxial,
textured, and polycrystalline HfO2-based films; and (3) the polarization-
controlled resistive switching in the HfO2-based ferroelectric tunnel junctions
as a function of the ferroelectric barrier microstructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of epitaxial strain on stabilizing the
ferroelectric phase in single-crystalline orthorhombic and rhombohedral HfO2
films will be explored using theoretical modeling based on density functional
theory and verified by electrical and structural characterization of the HfO2
films grown using pulsed laser deposition on the substrates and buffer layers.
The time-bias-dependent switching behavior will be investigated as a function of
the HfO2 films microstructure via direct observation of the domain structure
evolution by piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) and measurements of the
device-level integrated transient currents by pulse testing methods. Local probe
microscopy in conjunction with structural characterization methods will be used
to relate the tunneling electroresistance effect to the polarization state
stability and microstructure of the HfO2-based tunnel junctions. Thus, the
intellectual merit of this project will be elucidation of the relationship
between the polar phase stability, film microstructure and interface strain,
clarification of the mechanism of polarization reversal, and demonstration and
quantification of the resistive switching in the HfO2-based ferroelectric films
and device structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.