* 1917368
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Subduction zone imaging following the 2018 Anchorage earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Kevin Ward, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 01/31/2020
* USD 6,116.00

Subduction zones are places on Earth where one plate goes beneath another plate.
They are responsible for numerous volcanic eruptions and earthquakes, as the
recent Anchorage earthquake. Important dynamical processes take place in between
the two converging plates, such as the buoyant rising of molten mantle rock
below volcanoes. Seismology offers a direct way to image the convective zones of
subduction, which are between 30 km and 200 km deep. Seismometers installed in
the field record seismic waves from earthquakes occurring in the down going
plate and all over the world. By modeling the wave forms and timing, using
techniques like those used in medical ultrasound imaging, images of the
subduction zone can be obtained. Here, the project team will install more than
300 seismometers above the Alaska subduction zone. It will take advantage of the
seismic waves produced by the ongoing aftershocks from the Anchorage earthquake
to image at high resolution the subsurface structures. This project will also
test the imaging capabilities of the timely deployment of dense networks of
small seismometers, a new approach in seismology. It will provide critical
constraints for models of subduction zone dynamics and associated hazards, as
well as field experience to seven students in seismology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID project will support the deployment of 306
seismometers (three-component nodal sensors) to image the Alaska subduction zone
at an unprecedented resolution. It will take advantage of the active local
seismicity enhanced by the aftershocks of the 2018 magnitude-7 Anchorage
earthquake. Recent results from Cascadia indicate that ambient noise and
teleseism body waves can be used to image crustal structure. Here, local
seismicity will be used to image the mantle wedge and crustal structure. Distant
earthquakes will be used to image subsurface discontinuities, such as the
crustal thickness and the subducting slab. Surface waves from ambient noise will
be used to characterize the shallow crustal structure. This should allow
resolving at km-scale the structural complexity within the mantle wedge between
the subducting Pacific plate and the overlying North American crust.
Furthermore, by leveraging an ongoing smaller-scale project focused on the
Denali fault, this work will allow the simultaneous characterization of small-
scale fault zone structures and broader crustal contrasts across the fault.
Higher resolution images will provide important constraints for models seeking
to understand the dynamics of subduction zones. The project is led by three
early-career scientists and will involve seven students in seismology for the
field deployment and recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.