* 1917369
* Wyoming King Air as a National Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bart Geerts, University of Wyoming
* Cooperative Agreement
* Subhashree Mishra
* 08/31/2024
* USD 10,934,420.00

The primary objective of this project is to provide a mission-ready aircraft
(the University of Wyoming King Air) to the geoscience research community. The
University of Wyoming King Air fulfills a unique role in the suite of lower
atmosphere observing facilities supported by the National Science Foundation.
This research aircraft provides a small, light weight, and relatively
inexpensive aircraft as an agile airborne platform for cloud, precipitation,
atmospheric chemistry, wildfire, and boundary layer meteorological research.
During the five-year award period, scientists funded by the National Science
Foundation may request the use of the aircraft, the cloud radar, and/or the
cloud lidar through the Lower Atmosphere Observing Facilities Program for the
purpose of conducting atmospheric research. This award provides base support to
a staff of scientists, engineers, technicians, pilots, and mechanics, who
maintain and deploy the aircraft and instrumentation for this cutting-edge
research aircraft. The award includes scientific effort to support field
deployments of the facility, data assurance and quality control, delivery and
archiving of data products accessible to the entire scientific community; and
the engineering effort for instrumentation and software upgrades that will
enhance the scientific and educational benefit to the community. The impact of
the research enabled by the facility may be broad and far-reaching depending on
the individual projects that request its use through the National Science
Foundation's Lower Atmospheric Observing Facilities
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Wyoming research aircraft along with the
Wyoming Cloud Radar, the Wyoming Cloud Lidar, and associated research
instruments will enable acquisition of airborne in-situ and remote sensing
measurements to address a broad range of geoscience-related topics. Support of
the facility will ensure access to a mission-ready research aircraft and
associated instrumentation. The Wyoming King Air is capable of use in studies
ranging from cloud-aerosol interaction, to boundary-layer dynamics, air quality,
cloud and precipitation physics, and chemistry of trace gases and aerosol. The
data collected by the Wyoming King Air facility will take advantage of the
combined in situ measurements from the aircraft and remote sensing capability of
the Wyoming Cloud Radar and the Wyoming Cloud Lidar, targeting projects that can
benefit from the agility of the aircraft and its low cost of operation. The
measurement capabilities available to the geoscience community through this
award will provide a greater understanding of atmospheric properties and
composition, inform new ideas about atmospheric processes, feed numerical models
to improve atmospheric representation, and ultimately lead to greater
predictability of the earth-atmosphere weather and climate systems. In addition
to the far-reaching broader impacts of the scientific studies that are enabled
by the aircraft, the impacts of the work supported through this award are rooted
in their contribution to education and training of the next generation of
observational atmospheric scientists. Since the University of Wyoming King Air
is owned and operated by a university, it provides a natural setting for
educating and training young scientists in obtaining and using airborne
atmospheric observations and in the development of tools and techniques for
maintaining, calibrating, and assessing airborne instrumentation. The skills
developed by scientists who use and work with the facility and associated data
sets are well-suited to train the next generation of atmospheric scientists to
work within laboratories or other airborne research facilities across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.