* 1917144
* EAGER: Numerical two-dimensional fluid simulations and finite element analysis to model an adaptive and flexible microplasma discharge system.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Massood Atashbar, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2021
* USD 74,718.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant will explore the
effects of varying ambient conditions on microplasma discharge for accelerating
the pace of microplasma discharge device-based system development. Microplasma
discharge devices, which are based on non-thermal or cold plasmas, have been
receiving growing interest for various applications in the food, biomedical and
health care industries. The performance of the devices is dependent on a stable
and uniform microplasma discharge. To maintain a uniform distribution of
microplasma discharge, the devices are often operated with high input voltages
along with the use of inert gases such as argon, neon, helium, xenon and
nitrogen. However, the use of high voltages and inert gases are a safety hazard
and prohibits the development of portable microplasma discharge devices. To
overcome these limitations, the microplasma discharge devices are operated in
controlled environments and specialized chambers, under stable atmospheric
conditions, thus making the systems complex, bulky, non-portable and expensive.
Even though novel microplasma discharge devices that operate in atmospheric air
can be developed to address these drawbacks, the devices are exposed to varying
ambient conditions including dynamic temperature, pressure and humidity changes.
This further multiplies the challenges associated with the development of
optimum microplasma discharge devices because of the changes in electron
density, electron mobility and electron temperature due to the varying ambient
conditions. The EAGER grant is used for developing a deep understanding of the
microplasma discharge dynamics such as electron density, electron mobility and
electron temperature under varying ambient conditions. The research has the
potential to advance the development of adaptive control systems for microplasma
discharge devices. This could have a profound technological and economic impact
on the emerging flexible hybrid electronics (FHE) and wearable biomedical
industries. The results obtained from this project will be disseminated through
research publications in peer reviewed journals as well as in presentations at
regional, national and international conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research under this EAGER grant aims to radically reduce the risk associated in
developing novel microplasma discharge devices and study the microplasma
discharge performance that has not been investigated before. Numerical two-
dimensional fluid simulations and finite element analysis will be performed to
model the microplasma dynamics of different microplasma discharge device
configurations with varying electrode designs, electrode gaps and overall device
dimensions, at varying ambient conditions. The results will enable optimization
of the microplasma discharge device parameters for consistent electron density
and electron mobility. This will facilitate uniform voltage distribution across
the surface of the electrodes resulting in uniform generation of microplasma
discharge. The dielectric barrier discharge and breakdown voltage analysis will
be performed on the optimized electrode configuration to understand the optimum
breakdown voltage required for microplasma discharge. Finite element modelling
and simulations of the microplasma discharge dynamics such as electron density,
electron mobility and electron temperature will be completed for varying ambient
temperature, pressure and humidity. The results will be utilized to generate a
detailed database that can be used for designing and fabricating novel
microplasma discharge devices which can be integrated with adaptive control
systems for the development of novel microplasma discharge device based systems.
The fundamental breakthroughs from this research will eliminate the risks
associated with optimizing microplasma discharge devices for applications such
as sterilization, wound disinfection and surface
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.