* 1917467
* GEM Underrepresented Minority Internships for Chemists, Chemical and Environmental Engineers,and Physicists
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Marcus Huggans, The National GEM Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 08/31/2021
* USD 658,000.00

Promoting progress in science and building a globally competitive workforce, a
core part of the National Science Foundation's mission, requires increasing
diversity in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). This
project is supported by the Divisions of Chemistry and Physics in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Engineering
Directorate. The GEM Consortium aims to improve diversity in the STEM workforce
through a two-pronged approach. First, GEM encourages selected underrepresented
minority (URM) students to pursue graduate degrees in STEM fields by ensuring
that the students receive a living stipend and tuition while enrolled in a GEM
member-university program. Next, GEM provides access to paid internships for the
selected students, providing the students with work experience and networking
opportunities. Ultimately this project works to illustrate and provide pathways
for advanced STEM education and careers for URM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides training pathways for both
Ph.D. and Master's level students in STEM fields, particularly in Chemistry,
Chemical and Environmental Engineering, and Physics. GEM consortium-selected URM
students apply to the university-member programs, and upon acceptance, GEM
provides a stipend towards living expenses and tuition. The universities cover
the remainder of the tuition, and in the case of Ph.D. level students, a living
stipend (through teaching or research assistantships or other methods) for the
duration of the degree. This encourages member universities to accept URM
students, while assuring students of the economic feasibility of an advanced
degree. Students also participate in a paid internship that GEM helps to
arrange, which enables students to build a career network and provides them with
work experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.