* 1917229
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Agricultural Adaptation and Socioeconomic Change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Scott Ortman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 19,672.00

Knowing how people adapt their land use in light of changing economic and trade
relationships is important for understanding environmental and land management
decisions. These decisions become even more complicated when they involve groups
with substantial power differences. The archaeological record, with its numerous
example cases and substantial time depth, holds valuable insights regarding
these issues. This doctoral dissertation project, directed by Kaitlyn Davis and
Dr. Scott Ortman of the University of Colorado-Boulder, will assess the
interplay between Spanish impositions and Native agency with regard to Pueblo
economic and agricultural practices in 16th and 17th century New Mexico. The
goal is to better understand the Pueblo agricultural economy prior to and
following Spanish contact. The data collected for this project will address gaps
in the understanding of the implications of and responses to colonialism in the
Americas, reassessing and complicating the colonial narrative in light of Native
agency. The data will also help fill in gaps in the understanding of how
indigenous arid-land agricultural systems operated, and continue to operate, in
the Americas. The multi-crop agricultural potential model produced by this
project will be instructive as to where good agricultural areas are in the study
area today, and thus has environmental sustainability value and will be of use
to scholars as well as farmers. Finally, working with local landowners and
Pueblo community members through every step of this project will provide
educational opportunities and a positive example of collaborative archaeology.

Spanish colonization of the Northern Rio Grande region in New Mexico contributed
to demographic changes, additional demands on the finite land base, and changes
in the economic system, including changes in trade networks and taxation. The
recent literature on this period has tended to interpret changes in the
archaeological record as deriving from the impositions of or resistance to
Spanish colonization. While both did occur, what has been overlooked is the
extent to which Pueblo people also took advantage of the opportunities presented
by introduced Spanish crops, technologies, and livestock, adapting them for
Pueblo use and incorporating them into Pueblo life. In previous scholarship,
considerations of local agricultural production have been largely divorced from
the economic system they fit into. In this project, the researchers will assess
the role of Spanish introductions in Pueblo economics and settlement by: 1)
creating spatial models of agricultural potential for indigenous and introduced
crops and combining these with artifact and settlement data; 2) determining
associations between field types and crop types by collecting and analyzing
microbotanical samples from various field types at two pre-Hispanic Pueblos and
two colonial-era Pueblos; and 3) assessing changing investment in various field
types, technologies, and associated crops through surface survey of field
features and dateable artifacts at these four sites. These efforts will yield a
better picture of agricultural potential versus agricultural investment through
time to reveal Native choices in a changing economic and social system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.