* 1917256
* SBP: Theories of Social Status and Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* David Melamed, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,998.00

This project investigates how personal attributes with status value can cease to
have status value attached to them. It is well known that certain personal
attributes not intrinsically tried to competence can have status value attached
to them so that they are associated with how well people are expected to
perform. This project investigates the removal of status value from attributes,
or "status deconstruction," by testing theoretically derived propositions
through experiments. Findings will point to interventions to disassociate
expectations for competence from categorical distinctions, which in turn is
likely to contribute to equity in task-focused groups and improve the groups'
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory is tested via two laboratory
experiments. These begin by using established procedures for associating
competency expectations with categorical distinctions. Then, multiple
theoretically relevant conditions are implemented to remove the association
between the categorical distinction and competency expectations. Data consist of
both behavioral data, which are measures of the degree to which participants
accept influence from others with different attributes, and questionnaire data,
which assess attitudes toward others with different attributes. Results from
this experiment will evaluate theoretical predictions about the conditions
leading to status deconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.