* 1917180
* Workshop Proposal: Global Environmental Research Infrastructure (GERI) Planning Workshop; June 25-27, 2019; Boulder, Colorado
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Henry Loescher, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* Roland Roberts
* 03/31/2020
* USD 69,586.00

Funding is provided to Battelle Memorial Institute to execute a workshop
intended to assemble leaders of Environmental Research Infrastructures (ERIs)
from six countries to explore common research interests and explore models to
enhance collaborations that leverage each infrastructure's individual, and their
combined research strengths. The sheer geographic breadth and the diverse
research communities served by participating ERIs potentially add extensive
societal benefits to this global scientific endeavor, supported by international
data sharing.

A workshop facilitating the identification of common research themes and the
development of features and potential requirements for a potential governance
structure that aligns with each ERI's national goals and engenders global
perspectives and good practices for research infrastructures is funded. The
workshop also promotes the building of lasting scientific collaborations that
will catalyze actions addressing global research questions in environmental
science and ecology. The activities proposed will initiate the creation of a
platform that fosters wider community mobilization across international
boundaries, thus having the potential for significant societal impacts. The
organizers plan to engage 28-32 individuals from six ERIs and allow for remote
participation, expanding the reach of the workshop. In summary, this workshop
leverages NSF's investment in the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)
and provides a collaborative framework for US researchers to participate in this
global conversation and potentially influence, and gain access to, a global
ecological data set.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.