* 1917630
* Sensor-integrated 3D tissue scaffold for physiological interrogations
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Zheng Yan, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 366,316.00

Cells and tissues are often cultured outside the living environment (in vitro)
to facilitate various studies in disease modeling, drug test and precision
medicine. The mechanical and electrical behaviors of a tissue system are two
basic physiological properties that indicate the tissue state. Consequently, the
real-time monitoring of both parameters in the 3D tissue is important for
assessing tissue state and revealing biological mechanisms. A comprehensive
assessment requires the knowledge of both parameters at distributed locations
buried deep in the tissue, which remains challenging. This project aims to
integrate multifunctional bioelectronic sensors in a 3D macroporous scaffold, in
which the scaffold provides a 3D microenvironment for tissue culturing whereas
the distributed and embedded sensors can real-time monitor both electrical and
mechanical responses from the tissue. The developed system can lead to more
precise biomedical devices for disease modeling, drug screening, and health
diagnostics. The outreach efforts are expected to broaden STEM participation and
education. The interdisciplinary research and training will prepare next-
generation young minds to entrepreneurial experiences through "Innovation-
Challenge Competition". Plans are to create "Women Engineer Day" which will host
15-20 high school girls and to add "Eureka!" program to target middle to high
school girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding physiological and pathological
behaviors of live cells in deep tissues can provide both fundamental insights
into biological mechanisms and biomedical solutions to diseases. Conventional
biosensing technologies, such as optical imaging and planar biochips, are often
confined to surface regions. To transcend these limitations, this project aims
to develop and validate a novel type of 3D, sensor-innervated, electronic
scaffold systems which can enable high-speed and simultaneous measurements of
both bioelectrical and biomechanical signals within engineered tissues. The
central approach is to employ multi-level hierarchical assemblies to integrate
multifunctional biosensors in a programmable 3D scaffold. The developed system
will provide a new tool to fundamental studies in cell mechanics and
electrophysiology. The research is also expected to lead to translational
biochips that can upgrade current single-parameter, planar physiological
quantification into multi-parameter, deep-tissue physiological quantifications
in engineered tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.