* 1917515
* Collaborative Research: Fresh water and heat fluxes to the Arctic Ocean modeled with tree-ring proxies
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Richard Lammers, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 528,776.00

Arctic Ocean sea ice has been declining for several decades. As the ice
retreats, more open water is exposed, which reduces the amount of light
reflected back from the Arctic and leads to further Arctic warming and sea ice
loss. This feedback contributes to the amplification of warming across Arctic
regions, which is changing the regular connections between river water and
atmospheric circulation, and consequently the heat and energy flowing into the
Arctic Ocean. Modern observations of Arctic river flow, and estimates of
associated heat budgets, rarely extend back more than several decades. These
records are too short to fully quantify the long-term trends in freshwater flow
and heat budgets, which makes it difficult to understand the processes
underlying those trends. This research helps fill that gap by utilizing tree-
ring records and river gauge data in the Arctic to reconstruct and study multi-
century fluctuations of water, heat and energy flow to the Arctic
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses a wide array of existing and
newly collected tree-ring data, coupled with a long record of river gauge data,
to develop and test reconstructions of water flow and heat budgets for the
Yenisei River, the second largest river of the Arctic. Causal attribution of
spatial-temporal variations of river hydrology requires consideration of
changing snowmelt, thawing permafrost, and modification of natural flow regimes
by dams and reservoirs. This consideration is assessed with the New Hampshire
University Water Balance Model. With the engagement of multiple layers of
instrumental and modeled data updated to 2020 (e.g., climatic, hydrologic,
anthropogenic, General Circulation Model (GCM) outputs) the team is using over
300 tree-ring records from Siberia to reconstruct river discharge and water
temperature for the last 300 years. In addition to conventional tree-ring width
measurements, the heat transport reconstruction explores the signal for river
temperature variation in the wood anatomy of tree rings. Overall, this effort is
identifying climatic drivers of past river energy flux variations in the Arctic.
The researchers place runoff features of the gauged period, as well as the
annual, multi-decadal, and centennial variability from the reconstructed
periods, in the context of GCM projected runoff changes for the next century.
While the Yenisei River is the direct focus of the research, a broad goal is an
extension of the approach, methods, and tools to other pan-Arctic regions. To
assist other researchers, the team is developing a new online toolbox (TR-RIMS,
Tree-Ring Regional Integrated hydroclimatic Modeling and analysis System). The
tool synthesizes tree-ring signals for the heat and volume of Yenisei River and
adopts a non-parametric statistics for the spatial reconstruction. The online
TR-RIMS tool enhances the infrastructure for both research and education and
enable societal understanding of natural hazards and environmental change
induced by the Arctic amplification. The research also promotes international
scientific collaboration in the Arctic to boost international and
interdisciplinary collaboration exploring biogeochemical, geophysical and
ecological processes underlying Arctic system change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.