* 1917323
* Collaborative Research: Novel Relaxations for Cardinality-constrained  Optimization Problems with Applications in Network Interdiction and Data Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2018,07/31/2022
* Jean-Philippe Richard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2022
* USD 275,219.00

In many fields, such as telecommunication, logistics, and genetics, a decision-
maker often prefers to find a solution, where only a fraction of potential
resource assignments is selected. Such solutions are easier to interpret and
implement, but they may be difficult to identify. Leveraging new structural
results, the investigators develop new techniques to obtain high quality
solutions to these types of problems. This project will apply these techniques
to data analysis and network interdiction problems. Network interdiction models
have been successfully used to identify vulnerabilities in power and water
systems, and to secure networked systems. Improved methods will help create
better predictive models and yield tools to enhance national security. This
research will also support training of graduate and undergraduate students and
creation of pedagogical material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
develop new convex relaxation techniques that will lead to stronger relaxation
bounds for cardinality constrained mathematical programs (CCMPs) and improve the
convergence of generic and custom branch-and-bound codes for mixed integer
nonlinear programs. Specifically, the researchers will (i) investigate bilinear
formulations of cardinality requirements through the lens of the recently
developed convexification procedures; (ii) focus on disjunctive relaxations
previously introduced for linear relaxations of CCMPs, which can be used to
generate cuts from any simplex basic solution that does not satisfy a
cardinality constraint; (iii) develop cutting plane strategies that can generate
convex hull descriptions devised from extensions of reformulation-linearization
techniques; and (iv) utilize the concept of permutation-invariance to develop
new formulations and relaxations for CCMPs arising in data analysis and models
of various logical propositions. The project will also investigate the
application of these results to the KKT formulation of network interdiction with
asymmetric information. The investigators will also make use of these improved
relaxations in the development of heuristic and exact solution techniques for
sparse principal component analysis.