* 1917475
* University of Alaska Fairbanks/Sikuliaq Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2021
* John Haverlack, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2021
* USD 68,661.00

The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) operates R/V Sikuliaq, a 261 foot,
global class ice-capable oceanographic research vessel owned by the NSF as part
of the UNOLS fleet. Sikuliaq provides a general-purpose platform for
multidisciplinary research missions from polar to temperate latitudes. The ship
was delivered in 2014 and has completed four years of funded operations. UAF
requests funds to purchase and install shipboard scientific support equipment
that would be custom engineered to enhance the vessel's capability in support of
NSF-sponsored research to be undertaken on Sikuliaq in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2018, R/V Sikuliaq completed 232 days, 142 (62%)
of which were for NSF. In 2019, the vessel is scheduled to sail 252 days with
69% (174 days) of the schedule for NSF. With this proposal, UAF provides
technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the following
Oceanographic Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Timeserver replacements
$13,668 &lt;br/&gt;2) Workhorse 300 kHz ADCP $37,943 &lt;br/&gt;3)
Meteorological sensors $17,050 &lt;br/&gt;4) Software-defined Data Center (SDDC)
Hardware $248,058 &lt;br/&gt; $316,719 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.