* 1917313
* Longitudinal Study on the Impact the Sunday Academy Model had on STEM Learning and Success of American Indian Students
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Anita Parisien Frederick, Tribal Nations Research Group
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Extending the instructional capabilities to the
local pre-college population is a significant element and broader impact of the
central work. This project aligns directly with that goal, and moreover will
increase the body of knowledge on the efficacy of instructional methodologies
that appeal to Native students and increase their interest and success in STEM
studies and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tribal Nations Research Group (TNRG)
serves as the lead for a study that would describe the context and capture the
impact of an informal STEM instructional experience, the Sunday Academy Model
(SAM). SAM has been supported largely by NSF for almost two decades and has been
conducted by the tribal colleges of North Dakota, with participation of North
Dakota State University (NDSU) and the University of North Dakota (UND). The
program has provided STEM instructional enrichment activities for on- and near-
reservation students and teachers, and has engaged approximately 2000 students.
The study will be pursued through mixed methods that include focus groups,
measures of student academic success and pursuit, and control
comparisons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.