* 1917624
* Workshop on Decision Analytics for Dynamic Policing; Arlington, Virginia; May 9-10, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Victoria Chen, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports a conference that convenes researchers from the fields of
operations engineering and criminal justice, along with police department
leadership from across the US, to explore research directions in decision
analytics and operations research to improve dynamic, data-driven policing
methods. Beginning in 2008, so-called "predictive policing", which entails using
analytical methods to predict how, when, where, and by whom crimes will occur,
has been deployed by police departments in many states. These methods rely on
historical data collected on time, location, and details of crimes, as well as
on characteristics of perpetrators and victims. While some jurisdiction have
shown an overall decrease in crime after implementation of predictive policing,
other evaluative studies have shown the effects to be negligible or even
detrimental. These methods have been criticized on three critical aspects: (1)
they are not informed by a sociological perspective; (2) they assume that data
include the necessary information for both prediction and effective response;
and (3) they ignore the dynamic nature of the policing system. This conference
will bring together appropriate researchers, along with practitioners, to build
a cross-disciplinary understanding of policing challenges that may be
addressable by decision analytics and operations
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most serious challenges facing police
departments is the effective use of resources to address calls for service,
especially when responding to serious crimes. Police departments recognize that
part of a comprehensive approach to community safety involves protecting the
rights of all involved during police encounters. The focus of this workshop is
on identifying operational aspects, including data collection and analysis,
planning, training, and crime scene investigation, where additional research may
lead to improved resource allocation. Day 1 of the conference includes keynotes
on predictive policing and data analytic case studies, as well as breakout
sessions for working groups. Day 2 of the conference will include a keynote
speaker addressing international policing strategies, and working groups will
continue to discuss and document research needs. Four teams of researchers who
have established relationships with large police organizations serve as workshop
organizers. Additional teams of attendees (operations engineers, criminal
justice researchers, police department leadership) will be recruited to
participate in the workshop. This activity will provide a unique forum to bring
together a variety of stakeholders to encourage research on this important
societal topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.