* 1917480
* Collaborative Research: Development and Application of a Molecular and Process Design Framework for the Separation of Hydrofluorocarbon Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mark Shiflett, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,710.00

Refrigerators and heat pumps use a substance called a refrigerant to move heat
between two spaces. Prior to the late 1980s, refrigerants often contained
chlorfluorocarbons, but these materials were phased out because of their high
ozone depletion potential. Mixtures of hydrofluorocarbons appeared on the market
as replacement refrigerants. Hydrofluorocarbons (HFC) do not deplete the Earth's
ozone layer, but they to do tend to trap greenhouse gases in the atmosphere,
measured as global warming potential, prompting a concerted effort to phase out
the use of high global warming potential HFCs. The phase out of these materials
is complicated by the fact that there are thousands of tons of refrigerant
mixtures that contain both low and high global warming potential compounds, and
there is no viable method for separating and reclaiming the components. The
separation of low and high global warming HFCs is complex because they are
azeotropic or near-azeotropic materials, meaning they are chemically similar and
behave like a single (pure) fluid. The goal of the project is to develop tools
and processes that enable the separation of high and low global warming
potential HFCs, allowing the recovery and reuse of the low global warming
potential HFCs. To accomplish this goal, an integrated molecular and chemical
process design framework will be developed to engineer novel ionic liquid-based
HFC separation technologies. The approach will unify "top-down" computer-aided
molecular design with "bottom-up" experimentally-driven approaches to more
efficiently identify new separation agents for HFC azeotropic mixtures. The
engineering framework will be widely applicable to other chemical separation
processes, including that of next-generation refrigerants such as hydrofluoro-
olefins and hydrochlorofluoro-olefins. The physical property data and
computational tools will be disseminated through national data repositories and
open source agreements, respectively. The project also provides experiential
training opportunities for two graduate students who will interface with
industrial partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hypothesized that ionic liquids
can be designed to achieve unprecedented separation efficiency for azeotropic
HFC mixtures. However, there are millions of potential ionic liquids, making a
trial-and-error search infeasible. The overall goals of this project are: i) to
establish a unified framework for ionic liquid molecular design and separation
process configuration optimization and ii) to engineer new technologies to
enable recycling of HFC refrigerants. The collaborative project integrates
state-of-the-art methods in pure and mixed gas solubility measurements, high
throughput molecular simulations, and superstructure optimization into a single,
unified framework. Both experimental physical property measurements and
laboratory-scale demonstrations will be used to validate the multiscale
computational models. The proposed framework offers a systematic approach to
rapidly engineer ionic liquid solvent and separation processes. The framework is
general purpose and has the potential to enable dramatically faster discovery of
novel separation solvents and systems well beyond the HFC
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.