* 1917146
* Collaborative Research:  Temperate radiations and tropical dominance: the diversification and evolution of the plant clade Ericales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Christopher Dick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 709,463.00

The tropical forests that circle the equatorial belt of Earth are home to vastly
more plant species than the temperate zones that extend toward the poles.
Biologists have tried to explain the difference in biodiversity between tropical
and temperate regions for centuries, but efforts have been hindered by limited
data, particularly among plant groups. Nevertheless, understanding these
worldwide patterns is fundamentally important to understanding these patterns in
natural systems in the U.S., where plants play a key ecological and economic
role. This research will provide a detailed study of a diverse and globally
distributed group of plants, known as the Ericales, that includes a variety of
economically important species such as blueberries, kiwi fruit, persimmon,
Brazil nut, timber woods (e.g., ebony), azaleas, rhododendrons, and even
carnivorous plants. These newly collected "big data" resources will allow
researchers to discover genetic and morphological factors that contribute to the
origin and maintenance of the biological diversity in Earth's forests. This
research will also promote the training of the next generation of young STEM
researchers to be fluent in application of computational and plant genomics
resources to challenges facing the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The staggering
diversity of tropical plants contributes to a latitudinal diversity gradient of
increased species richness towards lower latitudes; a pattern found across the
tree of life. Despite the significance of tropical biomes and the
evolutionary/ecological importance of movements across, into, and out of
tropical latitudes, the sparse sampling of species for both DNA sequences and
morphological traits has inhibited progress in addressing major evolutionary
questions regarding the origin, diversification, and niche evolution of lineages
with temperate and tropical transitions. This research is positioned to overcome
these limitations, using the diverse and ecologically important plant clade
Ericales as a case study. The researchers will use transcriptome and targeted-
capture sequencing to resolve phylogenetic relationships and characterize gene
and genome evolution within the Ericales at an unprecedented scale to produce a
robust species-level phylogeny combined with paleobotanical data, morphological
traits (including habit and floral), and information regarding species niche to
evaluate the intrinsic and extrinsic correlates of tropical and temperate
diversification. They will conduct analyses that address specific questions of
broad interest: 1) What are the major drivers of diversification and evolution
between the temperate and tropical lineages? 2) Do adaptations to new
environments lead to faster rates of both molecular evolution and
diversification? 3) Are differences in rates of evolution between lineages in
different biomes and different elevations reflected in individual species
geographic and niche evolution patterns? 4) What biogeographic histories and
adaptations underlie the highly diverse and threatened tropical montane
biomes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.