* 1917139
* Planning Grant: Building Women Leadership at  field stations and marine laboratories
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Lisa Busch, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 37,747.00

Field stations and marine labs (FSMLs) provide a network of facilities that
enable observations and experimental research on a myriad of biological
processes to monitor the effects of a shifting climate. Field-based institutions
represent a unique resource in the nation's scientific infrastructure and
present invaluable opportunities for the translation of scientific discovery
into education, public engagement, resource management, and policy. FSMLs face
unique challenges, including their remote locations, limited resources, group
living conditions, and constrained communications. The extent to which these
challenges pose barriers to ensuring diversity and equity in participation in
field science is poorly understood. While participation of women in the
biological sciences has been generally increasing, equity in leadership
positions, salaries, and career advancement continues to lag behind
expectations. The value of the nation's network of field stations is compromised
in the absence of inclusive and equal participation in science by all members of
the community. The long-term vision for this project is to increase the number
of women leaders at field-based institutions and create an inclusive culture in
which women feel prepared, supported and empowered to lead. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;With this grant, funds are provided for planning activities to gather
data about the needs of women leaders in order to fully define the status quo,
to design an effective strategy for leadership training with experts in the
field and who have experience with issues of equity and inclusivity, and to
identify training workshop deliverables. Through a community survey and a
facilitated planning meeting with a diversity of participants, this project will
assess the current state of gender equity in leadership at FSMLs and identify
areas of need and opportunities. These will be used to form a set of design
requirements for a pilot leadership training program. The project will work
closely with the relevant societies such as the Organization of Biological Field
Stations and the National Association of Marine Laboratories. A final
deliverable will be a strategic plan for identifying barriers and potential
solutions to increase and support women leadership at field stations and marine
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.