* 1917904
* 2019 International Conference on Resource Sustainability - Cities (icRS Cities 2019)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Ming Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2021
* USD 30,000.00

This funding is to support 20 U.S.-based early-career researchers (students and
postdoctoral researchers) to attend the 2019 International Conference on
Resource Sustainability - Cities (icRS Cities 2019) to be held in Adelaide,
Australia on July 1-3, 2019. The conference serves as a platform for researchers
and practitioners around the world with diverse background and expertise to
share the most recent ideas, outcomes, and practices on resources management for
sustainable urban systems. Given that more than half of the world population now
lives in cities, urban centers have become the primary sink of resources and
energy, and major source of emissions and waste. icRS Cities 2019 will bring
together researchers and practitioners to discuss how to achieve urban
sustainability through wise resources management policy and practices. Attending
the conference will allow the U.S.-based early-career researchers to showcase
their research and develop networks with their peers around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide range of topics will be covered at the
conference related to sustainable urban systems. Solutions to the complex urban
sustainability challenges can only be developed via inter- and trans-
disciplinary approaches. With participation of natural scientists, engineers,
social scientists, industry practitioners, and policy makers, we expect that
icRS Cities 2019 will provide an excellent venue for the broad sustainable
resources management community to share their findings and opinions on urban
sustainability. We also expect icRS Cities 2019 will fill key knowledge gaps
which in turn contribute to enhance the holistic understanding of sustainability
challenges facing urban systems worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.