* 1917643
* The Connection Between Sentiments and Social Status
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Alison Bianchi, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,321.00

This project tests, by means of laboratory experiments, a new theory of how
sentiments are related to social status in humans. One strand of theory in group
processes research has concerned how sentiments, the liking and disliking
relations among group members, organize groups. Another strand has concerned how
the arrangement of social statuses in a task group fosters or hinders group
members' opportunities to contribute to their group's goals. The theory tested
in this project is a combination of these. Its potential benefits lie in its
direct applicability to project teams within businesses, academia, and other
professional organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical predictions are
derived using the mathematical apparatus of expectations states theory in the
group processes tradition. These predictions are tested using an experimental
design involving six conditions. The experimental set-up is an adaptation to
three-person groups of the usual experimental configuration in this tradition in
which social influence is measured by looking at change in a binary choice task.
For the entire study, valid data will be collected from 150 research
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.