* 1917711
* Interaction Mechanics of a Stiff Hollow Tube Penetrating a Soft Nonlinear Material
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Parsaoran Hutapea, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2023
* USD 395,534.00

Recently there has been a substantial and growing interest in the medical
community to develop next-generation surgical needles to reduce tissue damage
during percutaneous interventional procedures. Innovative solutions to the
challenge may be found in nature. Insects such as honeybees, mosquitos, and
wasps have sophisticated stinger structures and stinging mechanisms, which help
them to effectively steer their stingers to specific targets. This award
supports fundamental research to study these insertion mechanisms and to obtain
knowledge on insertion mechanics as a basis for designing bioinspired surgical
needles. Innovative needling devices employing nature-inspired insertion
mechanisms will enhance the effectiveness of various existing percutaneous
procedures and improve the patients' comfort, and therefore benefit a wide range
of medical diagnoses and treatments including those related to cancers. In
addition, bioinspired needles with improved controllability can also help
develop new medical procedures for biopsy, drug delivery, brain surgery, and
many other percutaneous procedures. Through the course of the research work,
this project also aims to educate the next generation of scientists and
engineers by mentorship and development of new educational materials. Moreover,
this project will enhance the engagement of underrepresented groups and women in
STEM education and training, and disseminate the state-of-the-art knowledge
obtained from research activities to a broad range of audience including the
general public and high school students in a variety of public forums such as
science fairs, open house events, and summer programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lack of mechanics-based understanding of bioinspired
needle-tissue interactions has been a major obstacle preventing effective design
and development of transformative surgery needling technologies. This project
will address the challenges in applying bioinspired designs to advanced needling
technologies by extending our understanding of mechanical interactions between
artificial components (bioinspired needles) and biological systems (soft
tissues). Achievement of this goal will be facilitated by understanding the
insertion and extraction mechanics of bioinspired needles through experimental
studies, studying the effect of manufacturing conditions on the mechanical
properties of the needle components, and predicting the insertion behavior using
analytical and simulation methods. The outcome of this work will provide novel
knowledge on mechanical behavior of bioinspired needle under relevant
conditions, and assist development of reliable predictive needle-insertion
models for advanced surgeries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.