* 1917707
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Standard Grant: Artificial Intelligence and Predictive Policing: An Ethical Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ryan Jenkins, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 240,336.00

This project is a study of the use of artificial intelligence to assist police
on patrol by using massive troves of historical crime data to train machine
learning algorithms to anticipate the timing and location of criminal activity.
Predictive policing has come under intense criticisms from civil rights groups,
academics, and communities that have been subject to predictive policing. These
criticisms include its recapitulation of racially biased patterns of policing,
its further burdening of marginalized communities, and its infringement on the
liberties of targeted communities. The researchers propose to examine these
claims and to develop best practices for the development and deployment of
algorithmic policing programs. The results of this project promise to benefit
police departments, communities patrolled based on algorithmic crime
predictions, and public understanding of the societal and ethical implications
of predictive policing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this grant are to
examine and develop viable ethical frameworks for the assessment of predictive
policing practices. In doing so, the researchers will propose and evaluate novel
considerations that might bear on the ethics of predictive policing. They will
also develop empirically grounded recommendations for the ethically sensitive
and effective development and use of predictive policing. The results of this
project promise to advance understanding and illuminate fertile new areas of
research in moral philosophy, technology ethics, sociology, and criminology.
They also will have clear relevance for other algorithmic technologies with
similar implications for justice including algorithms that predict criminal
sentences, make healthcare diagnoses, and serve as gatekeepers to government
benefits (all of which are currently in use).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.