* 1917879
* Problems in Distributed Sensing and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* A. Morse, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 488,773.00

Current interest in distributed control has led to a very rapid increase in the
application of graph theoretic ideas to problems of analyzing and synthesizing a
variety of desired behaviors such as swarming, rendezvousing, reaching a
consensus, as well as well as a variety of sensing and communication tasks
associated with distributed averaging, search and rescue, environmental
monitoring, security, etc. While this in-depth assault on these problems using a
combination of graph theory and system theory has been underway for some time,
it is likely to significantly expand in the years to come. One example of this
is the resurgence of interest in structural controllability and its applications
to swarming, complex social networks and network security. Another is the
explosion of interest in the development of distributed computational procedures
for addressing basic numerical problems such as estimating parameters of a
linear system, solving a distributed optimization problem or solving a system of
possibly nonlinear algebraic equations. Still another is the extremely active
area of network security. In broad terms these are the three problem areas upon
which this project will focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be
undertaken will address distributed sensing and control on three clearly defined
fronts. (1) A study will be made of the genericity with respect to specific
perturbation classes of various fundamental properties of linear dynamic systems
such as controllability and spectrum assignability. Many classical results
already exist for linear models in which algebraically independent parameters
enter a model's system matrices "linearly" at unique locations. The novelty of
the research to be undertaken in this project is that it is aims to deal with
the commonly encountered situation in which the same parameter appears in a
model's systems matrices in multiple location. An attempt will be made to
characterize in graph theoretic terms significantly more general notions of
structural controllability and structurally fixed modes than are currently
available. (2) An effort will be made to develop distributed and asynchronous
algorithms for solving certain systems of nonlinear algebraic equations which
arise in connection with distributed optimization and estimation problems across
a given network of autonomous agents assuming limited communication between
agents and time-varying networks. Questions of convergence rate, robustness and
stability of these algorithms will be addressed, as will the effects of
intermittent data transmissions and transmission delays. (3) An exploration will
be made of various algorithms based on game theory for searching across a
physical network with the goal of capturing or otherwise defeating an intruder
intent on causing a disruption. The games will be formulated between two
players, namely the intruder and a surveillance agent whose job is to thwart the
intruder. Various types of static and dynamic games will be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.