* 1917871
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Knowledge, Practice, and Clinical Experiences of Oncology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Adrienne Strong, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 24,146.00

As chronic diseases, such as cancer, begin to dominate the landscape of threats
to global health and development targets, it is of vital importance to improve
our understanding of how to implement biomedical programs in non-Western, low
resource environments. Research from within anthropology has repeatedly shown
medical treatments are rarely implemented in a new context unchanged, and that
biomedical systems adapt to local conditions and beliefs. Through a careful
examination of implementation of oncology practice, this project explores the
ways that care for cancer is shaped by differences in technology,
infrastructure, economics, development, medical practice, and cultural beliefs.
By gaining a better understanding of the ways that these forces impact care for
cancer, this project has the potential to yield insights for improvement in
biomedical and development practice in oncology. Further, the lessons learned
from this specific case study may be fruitfully extended to improve biomedical
and development practice more broadly, including use in other cases of
implementation of systems of care for non-infectious diseases. Thus, as the
global health community begins to pivot towards the problems of chronic illness,
this project has the potential to yield concrete, actionable recommendations for
improving biomedical practice, training, and the development of sustainable
infrastructure in this context.

Rebecca Henderson, under the supervision of Dr. Adrienne Strong of the
University of Florida, will investigate how knowledge, technology, and treatment
protocols of cancer are created an enacted in clinical settings, with the aim of
understanding how biomedicine is transformed as it travels. This research will
be conducted in several of the key cancer research centers in Haiti in the
capital city of Port-au-Prince, as well as those in more rural areas. Using a
qualitative approach, this project will capture the perspectives of clinicians,
patients, and families as they encounter oncology. It will employ participant
observation in order to document activities in hospitals and health centers, as
well as centers of diagnosis such as laboratories and imaging centers. It will
also employ semi-structured interviews with patients, their families, and the
clinicians engaged in their care in order to capture local understandings of
cancer, cancer treatment, and disease course. Oral histories will allow for an
improved understanding of the development of cancer care over the last decade.
All interviews and fieldnotes will be thematically coded using an iterative,
inductive methodology based on grounded-theory. Finally, a review of medical
records will be conducted at clinical centers in order to more fully describe
changes in oncological care over time, as well as to better understand the
effect of these factors on patient outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.