* 1917434
* Collaborative Research: The Distributed Biological Observatory (DBO) - A Change Detection Array in the Pacific Arctic Region
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Karen Frey, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 470,408.00

The Arctic is changing. The Distributed Biological Observatory studies these
changes in the northern Bering and Chukchi seas. Investigators sample locations
that are biologically important in U.S. territorial waters. These locations have
been sampled annually since 2010. Other investigators also sample the same
locations. As a result, the locations are sampled multiple times a year. Data
are collected on environmental conditions including water column and sea floor
animals that are food for whales, seals, and birds. Data are shared
internationally. The project contributes to the U.S. National Ocean Policy and
Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee 5-year plan. The data will be of
value to U.S. and international science and management agencies, private
industry, and local communities as they try to understand changes to the
environment. The project supports four graduate students and one postdoctoral
research associate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observational plan includes
consistent standard hydrographic and biological measurements along five transect
lines located in the northern Bering and Chukchi Seas. These sampling locations
are arrayed south-to-north and reflect a gradient of seasonal sea ice change and
seawater warming. The investigators chose these 5 regions because they are zones
of high biological productivity and biodiversity. Results so far indicate a
freshening and warming of Pacific seawater which transits northward over the
spring to fall season. These changes have impacted prey for larger marine
mammals and seabirds. Satellite observations are also used to evaluate seasonal
changes in sea ice concentration, surface seawater temperature, and chlorophyll
concentration. The biological measurements focus on lower trophic levels and
shipboard surveys of upper trophic level organisms. This research will increase
our understanding of the impact of key environmental forcing parameters on
biological change in the system. The collection of key prey-predator biological
data along with physical and chemical measurements will allow for analyses and
ecosystem modeling which will promote better understanding of Arctic
environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.