* 1917263
* Bilateral BBSRC-NSF/BIO: CIBR: Structural modeling of interactome to assess phenotypic effects of genetic variation.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Petras Kundrotas, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 957,042.00

Structural characterization of protein interactions is essential for
interpretation of genetic variation. A vast amount of information on single
amino acid variants will be available from sequencing. The project focuses on
application of computational approaches to the development of a public resource
incorporating structural modeling with genetic amino acid variants and
assessment of their functional impact. The resource will facilitate better
understanding of principles of protein interaction and structure/function
relationships. The long-term goal of this research is to gain insights into
fundamental principles of molecular processes in living systems, leading to
structure-based description of the cell. The collaborative project combines
highly complementary areas of expertise of the US team, on high-throughput
modeling of protein-protein interactions, and the UK team, on protein structure
prediction and effects of genetic variation. The teams will coordinate research
and training activities, based on the project, with graduate and undergraduate
programs locally, nationally and internationally. Minority students and women
will be involved in different parts of the research, including those within
established minority-oriented programs. The project will enhance infrastructure
for research and education. The US and UK teams have an extensive and well
proven record of developing and disseminating public resources, used by many
researchers worldwide. The project participants will be actively presenting
their results at various multidisciplinary conferences and workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will continue development of an integrated
approach to high-throughput modeling of proteins and their complexes. The
objectives of the project are: (1) to develop advanced high-throughput
approaches to modeling of protein interactome; (2) to provide assessment of
phenotypic effects of genetic variation; and (3) to develop and implement
genome-wide resource for structural characterization of interactome and
phenotypic effects of genetic variation. The structure modeling approaches will
be based on new search, scoring and refinement strategies, and will integrate
the tertiary and quaternary structure prediction. The prediction of the mutation
effect will evaluate the change in protein interactions. The genome-wide GWYRE
resource will incorporate structurally refined protein complexes for model
organisms annotated by the phenotypic effects of the single amino acid variants.
The project outcome will have a significant impact on the research field by
integrating template-based tertiary and quaternary structure prediction, and
development of a comprehensive public resource for structural characterization
of interactomes and assessment of phenotypic effects of genetic variation. The
results of the project will be available at http://www.gwyre.org and also at
http://vakser.compbio.ku.edu and
http://www.sbg.bio.ic.ac.uk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.