* 1917824
* Legal Pluralism, Restorative Justice, and Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Pauline Wiessner, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 93,000.00

It has been scientifically well documented that culturally evolved norms as
public goods can constrain individual interest and facilitate collective action
to overcome tragedies of the commons as well as common tragedies. However, we
have little understanding of how existing norms are shifted and new norms
evolve, so that justice is seen to be done and cooperation furthered in the face
of change. Many jurisdictions have adopted legal pluralism to bring about
harmony at different levels of society with formal western-based law courts for
administering retributive justice and customary courts negotiating compromise
through restorative justice. This project explores the role of these public
forums for restorative justice, which are optimal settings for understanding the
dynamics of coalescing diverse opinions into norm shifts to maintain community
cooperation despite rapid demographic, economic and social change. The project
includes educational components that broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in science, and improve the public's understanding of
science. The research team will produce educational materials on courts and
customs. The work is highly generalizable to other traditional court and
restorative justice systems, which will contribute to the field at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study conducted by Dr. Polly Wiessner (Arizona
State University and the University of Utah) and Mr. Nitze Pupu, J D (Enga
Tradition and Transition Centre) will build on a decade of research observing
and documenting over 1,000 customary court cases in village courts within and
between the tribes of the Enga of Papua New Guinea since 2008. Customary courts
are open air forums, manned by elected local leaders, have broad participation,
and host extensive public discussion. They are sanctioned by the government for
resolving conflicts and minor crimes, although they often mediate settlements
for serious ones. The study will examine the processes and outcomes of the
documented cases and continue to research new ones asking: (1) Which procedures,
norms, and customs continue to bring about decisions that satisfy communities;
which do not and why? (2) How are norms and values updated during public forums
to address new realities, such as radically altered patterns of communication
with mobile phones, changing norms in sexual relations and marriage, guns in
warfare, and land inheritance? (3) How do community members assist in making up
for harm done and bringing wrong-doers back into the fold as productive
citizens? (4) What are rates of recidivism for different infractions? (5) Why
are customary courts often favored over formal courts? (6) How are the relations
between the formal western-based courts and customary village courts altered in
response to changing conditions and how are mismatches resolved to avoid legal
dissonance? Methods proposed include the collection of court case data, follow-
up data collection on compensation payment, follow-up interviews with
participants in key cases (to include customary court officials, those involved
in cases, and those that observed proceedings or contributed to restitution
payments), follow-up data collection on recidivism, and finally workshops and
focus groups with magistrates and customary court officials to get their
perspective on changes in the customary court system over time. The PI plans to
use content analysis methodologies to identify shifting norms around
reproduction, production, and social support; as well as changing articulation
with the formal courts. The research will contribute to better understanding of
the articulation between local, regional, and national systems. The adaptive
potential of restorative justice systems is of wider interest to anthropologists
and other scholars of legal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.