* 1917050
* NSF/MCB-BSF:  RNA-mediated regulation of innate immunity
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Heather Hundley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 838,303.00

This project will address how organisms maintain a precise balance of molecules
that fight infection. Some such molecules accumulate in various organisms even
in the absence of a threat, so that the organism is ready to fight a pathogen
immediately upon infection. However, production of excessive amounts of these
molecules has been shown to inhibit growth in plants, cause tissue damage in
animals and autoimmune disease in humans. The objective of this project is to
understand how the optimal amount of infection-fighting molecules is maintained
in a model organism Caenorhabditis elegans, by dissecting the antagonistic role
of the ADAR family of RNA binding proteins and small RNA silencing factors in
regulating the expression of these molecules. This research will involve direct
participation by graduate and undergraduate students, including underrepresented
minorities and first-generation college students. Additional undergraduate and
graduate students together with the US PI will participate in hands-on science
lessons to kindergarten students. In an effort to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups, the US PI will continue to serve as a faculty mentor
for a residential community of female STEM undergraduates and will provide a
workshop to incoming graduate students to help students navigate the path to
successful completion of a doctoral degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms
by which the nervous system influences the immune response has recently become
an area of intense investigation. While many efforts are aimed at understanding
how neuro-immune communication is involved in induction of the immune response,
this project focuses on an underexplored area regarding how gene expression in
the nervous system contributes to basal immunity. This research seeks to answer
three fundamental questions 1) Can expression of an RNA binding protein
specifically within neural cells influence pathogen susceptibility? 2) Does RNA
editing contribute to innate immunity? 3) What small RNA pathways affect
resistance to pathogens? To tackle these questions, the collaborative research
will leverage the strengths of the US PI (gene regulation by ADARs,
biochemistry) and the Israeli investigator (small RNAs, computational biology).
These studies will fundamentally advance our understanding of RNA-mediated
regulation of innate immunity as well as provide further insight into how the
nervous and immune systems communicate. Furthermore, as small RNAs and RNA
binding proteins are major regulators of post-transcriptional gene regulation,
these studies will provide a paradigm for how antagonism between these factors
can fine-tune gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/Israel
project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the Israeli
Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.