* 1917325
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Great Lakes Bioinformatics Conference (GLBIO)
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Tijana Milenkovic, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 03/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

The Great Lakes Bioinformatics Conference (GLBIO) strives to enhance educational
opportunities and research infrastructure throughout the North American Great
Lakes region, to make the region a world leader in bioinformatics and
computational biology. In 2019, GLBIO will be held at the University of
Wisconsin at Madison, during May 19-22. An important goal of the 14th edition of
this annual conference is to foster long-term, collaborative relationships among
computational and life science researchers and educators from academia,
government, and industry. GLBIO provides an interdisciplinary forum for sharing
scientific information, including discussing methods, research findings, and
educational experiences regarding computational investigations of biological
problems. The annual meeting includes invited keynote presentations, oral
presentations selected from peer-reviewed full paper or abstract submissions,
tutorials, workshops, special sessions, and poster presentations. This travel
award supports student participation from US universities at GLBIO 2019.
Students will be educated on cutting-edge scientific developments that will
drive future discoveries in the fields of bioinformatics and computational
biology. Also, they will have opportunities to present their work as oral talks
or posters, or to participate in recruiting events with universities or industry
partners. By helping further students' careers and train interdisciplinary
scientists, this NSF student travel grant will benefit global scientific
competitiveness of the US.

Historically, more than half of the GLBIO attendees have been students, over 90%
of whom have been US-based. Through this NSF student travel grant, GLBIO 2019
will create a valuable training opportunity for 20 student attendees, by
providing them with a partial funding support to attend the conference (as a
combination of conference registration, lodging, and transportation costs).
Special focus will be on first-time conference attendees who will not
necessarily be presenting their work at the conference, and of the students who
will be presenting their work, on female, undergraduate or high school,
underrepresented minority, or disabled students. Applications for student travel
grants will be solicited as follows. All students presenting their work at the
conference will be sent emails making them aware of the student travel grant
opportunity. The grant opportunity will be advertised on the GLBIO 2019 web
site, via conference announcements, and outreach to under-represented student
groups and organizations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.