* 1917328
* Completing the Single-Column Root of a Hierarchy of Configurations for the Community Atmosphere Model
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Brian Mapes, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 203,042.00

Just as medicine learns from biology's studies of fruit flies and lab mice,
atmospheric sciences rely on a "hierarchy" of models with various complexity
that allow the processes under the consideration to interact with one another
fully while keeping others simplified for improving our understanding and
enhancing our ability of weather and climate simulations and predictions. The
vertical dimension of the atmosphere is special, because temperature and
pressure vary greatly in just a few kilometers. Modeling of atmospheric vertical
profiles under various conditions, called single-column model, has been regarded
the lowest "root" of the hierarchy of model complexity for atmospheric sciences.
The goal of this project is to develop and demonstrate the utility of using
single-column model platform for understanding and evaluating impacts of various
physical parameterization schemes on the tropical climate and variability of a
climate model. This project will contribute to relevant international model
intercomparison projects, such as the Radiative-Convective Equilibrium Model
Intercomparison Project and the Global Atmospheric Systems Study - Weak
Temperature Gradient project. The project will support a graduate student to
complete his degree and the training of the next generation of atmospheric
scientists is also an important impact of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, a PhD student will complete his multi-year work with the PI in
devising a version of the Community Atmosphere Model that includes only the
vertical interactions among radiation, surface energy exchanges, and turbulence
and cloud processes. Specifically, they will configure the single-column model
component of 4 versions of the Community Atmospheric Model in two different
settings: one only considers interactions among radiative and convective
processes and the other also includes large-scale dynamics effects, although
highly idealized or parameterized, in the interaction loops. In the latter case,
the large scale would be parameterized using either the weak temperature
gradient approximation, or the damped-gravity wave limit. They will use this
framework to explore the dependence of simulated column atmosphere on radiative
heating rate, convective parameterizations, vertical resolution and forcing and
its interactions with large-scale dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.