* 1917117
* CICI: SSC: Proactive Cyber Threat Intelligence and Comprehensive Network Monitoring for Scientific Cyberinfrastructure: The AZSecure Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 998,014.00

The rapid growth of computing technologies in scientific instruments has
increased the rate of discovery. Some recent examples include the discovery of
new fundamental particles and the first-ever images of a black hole.
Unfortunately, the same technologies contributing to these high-impact
discoveries are also being targeted by hackers to steal ideas or for profit.
These attacks threaten the privacy, integrity, and ability to access valuable
scientific data and events. The risks to scientific facilities and how they can
be attacked have still not been properly mapped. This project will use novel
Artificial Intelligence to (1) study hackers in the international and ever-
evolving Dark Web and identify and categorize hundreds of thousands of risks and
(2) link those risks to possible attacks on two large-scale science community
facilities. One of them is a facility funded by the National Science Foundation
offering advanced computing resources for Life Sciences. The other uses a
network of sensors around the globe to collect detailed and timely data for
Earth Sciences. Studying these valuable targets enables investigation of current
and emerging threats that present risk to scientific
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by the Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI)
University of Arizona (UA), this project designs an innovative, holistic, and
proactive Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) framework with two synergistic
research streams. The first builds upon advanced topic modelling and text
classification approaches from our NSF Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
research to systematically collect and explore multi-million record Dark Web
hacker forums for scientific cyberinfrastructure exploits. The second designs
novel banner data feature extraction, text analytics, and custom vulnerability
scanning integrating state-of-the-art tools to comprehensively categorize and
assess the vulnerabilities within CyVerse?s (life sciences) and LEO?s (earth
sciences) diverse instruments, data, hardware, and software. Exploit and
vulnerability assessment results are linked via a novel deep learning-based
Exploit Vulnerability Deep Structured Semantic Model (EV-DSSM) based on word
embedding. UA?s National Security Agency-designated Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense, Research, and Operations, NSF Scholarship-for-
Service (SFS) Cyber-Corps, and Master?s in Cybersecurity programs position the
project for synergy with teaching and research. Techniques developed in this
project will advance knowledge not only CTI, but network analysis, deep
learning, and text analytics across multiple disciplines. Findings from this
research will be disseminated to 75+ SFS partner institutions and operational
intelligence for the larger scientific community (e.g., NSF Cybersecurity
Summits of Large Facilities and Cyberinfrastructure).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.