* 1917781
* The Cross-equatorial Influences of South American Rainfall on the North Atlantic and Adjacent Continents
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Robert Dickinson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 679,391.00

The influence of one-hemisphere on another hemisphere is an important component
of global weather and climate teleconnections. Most of previous research has
been focused on teleconnections over the eastern Pacific during boreal winter
season through the propagation of the atmospheric planetary (Rossby) waves
across the equator. Over the American-Atlantic sector, various interhemispheric
teleconnection pathways control the influence of Amazonia deforestation and of
extreme cold front incursions on weather and climate variability over the North
American and Europe. Two of the outstanding questions are what are the dynamic
processes that control these teleconnections and how they affect droughts,
floods and the tracks of tropical storms. This proposal will address this
knowledge gap by testing three hypotheses about the mechanisms behind the
interhemispheric teleconnection pathways over the American-Atlantic sector. The
insights from the project will help advance our understanding of cross-
equatorial teleconnections and may have implications for improving sub-seasonal
to interannual climate predictability over the North Atlantic and the
surrounding continents, including North America, Europe, and Africa. The latter
is also central for characterizing the potential influences of rapidly changing
Amazonian rainforests on global atmospheric circulation and climate. The main
broader impacts involve training of two graduate students from underrepresented
groups, mentoring of undergraduate research. The research findings will be
incorporated into a large upper-division undergraduate science course. The
project also supports visitations of faculty members from South America to help
build networks of U.S. colleges and universities, especially for students, with
international academic institutions and organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They will consider three dynamic processes operating in
different seasons responsible for cross-equatorial teleconnections originated
from diabatic heating anomalies over South America: (i) cross-equatorial
propagation of the Rossby waves generated by diabatic heating over the South
American Monsoon to influence the North Atlantic Oscillation during boreal
winter, (ii) convective coupled eastward propagating Kelvin waves from Amazonia
that influences tropical Atlantic surface winds, sea-level height anomalies, and
western Congo rainfall variability in boreal spring, and (iii) a shallow cross-
equatorial circulation connecting cold air incursions from the extratropical
South America to influence weather and climate variability of the tropical and
subtropical North Atlantic in boreal summer. The PI plan to evaluate these
hypotheses through observational analyses and a suite of idealized numerical
model experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.