* 1917462
* Understanding and Controlling Amine-Hybrid Perovskite Vapor-Solid Reaction at Nanoscale
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Mark Ming-Cheng Cheng, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 292,502.00

Breakthroughs in low-cost photovoltaics and lighting technologies can transform
global energy systems and reduce environmental impact of human activities.
Hybrid halide perovskites have emerged as an important class of optoelectronic
materials for a diverse range of applications, including solar energy harvesting
and solid-state lighting. The objective of this proposal is to test the
hypothesis that the reaction between an amine and a hybrid halide perovskite has
a threshold amine pressure, below which the reaction can be used to reliably
synthesize a nanoscale shell around the perovskite, improving its environmental
stability and interfacial electrical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research project aims to develop fundamental understanding of reactions
between amine vapors and hybrid perovskite substrates. A custom-built glove box
vacuum reactor with in situ infrared spectroscopy, quartz crystal microbalance,
and mass spectrometry will be used to enable detailed studies of the chemical
reaction mechanisms and identify the threshold pressure in a set of important
amine-perovskite reactions. The effects of amine size, proton affinity, chemical
composition and processing temperature on the threshold pressure will be
studied. Operating conditions will be identified that allow precise control of
the extent of reaction for reliable growth of nanometer-scale structures. The
project will be used to train a PhD student on state-of-the-art experimental
methods in the field of surface science and nanoscale materials synthesis and
characterization. Proposed activities aimed at integrating research and
education include curriculum development to incorporate surface science concepts
into undergraduate and graduate courses and research opportunities for
undergraduate students. Outreach activities to K-12 students are planned to
promote awareness of the fields of surface science, nanotechnology and
environmental sustainability, and to encourage students to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.