* 1917640
* Collaborative Research: Suturing the Heart of Asia: Tectonics of the Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean Closure
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Laura Webb, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 288,511.00

The closure of ocean basins and formation of supercontinents throughout geologic
history have directly influenced the distribution of natural hazards and natural
resources. Changes in the distribution of ocean basins and land masses have also
impacted the history of Earth's climate and the evolution of life. The modern-
day continent of Asia consists of remnants of old continents, relict ocean
basins, and fragments of island chains assembled over hundreds of millions of
years. The ancient Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean was one of the largest oceans that
previously separated fragments of the present core of the Asian continent, and
yet remarkably little is known about it. This study examines the timing and
mechanisms of the closure of the Mongol-Okhotsk Ocean through a
multidisciplinary approach that includes field mapping and dating of key rock
types. The project supports collaborations between diverse scientists from
universities in the US and Mongolia, and training and mentoring of US and
Mongolian students. Outreach efforts associated with this project include new
educational resources for US and international students, along with new
educational modules on plate tectonics, supercontinents, and geologic time for
secondary school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
stratigraphic, paleomagnetic, structural, and geochronologic datasets for the
Mongol-Okhotsk suture that are assessed in the context of competing end-member
hypotheses regarding modes of ocean basin closure and continental collision,
such as major oroclinal bending as compared with scissor-like suturing. The
project also investigates the role of strike-slip faulting during ocean closure
and its relationship to subsequent orogenic collapse. Research outcomes are
multidisciplinary and include: 1) stratigraphic analyses to document marine-
nonmarine facies transitions and better delineate subtypes of remnant ocean
basins; 2) structural datasets that document deformation in the nominal western
hinge zone near the Hangay Dome; 3) verification of existing low-volume
paleomagnetic data sets and new reference poles to improve APWP comparisons; and
4) development of an overarching geochronologic framework for key rock types.
The project includes collaboration with international teams focused on regional
magmatism and metallogeny.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.