* 1917164
* Collaborative Research: Optimal Sensor Selection and Robust Traffic Detection and Estimation in a World of Connected Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Ahmad Taha, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 11/30/2021
* USD 282,922.00

Reliable traffic management strategies require accurate knowledge of traffic
levels on roads. Though the emergence of connected vehicles (CV) offers
tremendous potential for sharing traffic data about vehicles' locations and
speeds through wireless communications, there are both privacy concerns and
bandwidth constraints - not all users want to share and not all vehicles are
able to share. This project will address both issues by designing methods to
guide the selection of some road users for data sharing and analysis to provide
accurate estimation of traffic levels in real time, while addressing privacy and
bandwidth issues. Throughout this project, training modules in traffic and
machine learning sciences will be designed at both UT San Antonio and UT Austin
and students from underrepresented groups will be recruited at UTSA where 58
percent of enrolled students are minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will: (i) consider privacy of user data hence maintaining anonymity of vehicles
and users, (ii) identify sudden changes in traffic conditions due to accidents,
(iii) design a time-varying selection of traffic data collected in real-time
from CVs, and (iv) quantify limits on the network bandwidth and uncertainty in
traffic conditions and road properties. The project's major contribution lies in
advancing the use of CVs as real-time, mobile traffic sensors. This involves the
integration of concepts from multiple disciplines: traffic flow, networked
systems, estimation, and machine learning theories. Specifically, the project
will investigate computationally scalable methods that traffic operators can
utilize to optimally sample data from CVs while satisfying privacy and bandwidth
constraints, thereby monitoring traffic in real-time. The theoretical
foundations will be validated with realistic traffic setups through
collaborations with the cities of Austin and San Antonio. The broader impact of
the research transcends traffic networks: the computational algorithms will be
applicable to related problems involving networked systems of partial
differential equations and moving sensing platforms such as environmental
monitoring by robot and unmanned aerial vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.