* 1917705
* Rapid: Assessing Temporal Dynamics of Disturbance Interactions as a Driver of a Novel Forest Mortality Event
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Robert Fahey, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ford Ballantyne
* 02/29/2020
* USD 57,849.00

In many forested regions of the world, disturbances caused by introduced pests
and pathogens, along with changing climatic conditions, has resulted in forest
health impacts. As these types of disturbances become more frequent, the
interactions between them can greatly amplify the impacts on forest health and
sustainability. This project will study an unprecedented, ongoing forest
mortality event that affects oak-dominated forests in southern New England. Tree
mortaility appears to be related to the interaction of both drought and multiple
canopy defoliations by non-native Gypsy Moth caterpillars. This project will
evaluate how the timing and interactions of those disturbances matters in forest
health. The research will assess if areas that have greater tree mortality are
those that experienced the most intense initial drought or if they underwent
defoliation closer in time to the drought. The results of the project will be
very valuable to forest stakeholders, helping them understand the underlying
causes of the tree mortality event and potentially allowing prediction of future
impacts. The investigators are highly engaged with the regional forest
management community and the results of the project will be used in planning
forest management strategies including tree removals related to this mortality
event. The project is important as it will communicate the potential
ramifications for wood products markets, forestry and arboriculture practices,
and general forest use by the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between
climate-mediated disturbances, such as droughts, and biotic disturbances, such
as defoliating insect pests, are increasingly driving continental-scale forest
structure and function. However, the temporal lags associated with drought
effects on biotic disturbance are not well understood and empirical data to
address this topic are lacking. The central hypothesis of this project is that
the effect of interacting drought and defoliation disturbance will be mediated
by temporal proximity between disturbances and initial drought severity. The
project will combine high temporal and spatial resolution remote sensing
analysis with dendrochronological reconstruction of forest growth patterns to
assess how the timing and severity of interacting disturbances affects patterns
of disturbance resistance, forest productivity, and tree mortality in temperate
forest ecosystems. The study will be conducted in a network of forest stands,
identified through the remote sensing analysis, which will be replicated across
categories of defoliation timing in relation to the initial drought disturbance.
The results of the project will support hypothesis generation, model
parameterization, and general conceptual frameworks for future experimental and
modeling studies that can evaluate the mechanistic basis for, and consequences
of, disturbance interactions in terrestrial
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.