* 1917276
* Collaborative Research: Autonomous Hierarchical Adaptive Dynamic Programming for Decision Making in Complex Environment
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Xiangnan Zhong, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 09/30/2019
* USD 237,297.00

The recent big wave of artificial intelligence (AI) not only provided tremendous
advancements ranging from fundamental research to a wide range of exciting
applications, but also presents enormous amounts of opportunities as well as
challenges to the community. Among many of the AI techniques, adaptive dynamic
programming and reinforcement learning (ADP/RL) is widely considered as one of
the key methodologies for learning-based intelligent decision-making process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop an innovative
autonomous hierarchical ADP/RL approach for decision making in complex
environments. By autonomously providing a hierarchical representation of sub-
goals for improved learning and exploration capability, the proposed research
provides a new approach to systematically and adaptively develop an optimal
multi-step hierarchical temporal abstraction sequence, rather than the one-step
primitive action in traditional methods. The research method advances the
foundations, principles, architectures, and algorithms for autonomous learning
and hierarchical control, which will facilitate the capability of learning and
generalization for decision-making. This project provides unique opportunities
to attract and educate future professionals by bridging the connections of
ADP/RL and energy systems, and for students to work on cutting-edge problems.
The team consists of two PIs with strong collaborations and complementary
expertise in computational intelligence, machine learning, autonomous control,
and the smart grid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research advances the scientific
foundations and methodologies of intelligent decision making in complex
environments with high-dimensionality, big data, and uncertainty. The
collaborations with industry integrates fundamental research into a microgrid
application providing critical technical innovations to the energy sector. In
addition, the developed ADP/RL based intelligent decision making method can
benefit other types of complex engineering systems. Furthermore, the research
results of this project are also expected to fulfill a critical need in the
community by training and preparing future workforce in the cross-disciplinary
areas of machine learning and energy systems. The integrative outreach and
education activities will provide unique opportunities to attract women and
minorities into the intelligent system and smart grid
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.