* 1917920
* Promoting empathy between groups by increasing empathic effort
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Karina Schumann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 351,029.00

Conservatives and liberals in America often demonize the other side, judging
each other's values to be inferior and immoral. Rather than seeking
understanding of others, people often shut out, talk over, or even spew hatred
at people who do not share their own perspectives. This "empathy gap" reflects a
tendency for empathy to break down in situations where people are in conflict or
feel different from each other. This research tests ways to reduce this empathy
gap by focusing on how people understand their own empathy. Does the belief that
empathy can be developed motivate people to empathize with those who have
differing perspectives? By examining how people's beliefs about empathy
influence their interactions with members of other groups, this project offers
insights into promoting more open-minded interactive dialogue and reducing
intergroup polarization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the
concept of empathic effort, which is the willingness to invest time and
cognitive energy into understanding and relating to members of a different
thought group. The project uses diverse methods and nationally representative
samples to examine how to foster empathic effort. The research tests (a) whether
a growth mindset of empathy (the belief that one can develop empathy) and a
dynamic norm of empathy (the belief that a growing number of people think
interparty empathy is important) combine to promote empathic effort toward
outgroup members, (b) whether empathetic effort and feelings of empathy toward
an outgroup member produce less hostility toward the broader outgroup, and (c)
whether receiving empathic effort from an outgroup member encourages empathic
effort from the recipient and reduces the recipient's hostility toward the
broader outgroup. Messages that teach a growth mindset of empathy and dynamic
norm of empathic effort could be delivered broadly and across multiple
intergroup contexts. As a result, the research offers insight into addressing
the empathy gap between those with different perspectives and other intergroup
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.