* 1917713
* Collaborative Research: Student Affect Detection and Intervention with Teachers in the Loop
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Shiting Lan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

In recent years, there has been increasing effort to integrate modern artificial
intelligence technologies into adaptive learning systems to enhance student
learning. One key emerging area is in the use of models that can recognize
student emotion in context, referred to as affective states. These models
typically take the form of machine learning classifiers that recognize affect
from the student's interaction with an online learning system. In this project,
the investigators will develop adaptive learning systems that actively enlist
the help of teachers to develop better student affect detection methods. In
return, the system will support the work of teachers by providing them reports
on the affective state of each student in real-time. The system will then learn
to mimic teachers' choices of intervention methods for disengaged students in
order to deliver interventions automatically. Overall, this project is
anticipated to lead to i) better understanding of how to leverage and align to
teachers' perspectives in detecting and responding to affect, and ii) enhanced
intervention by both teachers and automated software that re-engages students
and improves learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be
organized into three phases. First, the investigators will employ active machine
learning methods to ask teachers to observe specific students when they have a
break in classroom activity; these methods can improve the quality of the affect
detectors by providing data on the students whose affective states are most
informative to improve the classifier, rather than the standard method of
developing these detectors by observing students in round-robin fashion. Second,
the investigators will incorporate richer data types (specifically, self-
reported confidence ratings of affect labels) into the detectors to improve
their quality. These self-reported confidence ratings reflect how uncertain
humans are about specific affect judgements, which will be compared to the
uncertainty of classifiers, to possibly reveal insights into student affect,
such as what the properties are of situations where affect is ambiguous. Third,
the investigators will use crowdsourcing to solicit ideas from teachers as to
when specific affect interventions will be appropriate for specific students,
and will develop automated intervention methods using reinforcement learning.
These automated intervention methods are highly scalable since they can enable
the system to take the actions the teacher would take to intervene to support
different students experiencing negative affect at the same time. This
intervention system will be tested in real classrooms as students learn within
ASSISTments, a free web-based learning platform used by over 60,000 students a
year. If successful, this project will lead to new scientific discoveries on the
dynamics of affect and new technology for scalable student affect detection and
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.