* 1917916
* Liquidity, Crises and Stagnation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 184,999.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last few decades, especially after the
Global Financial Crisis of 2007-10, there has been two major concerns: slower
growth of many countries and rising inequality across households within
countries. Although there are different proposed explanations for these
observations, the key underlying phenomena is the declining growth rate of
productivity and worsening labor market conditions for youth. This project
explores these issues in relation to the accumulation of firm-specific skills
(intangible capital) on the job. The project also looks at systemic risk by
considering the role of financial intermediaries. The questions that are
explored are reasons of long stagnation after a crisis, the sources of financial
instability, and monetary and financial policies that may improve welfare and
mitigate financial crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project considers an
overlapping generations economy in which skilled workers are essential for
production along with unskilled labor. Unlike physical capital, intangible
capital (skill) cannot be directly transferred between generations. Young
workers accumulate the intangibles through on-the-job training offered by
skilled old workers. In the model, inputs are the skill of skilled old workers,
the learning ability of young trainees and the amount of time both skilled old
workers and trainees allocate for training. The outcome, skill acquired by the
young trainees, is subject to idiosyncratic shocks. This project plans to show
that when young trainees are not committed to staying in the same firms and
repaying their debt, a small difference in initial endowment and ability of
young workers leads to a large inequality in accumulation of intangibles and
income. Furthermore, a negative shock to endowment or the degree of commitment
is expected to generate a persistent stagnation and a rise in inequality. The
project also develops a macroeconomic model with financial intermediaries that
incorporates anticipated and realized bank runs. This study advances the
understanding of crisis events and points out the limitation of predicting
crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.