* 1917043
* SHAPE: Dynamic and Reconfigurable Multiband and Ultra-Wideband RF Spectral Tailoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Mable Fok, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Multiband radio frequency (RF) systems are essential for commercial, defense,
and everyday consumer uses. Further multiband RF resources have recently been
released for new applications such as the 5G system. Although these new
developments could lead to useful new applications being supported and more
people able to enjoy the associated advantages, we can only realize these
benefits if we can ensure high-quality transmission performance. This outcome is
challenging to achieve because the bandwidth of multiband RF signals can be
several gigahertz wide, and current electronic technologies are not capable of
dynamically manipulating such a wide spectrum. This research aims to overcome
this challenge by making use of photonics, an alternative signal processing
method that has much wider bandwidth and faster speed than its counterpart in
electronics. With the proposed photonics techniques, the RF signal is first
converted to an optical signal, which can then be processed almost
instantaneously and dynamically. This research focuses on the dynamic and
precise tailoring and equalizing of RF spectral response over ultra-
wide/multiple frequency bands. We will also carry out a comprehensive education
plan closely related to the research that includes developing mobile apps for
learning fiber optics, visiting local elementary and high schools, developing
undergraduate freshman seminars and cross-disciplinary courses, and providing
research experiences for high school and undergraduate students. This research
will strengthen vital wireless services in the United States, including smart
home system control, augmented reality learning, and surveillance and
reconnaissance efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While new RF resources from MHz to
tens of GHz have been made available to emerging wireless technologies such as
the 5G system, the inability to dynamically and precisely manipulate the whole
available RF spectrum hinders the performance of the associated multi-/wideband
systems. The mission of this research is to use photonics to enable effective
and precise manipulation of wide radio spectrum of tens of GHz. Two closely
related research themes are proposed: (i) Developing a photonics-based radio
frequency spectrum shaper that can achieve tens of GHz bandwidth of continuous
spectral tailoring capability with greater than 50-dB dynamic amplitude
compensation, and (ii) Developing a radio frequency photonic subsystem to enable
independent multiband RF spectral shaping and chirp control. The radio frequency
spectral shaper exploits the multi-point spectral control capabilities of a
uniquely designed RF multiband filter, the heterogeneous spectral property
control algorithm, and the instantaneous response of existing optical devices to
achieve dynamic radio frequency spectrum tailoring from low- to high-frequency
bands. The dynamic spectral manipulation of radio frequency spectrum enables
independent control of frequency, amplitude, spectral shape, bandwidth, and
group delay slope at each spectral control point. This proposal presents a
comprehensive, interdisciplinary, and innovative approach to solve the
challenging wideband radio frequency channel response problem while offering a
solution to individually and precisely tailor the wideband and multiband radio
frequency spectrum. The proposed research involves a close coupling of system
design and experimental validation, and thus will yield laboratory prototypes to
demonstrate more effective operation of wideband and multiband radio frequency
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.