* 1917277
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO:  PAX6 as a model for synthetic hypervariation studies
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jef Boeke, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

The human genome is made of DNA, a language of four letters A, G, C, and T, the
interpretation of which is known. This project entails "writing" DNA in ways
that change biological function. If the workings of genomes are known and
understood, then they can be "written" from scratch. The development of the eye
is controlled by special regions of DNA called enhancers, which turn on gene
activity at the right time and place in the developing embryo. The project
involves writing these enhancers in new ways, to test basic knowledge of how
expression of the genes that control eye development are wired. As a test of eye
development, the newly written DNA is transferred to the embryos of fish or mice
to observe the effects on eye development. This project is a collaborative
effort between a US laboratory with expertise in writing DNA and a British
laboratory with expertise in analyzing eye function. The project has broader
impacts through an exchange program of scientists who are learning more about
DNA writing, a scientific meeting on DNA writing, a workshop on manipulating the
genome of fish, and a tailored program to teach the genomics of eye disease
specifically to the visually impaired. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developmental
and physiological regulation of human gene expression is controlled by enhancers
often located at huge (100 to 1000kb) genomic distance from their target genes.
This represents a fundamental "Rule of Life" that is not very well understood.
What happens if enhancers are moved around? Why are introns so huge? What
happens if regulatory landscapes are pared down to a minimal size? What happens
if the relative position, orientation, order, and spacing of enhancer sequences
are jumbled? Can they be put altogether into one big mega-enhancer? These are
all questions that currently do not have answers. To help establish a platform
for systematically answering such profound basic questions about how
developmental systems are "wired" in the genome, a systematic synthetic
genomics-based approach called "synthetic hypervariation" is employed. This
approach allows variations to be constructed with high precision in yeast cells.
The variants are precisely delivered to the native locus, preserving the genomic
context that is likely critical for successfully interpreting the results. As a
powerful model for studying the function of non-coding regulation and impact of
its perturbation, these methods are applied to one of the most complicated
mammalian genes known, namely the key gene required for eye development across
multicellular eukaryotes, PAX6. The PAX6 gene is a prime example of complex,
long-range regulation in the mammalian genome. The PAX6 regulatory domain
contains 31 known enhancers which orchestrate complex spatial and temporal PAX6
expression in the eye. Many of the enhancers were identified through mutations
leading to the "aniridia" phenotype. This project aims to obtain a more
comprehensive and systems-level picture of how 31 (or perhaps more to be
discovered) enhancers control this single key developmental regulator. The
impact of the genomic changes are assayed using three distinct readouts: 1)
zebrafish embryo PAX6-GFP expression; 2) mouse ESCs differentiated into optic
cup; 3) Complementation of the mouse Sey (Pax6+/?) phenotype in
vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.