* 1917308
* Risk Assessment of Power Systems to Extreme Events using Polynomial-Chaos-based Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Lamine Mili, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2023
* USD 470,546.00

Modern power systems involve numerous uncertainties induced by random load
variations, renewable energy variations, and random outages of generating units,
lines, and transformers. As a result, they have been subject to an increasing
risk of cascading failures leading to large-scale blackouts. The computational
burden current methods is prohibitively large for large-scale systems,
restricting their practicability when assessing the risk of cascading failures
under topology and power injection uncertainties. To address these challenges,
this proposal will resort to polynomial-chaos methods and uncertainty
quantification theory to develop a new risk assessment framework for power
systems subject to extreme events. The developed framework will enhance power
system planning, operations, online monitoring and local and global controls.
Besides, the uncertainty quantification methods can be generalized to provide
great improvement in the control and design procedures of many other engineering
fields, such as aircraft design and control, vehicle and train control, among
others. The developed framework will be validated on two real power systems,
namely the Southern Brazil power system and the Dominion Virginia Power 500-KV
transmission system. The project also contains an integrated educational agenda
for K-12 students, undergraduates and graduate students who are interested in
the STEM (Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics)
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, Monte-Carlo-based methods are widely used
in power system planning and operation. The computational burden of these
methods for the problem of interest in this proposal is very high. In this
project, a new risk assessment framework for power systems subject to extreme
events and large uncertainties will be developed based on polynomial-chaos
methods and uncertainty quantification theory. Specifically, our proposal will
aim to 1) designing a new polynomial chaos-based algorithm that can handle
arbitrary probability distributions assumed for the random inputs while
providing accurate results for both short-time and long-time simulations, and 2)
providing fast calculation speed when the developed algorithm is applied to a
highly nonlinear system subject to high-dimensional uncertain inputs. This is
achieved by initiating a hybrid approach to conduct dimension reduction for very
high-dimension data, which consists of two steps. In the first step, a kernel-
based principle component analysis (PCA) is applied to obtain intermediate
dimension reduction results. In the second step, we use an analysis of variance
(ANOVA) or sliced-inverse-regression to obtain a more active central subspace.
Furthermore, scenario-based multi-element polynomial chaos expansion to handle
system topology changes will be initiated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.