* 1917937
* Combining ethnography, genetics, and spatial sciences to investigate the effects of people-plant relationships over time and space
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Rebecca Bird, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 444,560.00

While its clear that agricultural and industrialized populations have changed
plant communities over the last ten thousand years or so since the origins of
agriculture, we know very little about how hunting and gathering changes the
environment, nor how those changed environments feed back to affect people's
social and economic lives. This lack of knowledge about effects of human
interaction over very long time scales makes it difficult to understand why our
ecosystems look the way they do, and why and how certain social structures and
economies evolve. It also hampers our ability to know how our ecosystems will
respond to changed conditions in the future, and what we should do when species
are endangered. When a plant or animal faces endangerment or extinction, we are
often quick to assume its because of habitat loss, or overexploitation; yet
sometimes, especially with plants, it may be due to the loss of an important
seed disperser. If people have interacted with wild fruit for thousands of
years, and affected its distribution by dispersing seed, then the loss of that
species may be the result of the loss of that human interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how contemporary hunter gatherers
interact with plants to better understand the long human pre-agricultural
history of environmental change. The research team is working with indigenous
hunter-gatherers of Australia's Western Desert (Traditional Owners of Martu and
Kulyakartu homelands) to ask how foraging, patterns of movement, and the use of
fire has shaped the distribution and genetic diversity of wild tomatoes (Solanum
diversiflorum). By understanding how hunter-gatherers have shaped plant
distributions over thousands of years in the absence of agriculture, we may gain
better insights into management strategies to prevent extinction and decline in
the present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.