* 1917513
* Engineered Organic Color Centers for Profiling Protein-Carbohydrate Recognition
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Geyou Ao, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2023
* USD 356,969.00

Protein-carbohydrate recognitions are crucial events in many biological
processes including cell-cell communication, immune response, cancer development
and metastasis. Understanding specific interactions between carbohydrates and
carbohydrate-binding proteins has been a challenging task due to the lack of
versatile probes. Organic color centers created on nanomaterial hosts with
precise optical and carbohydrate functionalities are uniquely suited to profile
protein-carbohydrate recognition, which can lead to clarifying functions of both
molecules and their underlying molecular mechanism and discovering therapeutic
and diagnostic mechanism as well. This project will promote the progress in
science by advancing fundamental understanding of structure-property
relationships of engineered organic color centers with biological
functionalities and establishing the probing behavior of carbohydrate-
functionalized color centers for specific biological targets in either
physiological and pathological pathways. In addition to advancing an emerging
frontier across nanotechnology, chemistry, glycoscience, and engineering, this
work will positively impact the well-being of society. First, this work will
contribute to the development of the next-generation multicolor fluorescent
probes with precise functionalities for biomedical research and applications.
Second, this project will provide exciting opportunities to students of all
backgrounds through promoting engaged learning via hands-on research in an
evolving interdisciplinary field of nanomaterial science and technology and
glycosciences. It will further support the advancement of a broadly inclusive,
next-generation science and engineering workforce, particularly in bio-
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on probing specific
interactions between carbohydrates and proteins by engineered organic color
centers with the goal of achieving new nanomaterial tools to detect targeted
molecular interactions in biological processes with enhanced sensitivity and
selectivity. The proposed color centers will be created through covalently
functionalizing the sidewall of semiconducting, pure-chirality single-wall
carbon nanotubes via oriented immobilization of glycopolymers that closely mimic
the natural glycan structures and functions. There are many advantages for the
proposed color centers. First, chirality-defined carbon nanotube hosts have
defined structures and properties and color centers created on nanotubes further
tune light in the near-infrared regime that has attenuated autofluorescence and
deep tissue penetration, providing the ideal condition for high contrast
fluorescence detection in complicated biological samples. Second, pure-chirality
carbon nanotubes promote advances in ultra-low dose, high efficiency
nanomedicines. Third, biomimetic, precision synthesized glycopolymers mimic the
three-dimensional display of carbohydrates on the cell surfaces, thus warrant
enhanced sensitivity and selectivity for proteins. Particularly, the proposed
work will involve i) synthesizing organic color centers using galactose-
containing glycopolymers with different carbohydrate ligand densities, ii)
determining how the galactose pendent groups of glycopolymers mediate the
specific interaction of color centers with asialoglycoprotein receptor of human
hepatoma cells, and iii) assessing the basal toxicity and functionality of
organic color centers for selectively identifying human hepatoma cells utilizing
both two-dimensional and three-dimensional cell cultures. Here, microarray
three-dimensional bioprinting of cell cultures provides in vivo-like
microenvironments to better asses the toxicity and selectivity of nanomaterials-
based color centers, which could be used as biocompatible, cancer cell-targeting
multicolor fluorescent probes. Optical properties of engineered organic color
centers and their specific interactions with proteins and human liver cancer
cells will be characterized primarily by optical spectroscopy of color centers,
high-content imaging assays, and near-infrared fluorescence imaging. The
combinatorial diversity of nanotube structure and glycopolymer configuration
offers vast potential for chemical innovation and biochemical sensing and
imaging advancement. If successful, this work will provide a transformative
approach to study the carbohydrate recognition in biology that is essential to
uncover molecular mechanisms of many biological processes. This work will also
open up possibilities to create a new class of multicolor fluorescent probes
with distinct properties that are previously never achieved for many
applications, such as biosensing and bioimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.