* 1917900
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic Accommodation to Southern Speech
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Meredith Tamminga, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 06/30/2021
* USD 17,136.00

Previous linguistic research has shown that speakers accommodate by imitating
the same linguistic forms they observe an interlocutor using. It is not known
whether speakers also accommodate by using linguistic forms they expect from an
interlocutor based on social cues, even if the forms are absent from the input.
The dissertation targets a Southern variant---monophthongal /ay/---where the
vowel in 'ride' sounds more like 'rod.' The project examines whether speakers
produce more monophthongal /ay/ when conversing with a Southern talker who never
uses the /ay/ vowel, as well as the cognitive mechanisms responsible for this
behavior. Understanding how sociolinguistic expectations are formed and accessed
during expectation-driven accommodation contributes to a general understanding
of how social stereotypes are formed, mentally represented, and utilized.

The project employs a novel word-naming game paradigm designed to elicit tokens
of /ay/ from participants while exposing them to Southern speech that contains
no /ay/ tokens. Acoustic properties of participants' /ay/ tokens are compared
before and after exposure to a Southern or Midland (control) talker to determine
whether accommodation occurs. Experiment 1 investigates whether accommodation
based on expectations alone occurs. Experiment 2 tests whether expectation-
driven accommodation is socially or structurally rooted by manipulating social
cues (dialect labels) and structural cues (linguistic variants). Experiment 3
uses a joint perception-production task to determine whether participants
exhibit /ay/-category boundary shifts, and whether such perceptual shifts
predict accommodative behavior. This task attempts to pinpoint the perceptual
changes that must take place for accommodation to occur, as well as understand
the role of social information in both early perceptual changes and subsequent
production behaviors. Self-reported surveys are paired with all three experiment
to gauge the influence of social, cognitive, and attitudinal measures in
accommodative behavior. Results contribute to scientific understanding of the
relationship between perception and linguistic production, as well as the mental
relationships between social and linguistic knowledge.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.