* 1917299
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Towards High-Throughput Label-Free Circulating Tumor Cell Separation using 3D Deterministic Dielectrophoresis (D-Cubed)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Xiaolin Chen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 06/30/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Circulating tumor cells are increasingly recognized as predictive biomarkers in
early cancer detection; therefore, detecting circulating tumor cells in the
peripheral blood of patients has important implications for clinical
applications, which include early cancer detection as well as diagnoses and
prediction of cancer progression. If viable unmodified circulating tumor cells
can be separated from whole blood, then subsequent clinical analysis of these
cells can lead to personalized cancer treatment. However, due to the extreme
rarity of circulating tumor cells, a successful separation technology must meet
the performance metrics of high-throughput, high-sensitivity, high-purity, and
high-viability simultaneously to be useful - a goal that has never been
achieved. To tackle these performance metrics, this project utilizes a novel
threefold method called Three-Dimensional Deterministic Dielectrophoresis.
Currently, the combined effects of three-dimensional geometry, deterministic
lateral displacement and dielectrophoresis in a cell separation process
represent a gap in research. Through this research, comprehensive understanding
of the interplay between fluid mechanics, cell deformation, dielectrophoretic
forces, and deterministic lateral displacement structures will be gained, which
will lead to much improved sensitivity, purity, and cell viability at high-
throughput - all requirements to be met at the same time. Additionally, the
project will have a significant impact on a large number of underrepresented
students in technical fields at both University of Illinois at Chicago (a
federally designated Minority Serving Institution) and Washington State
University Vancouver (a Research in Undergraduate Institutions eligible
institution and the only four-year research university in southwest Washington).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Three-Dimensional Deterministic Dielectrophoresis
method brings a transformative impact by creating meaningful and valuable links
between previously unconnected ideas and domain knowledge - namely deterministic
lateral displacement, dielectrophoresis, and three-dimensional printing -
potentially disrupting and outperforming all existing alternatives. However, in
order to make the method truly useful for medical practice, fundamental
knowledge about the separation process must be gained. This breaks down into
three research objectives: 1) Study cell transport, cell-obstacle collision
dynamics, and cell dielectrophoresis in periodic obstacle arrays using
predictive models with experimental validations; 2) Fabricate Three-Dimensional
Deterministic Dielectrophoresis devices and characterize how different obstacle
shapes, geometries, obstacle array patterns, dielectrophoresis field parameters,
carrier fluids and flow rates influence the cell separation performance; 3)
Characterize circulating tumor cell separation performance for lung tumor cells
against the four performance metrics above. This proposed research is
significant because the multiphysics numerical models will elucidate scientific
mechanisms of the complex separation principles of this method, which will guide
experimental realization of a microfluidic device for high-throughput label-free
circulating tumor cell separation. The research is unique in that
dielectrophoresis will be combined with deterministic lateral displacement in a
three-dimensional micro-structure for the first time, which is enabled by state-
of-the-art nano three-dimensional printing technology. The research outcomes
here have important implications for clinical applications including early
cancer detection as well as diagnosis and prediction of cancer progression, as
circulating tumor cells are increasingly recognized as predictive biomarkers in
early stage cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.