* 1917728
* Retraining Built Environment Retrofitting Problem Solving Skills with Augmented Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Roger Azevedo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 761,998.00

The objective of this proposal is to study how emerging Augmented Reality (AR)
and Building Information Modeling (BIM) technologies can be integrated to
increase human performance by improving the retraining of construction workers
for retrofitting and repurposing buildings. A widely recognized problem is the
growing population of displaced construction and maintenance works due to
automation and artificial intelligence. Additionally, the U.S. demolishes and
replaces one billion square feet of building stock with new structures. The
impact of the waste produced by the demolition of these buildings on the
environment is significant and costly as such materials are often not recycled
and are landfilled. Retrofitting construction projects are gaining in popularity
because they increase a structure's lifespan, preserve historic elements, and
minimize waste. This proposal addresses these critical needs by studying how to
help workers more easily transfer trade skills and effectively increase problem-
solving skills for retrofitting and repurposing building structures. The
investigators will study how AR and BIM increase skill development,
productivity, and efficiency to help promote the future of work at the human
technology frontier in Architecture, Engineering, and Construction
(AEC).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose a novel interdisciplinary
approach to explore how AR devices superimpose BIM visual information to gain a
better and safer understanding of retrofitting and maintenance issues. This
grant will make significant research contributions by addressing the following
research questions: (1) Will AR technology be useful and impactful for
retraining displaced workers in building construction and retrofitting skills?
(2) How does the type of visual presentation of building information modeling
data and user-interface in the AR display aid and assist retraining skills and
problem-solving retrofitting? (3) Does an AR interface help workers problem
solve retrofitting tasks more accurately and more efficiently (e.g., in time and
waste of materials) than without an AR interface? The study will develop a
testbed of mini-labs for improving long-term problem-solving abilities of
retrained workers by creating an augmented workforce through in situ training.
The investigators will develop and disseminate their research outcomes both to
the academic community as well as skilled workers in the building trades. This
will pave the way for broad use and adoption of AR and BIM to solve building
retrofitting and maintenance challenges and improve workforce
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.