* 1917750
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Acquisition of inverse scope by L1-Mandarin L2-English learners
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Mien-Jen Wu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 16,891.00

Learning a second language can be a difficult experience for many learners, and
therefore studying how second language learning works and what kinds of
instructional approaches are most effective is important. This project examines
the effects of different kinds of grammar instruction with Mandarin-speaking
learners of English, one of the largest English learner groups in the U.S.
today. The results are expected to have implications for the grammar teaching of
this population in English as a Second Language classrooms, and will contribute
to the understanding of language learning as well as language
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how
input/instruction affects Mandarin-speaking English second language learners'
acquisition of English inverse scope, and whether learners can generalize the
acquired knowledge from one structure to another. English allows inverse scope
while Mandarin does not, and our preliminary findings suggest that Mandarin-
speaking learners of English are not able to acquire English inverse scope based
on naturalistic input alone. This project examines whether explicit instruction
and/or input flooding can help learners acquire inverse scope; it further
examines whether the learning effect is sustained over time. The scope
interactions in two structures are examined: universal quantifier-negation scope
(e.g. "Every sheep did not jump over the fence") and double-quantifier scope
(e.g. "A girl stroked every kitten"). In an intervention study, learners will be
instructed on one of those structures, but tested on both, to see whether they
can generalize their acquired knowledge to a different but related structure.
Learners will be instructed by means of either explicit rule presentation or
input flooding, to determine which is the most effective. The results can
contribute to both theoretical and applied research in second language
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.