* 1917500
* Probing the transient rheology of accretionary prisms and megathrust earthquake hazard in the Indian Ocean basin
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* William Barnhart, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2023
* USD 236,605.00

The world's largest earthquakes occur in subduction zones, plate tectonic
boundaries where one plate dives beneath another. These earthquakes have the
potential to generate tsunamis that impact people and cities many thousands of
miles from the location of the earthquake. The study of subduction zones and
their earthquake and tsunami potential is often difficult, though, because much
of the region where the geophysical and geological signals occur that are
diagnostic of subduction zone behavior is underwater. This limitation in turn
requires researchers to make simplifications of Earth behavior, such as whether
the Earth behaves elastically like a rubber band or viscously like candle wax,
that can negatively impact estimates of earthquake and tsunami potential. This
project will use unique observations of a subduction zone in southern Pakistan
and Iran, the Makran Subduction Zone, to better quantify how the rocks
surrounding a subduction zone fault behave over time. This location provides a
unique opportunity to better characterize subduction zones around the world
because much of this subduction zone is exposed above the surface of the ocean.
This means that the researchers will be able to quantify the behavior of the
subduction zone with unprecedented detail using satellite monitoring tools. The
Broader Impacts of the project include quantifying the future earthquake
potential of the Makran Subduction Zone where an earthquake-generated tsunami
would impact cities throughout the western Indian Ocean basin, including the
megacities of Mumbai, pop. 23.9 million, and Karachi, pop. 16.9 million. The
project also supports a graduate student and research in an EPSCoR
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goals above, the researchers will
use interferometric synthetic aperture radar (InSAR) time series analysis to
quantify post-seismic deformation caused by an Mw7.7 earthquake in within the
Makran accretionary prism. Preliminary analysis of this deformation signal
indicates that most of the accretionary prism itself undergoes viscoelastic
relaxation at relatively shallow depths (&lt;20 km). By combining InSAR time
series analysis with finite element modeling approaches, we will quantify the
rheological structure and viscosities of the Makran accretionary prism, whether
power-law viscoelastic behavior is required to explain the geodetic
observations, and what deformation mechanisms are active to accommodate the
post-seismic relaxation. Because InSAR observations miss the first 15 months of
post-seismic deformation, a period when afterslip is expected to be a dominant
deformation process, the researchers will explore new approaches in optical
imagery time series analysis using Landsat-8 imagery, with the goal of
quantifying early afterslip. Afterslip estimates will be incorporated into
viscoelastic relaxation simulations to provide a more complete and unbiased
model of the rheological structure of the Makran accretionary prism. Finally,
this project will incorporate this rheological model into interseismic coupling
models of the Makran Subduction Zone in an effort to better estimate the locking
distribution and locking rate of the Makran megathrust. These results will
additionally demonstrate the importance, or lack thereof, of including
viscoelastic accretionary prisms in subduction zone locking models elsewhere in
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.