* 1917631
* When Communication Fails: Examining How, Why, and Where Communication Goes Wrong
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Thomas Holtgraves, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 287,820.00

Successful communication is critical for all human interaction, from giving
instructions in the workplace to developing and maintaining relationships. But
communication is not always successful. Sometimes people are misunderstood,
their intended meaning is taken the wrong way, or it is missed entirely.
Misunderstandings often have serious consequences and can lead to faulty and
harmful decisions. Past research on miscommunication has tended to focus on
specific types of miscommunication, such as that between people of different
genders or cultures. The goal of this project is to develop a more general
theoretical model of miscommunication. The aim is to gain a clearer
understanding of the general principles involved in communicative
misunderstanding. A special focus of this project is miscommunication that
occurs in digital contexts, such as texting and email. The research will help to
uncover general principles, increase basic understanding of miscommunication,
and identify the factors that contribute to it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project integrates insights from social psychology, linguistics and
communications to develop and test a model of communicative misunderstandings in
the context of digital communication (texts, email, etc.). A general framework
is developed in which miscommunication is defined as an instance of a sender's
communicative intent not being correctly recognized by the recipient. An
important facet of the model is a focus on the interpersonal process of face
management (a person's public identity). The research considers how factors such
as culture, individual differences, and emoji influence the salience of face
management, and how these combine to predict message characteristics and
communicative success. Eleven experiments address critical questions about
miscommunication. The research will show how the linguistic realization of
specific speech acts and emotions vary as a function of threats to public
identity (face-threat), and how the relationship between different intentions
can influence communication errors. It will also consider the role of emoji in
message production and intention recognition, and how these processes are
moderated by cultural and individual differences in communication style and
mentalizing capacities. Successful communication is critical to almost all human
interactions. With the rapid growth of digital communication it is increasingly
important to understand how, why, and where communication goes
wrong.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.