* 1917138
* TRTech-PGR:  Development of Highly-Efficient, Genotype-Independent Transformation Systems for Maize and Soybean Genome Research Communities
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Keunsub Lee, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,899,993.00

There is a strong national and global need to develop crop plants that yield
greater food, feed, fiber and bioenergy related products, and that are more
tolerant of abiotic and biotic stresses, while requiring less inputs and having
reduced environmental impacts during production. One critical tool used for crop
genome research and genetic improvement is genetic engineering. However, current
genetic engineering systems don't work efficiently, or at all, for many
important crop species or varieties within species, limiting the research and
improvement progress that can be made with those crops. Research conducted on
this project is aimed at 1) development and optimization of efficient genetic
engineering systems that can be utilized across a wide array of varieties, 2)
creation of enhanced, open-source crop engineering tools and biological
materials for use in public crop genome research and genetic enhancement, and 3)
education and training in plant transformation principles, practices and
stewardship of transgenic/edited plants. As a part of these outreach efforts,
team members will host an intensive workshop on transformation methods and
protocols to disseminate the knowledge to other laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic engineering systems are critical tools for the
advancement of crop functional genomics research and genomics-based crop
improvement efforts both in the U.S. and worldwide. Current crop transformation
systems are limited, however, by genotype specificity, high complexity and low
efficiency of the processes, variable responses of target tissues, and an
overall lack of capacity at the national level. To overcome the above
limitations, research will be conducted to meet the following objectives: 1)
develop efficient, high throughput, genotype-flexible meristem-based
transformation systems for maize and soybean targeting easily isolated,
pretreatable, storable explants; 2) improve the breadth and efficiency of
Agrobacterium-based plant transformation systems via enhanced vector design,
strain manipulation and enhanced public access; and 3) rapid and effective
transfer of the knowledge and research outcomes from the project via
publication, training and a workshop, and implementation of the improved
protocols in public transformation research applications and services. Results
from this research will lead to important advancement in understanding the plant
transformation process and the role of specific biological, chemical and
physical factors in dicot and monocot meristem-based plant transformation
success and efficiency. New knowledge will also be generated regarding the
function of individual and combined super-binary vector components and
Agrobacterium strains on the plant transformation process. New knowledge,
protocols, and biological/molecular materials developed through the research
will be made widely available and contribute to development and deployment of
enhanced crop transformation systems in the public sector, and training of the
next generation of scientists in plant transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.