* 1917912
* Augmented Fluidity: Haptic vessels for online education of chemistry and fluid concepts in VR and augmented reality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Robert LiKamWa, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

In order to enhance the realism of educational virtual laboratories, this
project will research and develop educational virtual laboratories in virtual
reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) through software-controlled haptic
vessels for realistic perceptions of fluid handling. In chemistry education,
fluids play a critical role, especially in where they can represent different
volumes, render physical properties (e.g., viscosity), and mix to create
combinatorial reactions. To provide education regarding the handling of fluids),
most chemistry curricula use laboratory exercises which guide students through
hands-on manipulation experiments. The proposed vessel systems will be
3D-printed enclosures that are spatially tracked and internally motorized to
give the look and feel of vessels (e.g., beakers), cylinders, flasks, and test
tubes, that contain free-moving fluids in VR and AR. Augmented fluidity vessels
will enable experimentation possibilities in virtual laboratories for distance
education. The project will develop preliminary mechanisms, software frameworks,
and AR/VR educational laboratory simulations for formative evaluation of the
potential of augmented fluidity in at-home, after-school, and online education.
Software tools and vessel designs will be open sourced and distributed. Outside
developers will be able to create their own simulations, experiments, and fluid
vessel devices relevant to their needs and workplaces. Through the use of game
engine plugins and 3D printable materials, the project will provide access to
software developers at all levels, including Grade 6-12 students, university
students, and professional software developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project
research will address issues of realism, haptics, usability, and efficacy of the
VR/AR system. The project will develop preliminary mechanisms, software
frameworks, and AR/VR educational laboratory simulations for formative
evaluation of the potential of augmented fluidity in at-home, after-school, and
online education. The preliminary versions of the system will be tested through
focus groups and other qualitative methods.When preliminary development and
formative testing is complete, the project will conduct a summative assessment
with mixed methodologies including an experimental design which will look at
aptitude by treatment interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.