* 1917955
* Injecting Learning into Work: Enhancing Career Advancement through Transformation of Professional Development in Technical Career Paths
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Hilton, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2023
* USD 744,761.00

The World Economic Forum estimates that up to 5 million jobs may be lost to
disruptive labor changes by 2020, a development that leads to concerns regarding
unemployment, underemployment, and the need for workers to reskill. This project
explores how to address this problem by developing methods for embedding
learning opportunities within collaborative work tasks in the area of software
development. The research aims to gain insight into the differing
characteristics of how work is structured and managed that affect trade-offs in
terms of effort, time, learning benefit, and productivity both in the long and
short term. These insights can then be used by managers to make more strategic
choices about prioritization of learning versus productivity within specific
work episodes. This project specifically focuses on embedding learning
opportunities within team-based work, leveraging a new industry practice for
team-based software development to create a new paradigm for shared cognition in
software development. In doing this work, the project will provide additional
educational opportunities for teams in technical courses who will use the
developed tools, as well as releasing the tools for public
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental work in this project will be
conducted within an online software development course that connects learners on
campuses on multiple continents as well as in offerings of the course content to
industry professionals attempting to retrain. This specific collaborative work
paradigm adopted in this research and further developed under this research will
afford unique opportunities for embedding learning during work and the ability
to adjust the level of priority attached to learning vs productivity and thus
creates the ideal social structure in which to conduct the scientific
investigation. The research goals of the planned work are: (1) Discover how to
develop technology for effectively manipulating the level of interdependence
within team-based work, and in so doing to manipulate the trade-off between
learning and productivity, and (2) Quantify the long term positive impact of
learning in the short term on productivity in the long term so that it is
possible to maximize productivity overall in the face of decreases in short term
productivity in favor of learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.