* 1917154
* Conference: North American Summer School on Photonic Materials. To be Held  June, 15-19, 2019 at Laval University, Quebec City, Canada.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Kathleen Cerqua-Richardson, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

Photonic and optical materials enable various advanced technologies including
production/manufacturing; machine vision; medical and life sciences; systems and
information, as well as products like sensors and measurement tools; consumer
electronics; office automation; printing; etc. Within the past decades, advances
in optical communications, components and systems for flat panel displays,
lighting, defense, and photovoltaics have transformed the way energy and optics
are manipulated with novel materials. A 2017 market research by Photonics21
determined the global market for photonics products at $507 billion in 2015.
During the four-year period, 2011 - 2015, this market grew at a compound annual
growth rate of 6.2%. In spite of such strong role of photonic materials in
everyday life, few universities in the United States, indeed the whole world,
offer educational opportunities for the students to learn the subject at a
sufficiently advanced level (blending optics and materials science disciplines)
to enable multi-disciplinary breakthroughs that advance the state of art in
photonic materials R&amp;D. Even the few institutions that offer a course in
photonic materials do not provide hands-on, practical experience for the making
and characterization of such materials. This one-week long international summer
school (the School) will bridge this disconnect, filling the void in the
training of advanced undergraduate and graduate students of materials science
and engineering, and postdocs engaged in related research. The American Ceramic
Society and its Glass and Optical Materials Division along with the Ceramic and
Glass Industry Foundation will assist in the recruiting, assessing and selection
of the qualified applicants. The Centre d'Optique, Photonique et Laser (COPL) at
Laval University, Quebec City, Canada, which is a leading institution in the
world in the area of the Optics and Photonics, will host the School, June 15-19,
2019. It has offered to open its laboratories for the participants to carry out
hands-on team-based projects. It will also provide logistical support and
facilitate interfacing with the strong local Photonic industry
base.&lt;br/&gt;The School will comprise of lectures by 22 international experts
from six countries, who will introduce the participants to five complementary
aspects of photonic and optical materials: 1. Scope of optical materials; 2.
Properties and characterization of photonic materials; 3. Fibers and fiber-based
photonic systems; 4. Advanced materials for system applications, especially
planar photonic materials; and 5. Outlook for photonic materials, especially in
relation the needs of next generation photonic technology needs. The School will
train 40 students and 10 postdocs who will form interdisciplinary, mentor/mentee
teams to use lecture based tutorials to solve lab-based experimental and
theoretical problems. Approximately half the attendee cohort will be selected
from US institutions, and an equal number from the rest of the world. The
participation of US students will be managed by Lehigh University. In addition
to bringing students together with world-leading lecturers, the School will help
establish an international community of young photonic materials scientists who
will be prepared to collaborate and build careers while advancing the state of
photonic and optical materials. Overall, the first North American Summer School
on Photonic Materials promises to provide a most effective mechanism to train
best cadre of young materials researchers in the cutting edge photonic and
optical materials research. The support from NSF will ensure the participation
of young US scientists in this exceptional, international educational
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.