* 1917897
* FMitF: Track II: Automated Verification for Assembly Implementations of Cryptography Libraries
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Santosh Nagarakatte, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2022
* USD 99,996.00

Mainstream libraries for cryptography, like OpenSSL and BoringSSL, contain
several thousand lines of manually optimized assembly code for high performance.
Bugs in these systems are unfortunately somewhat common. This project develops
techniques and a tool, CASM-Verify, to automatically check the equivalence of
highly optimized assembly implementations of cryptographic algorithms against
unoptimized reference versions of these algorithms in order to ensure that bugs
are not introduced during the optimization process. The project's novelty is in
decomposing the equivalence checking problem into several small sub-problems
using a combination of concrete and symbolic evaluation. The project aims to
improve the assurance of widely used cryptography libraries with usable
equivalence checking tools. The project also will educate graduate and
undergraduate students and practitioners on various formal tools and
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software developed as part of this project
takes a given a reference and an optimized implementation, and concretely
execute the two implementations on randomly generated inputs and identifies
likely equivalent variables. Subsequently, it uses symbolic verification using
satisfiability modulo theory solvers to determine whether the identified
variables are indeed equivalent. Further, it decomposes the original query into
small sub-queries using a collection of optimizations for memory accesses. To
enable the usage of these ideas by mainstream developers, this project explores
the following directions: (1) support Qhasm and Jasmin languages for high-speed
cryptography, (2) support reasoning about large integer arithmetic, and (3)
verify constant-time properties of assembly
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.