* 1917618
* Human Stem Cell Fate Decisions Dictated by Decoupled Biophysical Cues
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Yan Li, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2023
* USD 510,000.00

Pluripotent stem cells can turn into all types of cells that make up the tissues
and organs in our body. The specific cell type (stem cell fate) depends on the
biochemical and biophysical cues they experience. The biophysical cues depend on
the surrounding scaffold's mechanical properties, such as the elastic modulus
and the Poisson's ratio (which is the ratio of a material's lateral contraction
to its increase in length upon stretching). This project seeks to understand how
these mechanical properties determine stem cell fate by tuning both elastic
modulus and Poisson's ratio to reveal the synergistic roles of biophysical and
biochemical signaling on stem cell fate. This research will benefit
bioengineering applications and biomanufacturing (e.g., novel microcarriers),
leading to better drug screening and disease modeling for the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries. The project will also establish an interactive
learning platform to reduce gender disparity and increase the participation of
minority students in engineering. Efforts will be made to stimulate African
American and women students to pursue an advanced training and career by
participating in the proposed research and educational activities. This project
will include working with Women in Math, Science and Engineering organization,
National Society of Black Engineers, Quality Education for Minorities Network,
and the SciGirls program at National High Magnetic Field Laboratory to attract
young girls and African American students for advanced science and engineering
training and career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
elucidate the interactions between biophysical cues of elastic modulus and
Poisson's ratio of 3D polyurethane (PU) scaffolds and their influence on the
secretion of endogenous ECMs and Yes-associated protein (YAP) localization by
iPSCs during lineage-specific commitment. The project's central hypothesis is
that the scaffolds with tunable elastic modulus and Poisson's ratio affect cell
organization and transduce biophysical signals to modulate the profile of
endogenous ECMs and YAP expression and influence lineage commitment of iPSCs.
This hypothesis is based on preliminary results that demonstrated enhanced
neural and vascular differentiation of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) using 3D
scaffolds with re-entrant structures - structures with angles pointing inward
that expand in all three directions if stretched in one direction, i.e.,
structures with negative Poisson's ratios. The research plan is organized under
three objectives. The FIRST Objective is to fabricate and characterize scaffold
arrays with different Poisson's ratio and elastic modulus. Regular PU scaffolds
with reticulate structure will be heated/softened and controlled buckling will
be used to produce a spectrum of auxetic scaffolds with varying Poisson's ratio
(0.3 to -0.4) at a fixed elastic modulus. Likewise, auxetic scaffolds with
different elastic modulus (1-100 kPa) at a fixed Poisson's ratio will be
fabricated by compressing the regular scaffold with different modulus to the
same degree of buckling. The scaffolds will be fabricated according to the
prediction of finite element modeling with the inputs of temperature-dependent
elastic modulus and on video data. The SECOND Objective is to examine the
differential effects of Poisson's ratio and elastic modulus on iPSC lineage
commitment. Undifferentiated iPSCs or iPSC-derived neural progenitor cells
(NPCs) will be seeded into different scaffolds and induced toward neural lineage
or vascular lineage. The cells will be characterized for neuronal markers or
vascular markers with expectations that auxetic scaffolds that mimic tissue
elasticity will promote neural differentiation of iPSCs and that elastic modulus
and Poisson's ratio have differential effects on neural lineage commitment. The
THIRD Objective is to determine the influences of Poisson's ratio and elastic
modulus on YAP localization and the secretion of endogenous ECMs, which modulate
canonical Wnt signaling and contribute to the lineage commitment of iPSCs. YAP
localization will be examined and the influence of YAP on Wnt signaling will be
revealed with expectations that auxetic scaffolds induce cytoplasmic YAP
localization, that nuclear YAP localization activates Wnt signaling, that cells
will secrete different profiles of ECMs in response to the scaffold elasticity
and influence Wnt signaling and finally, that interactions of YAP with Wnt
signaling contribute to the lineage commitment of
iPSCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.