* 1917512
* Seventh International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of Populations in Biological Systems (ICMA-VII)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Yang Kuang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 06/30/2020
* USD 24,240.00

This project will support students (undergraduate and graduate) and early-career
(junior faculty and post-doctoral fellows) participating in the Seventh
International Conference on Mathematical Modeling and Analysis of Populations in
Biological Systems (ICMA VII), scheduled at Arizona State University, Tempe,
USA, October 12-14, 2019. This conference will bring together researchers in the
mathematical and biological sciences to share their latest research findings on
the use of mathematical modeling and analysis to study problems arising in
population biology and the life sciences, with emphasis on the fast-growing and
challenging area of models in molecular and synthetic biology. The participants
will range from internationally recognized established researchers to early
career researchers and students (postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate). The
conference will include five plenary lectures given by selected researchers and
approximately eighty invited or contributed talks by others, including early
career participants. This conference will provide an opportunity for
participants to establish new connections and energize established
collaborations. Twenty students and early-career participants will be with an
emphasis on women and members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broad theme of the conference is the
formulation, validation, analysis and simulation of mathematical models for
gaining insight into the spatiotemporal dynamics of biological populations.
Specific topics include: fundamentals of molecular biology, mathematical
immunology, genetic-epidemiology models, stoichiometric population models,
mathematical oncology, mathematics of gene editing, and dynamics of multi-host-
vector-pathogen systems. Mathematical modelling and analysis, coupled with novel
mathematical and statistical techniques in data analytics, play a central role
in providing realistic insight into the dynamics of real-life phenomena arising
in the life sciences in general and molecular and synthetic biology in
particular. In addition to allowing for the design and implementation of
effective strategies for ensuring the persistence or extinction of some species
(such as using gene editing to control the population abundance of malaria
mosquitoes), molecular approaches potentially promote the development of new
therapies for effectively combatting many human ailments, creating a need for
population models which account for molecular techniques. For this effort to be
effective, modelers and biologists need to build new collaborations, and a goal
of the conference is to promote such interdisciplinary connections. The meeting
will include participants whose research involves model derivation, mathematical
and computational analysis of models and interfacing models with data and
observations. The plenary speakers will be encouraged to reach a broad audience,
surveying the current state of research in their field of study and suggesting
new directions. More details may be found at the conference website:
&lt;br/&gt;https://math.asu.edu/icma-2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.