* 1917943
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal Practices of State Neutrality in Educational Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Hafsa Oubou, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 11,718.00

The doctoral dissertation research project, which trains an anthropology
graduate student in methods of scientifically rigorous and empirical data
collection and analysis, aims to advance scientific understanding of the making
of subject-citizens and state-subject relations in educational settings through
a study of a the sociolegal concept of neutrality. The project would broadly
disseminate its findings to organizations invested in improving educational
policies. The project also broadens the participation of groups historically
underrepresented in science, contributes the education of underrepresented
groups, and builds capacity and scientific infrastructure through international
cooperation in these scientific research communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hafsa
Oubou, under the supervision of Dr. Katherine Hoffman of Northwestern
University, will explore the juridical concept of state neutrality in
educational practice as it relates to the role of religion in schooling. This
ethnographic research will explore how teachers of religion, respond to the
politics of teaching or not teaching religion. Recent events have made the
teaching of religion in public schools the subject of contentious debate,
leading to redefining the concept of state neutrality and to re-imagining the
place of religion in schools' curriculum. The investigator will examine how
teachers negotiate the role of minorities' religion in education policies and
will uncover how these teachers 1) navigate the discrimination towards
religiosity, and 2) redefine the place of religion classes in public schools.
During the fieldwork research, the researcher will conduct participant
observation in education settings, semi-structured interviews, oral histories,
and archival and media research. The project will advance anthropological theory
related education, the subfield of political anthropology, and debates about
secularism in the anthropology of religion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.