* 1917891
* TRINITY: Tradable Mobility Credits for Efficient Transportation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Moshe Ben-Akiva, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 479,993.00

Tradable mobility credit (TMC) schemes as a way to manage travel demand have
received significant attention in the transportation domain in recent years. In
a TMC scheme, a regulator initially provides an initial endowment of mobility
credits or tokens to all potential travelers. In order to use the transportation
system, users need to spend a certain amount of tokens that could vary with the
choice of travel mode, route, departure time etc. The tokens can be bought and
sold in a market at a price that is determined by token demand and supply. This
project will design, model and evaluate a system of TMCs--named Trinity--that
operate in real-time. Trinity is personalized for each user and is designed to
improve system-level objectives such as social welfare using future predictions
of the transportation system. This study has the potential to accelerate the
understanding and real-world deployment of TMCs and aid transportation agencies
and operators in achieving long-term societal goals of sustainability by
mitigating congestion and reducing energy and emissions. Algorithms and software
developed under the project will be open-source and publically shared. They will
be integrated with a transportation system prediction and control platform,
DynaMIT, which will provide a useful tool for researchers to further extend the
scientific knowledge. Educational benefits from the project include the training
of graduate students and the involvement of postdoctoral researchers in
undergraduate and graduate teaching activities and advising.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project pursues the following goals: (1)
Design and implement a novel bi-level optimization framework tailored for
'online' applications that includes two components: a system-level optimization
that periodically (in real-time) determines 'optimal' token (mobility credit)
rates for different mobility options by utilizing short term predictions of the
transportation network, and a user-level optimization that will determine a
personalized 'optimal' menu of mobility options to display to each individual
user subject to the optimal system-level token charging policy; (2) Model the
operation/dynamics of the token market by considering actions of the user
(individual buying and selling decisions and plausible behavioral models
incorporating heterogeneity) and regulator; and (3) Perform extensive
simulation?based experiments on real-world networks to gain insights into how
the design of the TMC schemes, user behavior, and network conditions can impact
performance and market dynamics (for example: how should the
allocation/acquisition/expiration of tokens be designed; how and when does the
regulator intervene in the market, how should the token policies be designed to
allow for scalability/effectiveness of optimization and network control?). The
Trinity system, in employing complex simulation-based disaggregate
transportation and market models, will allow a community of researchers to gain
insights into system behavior when the token charges, traffic flow patterns and
market price evolve together?a topic of immense interest which has received
limited attention thus far.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.