* 1917272
* Investigation of Nucleate Boiling Mechanisms using 3D Transient Temperature Mapping
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Myeongsub Kim, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2024
* USD 310,758.00

The rapid advancement of nanotechnology and microelectronics poses significant
challenges to the thermal management of extreme heat loads discharged from
tightly confined areas in electrical systems. Harnessing boiling heat transfer
associated with bubble growth is perhaps one of the most efficient cooling
methodologies for electrical systems due to the large amount of heat removal
during the phase change from water to vapor. Despite significant enhancements in
heat removal rates, numerous questions remain regarding the fundamentals of
bubble growth mechanisms, a major source of enhanced heat dissipation. The
project goal is to develop a mechanistic model for bubble growth that lessens
the risk of failure in trial-and-error tests for heat transfer enhancement. This
will, in turn, provide a systematic design route for next-generation cooling
systems while saving time and money. This project integrates research activities
with educational goals such as offering underrepresented minority and female
graduate and undergraduate students with hands-on research experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to accurately
measure local liquid temperature distributions surrounding a growing bubble that
help better explain the heat and mass transfer to bubble growth. Local fluid
temperatures in the microlayer are interrogated by total internal reflection
thermometry while fluid temperatures in the thermal boundary layer near the
liquid-vapor interface are measured by dual-tracer laser-induced fluorescence
thermometry. To capture transient temperature distributions, both techniques are
combined with high-speed imaging. The transient fluid temperature data are used
to quantify time-resolved heat fluxes contributing to mass transfer near the
growing bubble. Comprehensive 3D temperature information is also used to
validate the existing theoretical and experimental thermal transport models.
This project is scientifically significant in that it illuminates the dominant
heat transfer mode for fast bubble growth and therefore provides reliable
methodologies to engineer surface and fluid properties for enhanced heat
transfer without a trial-and-error process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.