* 1917002
* Infusing Data Science into Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Scott Pauls, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,791,391.00

With support from the Accelerating Discovery program, this project will develop
methods and materials for infusing data science instruction within the
undergraduate STEM curriculum. Infusion of data science will begin with the
earliest STEM calculus prerequisite courses and continue through capstone
experiences. Targeted courses include existing STEM classes in science,
mathematics, and engineering. Progressions through STEM curricula will be
developed to provide students with data science competencies including
acquiring, managing, analyzing, visualizing, and drawing conclusions from data.
The project materials that will be developed include sequenced modules,
curricular and co-curricular projects and internships, and capstone projects for
interdisciplinary teams. The project will also create a "data science hub" to
facilitate the forming and mentoring of student teams to actively engage in
applying data science methods within the physical and natural sciences,
mathematics, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As expertise in data science
is becoming a required component for work in any STEM field, this project aims
to integrate data science into the STEM disciplines to enhance undergraduate
student learning and preparation for the STEM workforce. The project will use an
integrative approach in which data science serves as the interdisciplinary
connector of mathematics, science, and engineering. The project aims to conduct
a comprehensive research study of the outcomes of the resulting integrative
instruction at the collegiate level. Specifically, the project seeks to generate
evidence about whether and how the curricular interventions effectively expose
students to data science and to determine if this exposure motivates students to
attain further training in data science and to pursue data science careers.
Student learning outcomes data will inform best practices for infusing data
science in undergraduate STEM education. The project will host a workshop for
faculty in STEM fields to expand the impact of sharing the curricular materials
developed in the project. Additionally, modules and curricular materials for
infusing data science will be available freely as web resources. By infusing
data science in the STEM disciplines, the project seeks to enhance undergraduate
students' exposure to and expertise in data science as well as enhance their
preparation to enter the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.