* 1917663
* Creating a Data Quality Control Framework for Producing New Personnel-Based S&amp;E Indicators
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jinseok Kim, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 497,019.00

Science and Engineering (S&amp;E) research generates substantial returns in
terms of human knowledge, social and economic benefits. Nations around the globe
compete for scientific and technological leadership through substantial research
funding and focused efforts to develop highly trained workforces. To date,
efforts to measure and understand national and international trends in S&amp;E
and to assess global strengths and weaknesses, have largely relied on the
analysis of documents such as patents and publications using big, growing
datasets. But this approach too often misses or mistakenly identifies the people
and teams who do productive science and engineering work. Robust indicators of
the size, composition, collaboration, and mobility of the S&amp;E workforce
within and across nations are largely missing from analysis and reporting. These
key aspects of the national and international scientific enterprise are poorly
captured by data analysis focused on documents and citations. To address this
problem, this project develops person level workforce and collaboration measures
that could add granularity to comparisons of international S&amp;E
competitiveness and lead to new policy insights for S&amp;E workforce training,
hiring, and retention for a nation's future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
prerequisite of such person level indicators is that individual researchers who
appear in multiple bibliographic datasets are correctly identified and linked.
Effective identification and linkage of authors based on their names is daunting
because names are often ambiguous. This is particularly the case for Asian
names, which poses a significant problem as Asian researchers play an
increasingly important role in many fields of research. This project addresses
the challenge of systematically and routinely disambiguating names in big
bibliographic datasets using a new Automated and Stratified Entity
Disambiguation framework. Core datasets for this effort are derived using a new
method that relies on multiple data fields and an iterative process to
automatically create disambiguated datasets that can be used to train artificial
intelligence tools to conduct robust person level analysis. To improve
disambiguation accuracy, name instances are stratified into two groups according
to name-ethnicity and disambiguated separately to produce optimal models learned
on the automatically generated truth data. Based on the disambiguated data, this
project develops new person-level S&amp;E indicators that characterize the
landscape and trends of the international S&amp;E research workforce across all
science and engineering fields. The new big data tools for automatic
disambiguation at scale will be documented and released publicly to enable
expansion, validation, and reuse by the science community as well as science of
science policy researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.