* 1917608
* Learning words and speech sounds in infancy
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel Swingley, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 710,801.00

This project aims to discover how infants begin to learn words and speech sounds
in the first year. When infants first hear speech, they do not know what parts
of each sentence correspond to individual words. They probably do not even have
the idea that words exist, but must discover it. This project uses what is known
about infants' speech perception and memory to test what infants can learn from
the speech signal. This will be done by making and annotating recordings of
mothers at home speaking to their infants. The researchers will carefully
measure the acoustics of words and speech sounds like consonants and vowels, and
will use computer models to estimate what language information could be
available to the naive infant. By linking together these estimates, and infants'
language accomplishments (like vocabulary) as toddlers, it is possible to test
how the maternal language environment provides for infant learning, and will
permit discovery of what features make learning easiest for babies. The project
will measure a diverse sample of mothers and children from Philadelphia and from
elsewhere in the country. Understanding how language learning begins in young
infants is important for understanding variability in young children's language
related outcomes. It is also important for giving parents guidance about how to
encourage language skill even in their very young children. Ultimately this will
give us a better understanding of the beginnings of language
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to discover how infants
begin to learn words and speech sounds in the first year. In doing so the
project will flesh out and challenge the proposal that infants learn speech
sounds by learning the forms of words, contra the dominant view that infant
phonetic learning is initially independent of the nascent lexicon. Central to
the project is the de novo creation of a longitudinal corpus of infant-directed
speech in African-American (AA) families, and the coordinated annotation of
lexical and phonetic features in both this AA corpus and in the mainstream-
English Seedlings corpus. The project will allow characterization, in
unprecedented detail, of the consequences of specific maternal behaviors for
specific learning outcomes in children, down to the individual word level. The
research will evaluate the degree to which these relationships hold in both low
and high SES families. The project will also use sensitive laboratory methods,
including eye-tracking analysis of infants' fixation to named pictures, to
evaluate the phonetic specificity of infants' early representations of words.
The result will be a quantitatively specified characterization of how infants
begin to learn how their language works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.