* 1917544
* Collaborative Research:  Plasmonically-Induced Phase-Correlated Ultralong Transport of Excitation Energy in Viral Quantum Dot Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Seyed Sadeghi, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 290,625.00

An inspiring feature of certain photosynthetic organisms is their ability to
transfer energy from one protein to another with significant efficiency and
range. It has been shown that such a remarkable light harvesting process is
deeply rooted in quantum mechanical processes at physiological temperatures.
Imitating such processes to generate efficient and ultra-long range of flow of
energy along specific paths in systems consisting of biologically assembled
nanostructures is a transformative frontier of research with many technological
impacts. This requires uncharted capabilities to control the energy transfer
routes in real space with very low amount of loss. This project is a
collaborative interdisciplinary effort between research groups with expertise in
nanophotonics at the University of Alabama in Huntsville and virus
nanotechnology at the University of Oklahoma. The team will develop
transformative concepts and physical/biological processes that allow transfer of
excitation energy in viral energy circuits over ultra-long distances that are
relevant to nanodevices and their integration. The biologically-inspired energy
circuits will consist of a nanowire, formed via a genetically modifiable protein
landscape (phage) and semiconductor nanocrystals, and two designated
nanocrystals that act as light harvesting and receiver antennas. The team will
develop a novel material platform that can dramatically change the normal
properties of such nanocrystals, allowing the viral nanowires to transport
energy over long distances by closely imitating photosynthesis process. This
includes energy transfer between domains of nanocrystals correlated with each
other via their interaction with metallic nanostructures. This project offers a
new path towards application of biology for building devices with nanoscale
dimension. It will also create new opportunities for the design of efficient
bio-inorganic hybrid systems for light emitting devices, detectors, and sensors.
This interdisciplinary project will integrate physical and biological education
by implementing a strong teaching and mentoring component, and will introduce
the essence of nanotechnology and nanoscience to high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop
transformative concepts and physical/biological processes for energy-
transporting materials that will involve bio-inorganic composite structures and
biologically-inspired collective properties. These processes allow transfer of
excitation energy in viral energy circuits over ultra-long distances that are
relevant to nanodevices and their integration (100 nm or more). Quantum dot
nanowires formed via genetically engineered non-toxic virus will be used as
energy channels. These quantum dot-coated viral nanowires will be biologically
conjugated to a light harvesting antenna (Up-Conversion Nanoparticles) in one
end and quantum dot receivers at the other end, forming biologically-templated
energy circuits. The team will develop a novel landscape of material structure
called metal oxide plasmonic metasubstrate (MOPM) to generate the transformative
processes needed to allow the light energy absorbed by the light harvesting
nanoantennas to be transported to the QD receivers along QD nanowires with low
energy loss. MOPMs will be formed via the creative composition of metallic
nanoantenna arrays, dielectric materials, and metal oxides. Immobilizing the
biologically-templated energy circuits to MOPM leads to (i) formation of domains
of phase-correlated dipole-dipole coupling between QDs across the viral
nanowires, (ii) ultrahigh enhancement of their radiative decay (Purcell effect),
and (iii) suppression of their defect environments. The transport of the energy
across viral QD nanowires occurs via the transfer of excitation energy between
the phase-correlated domains, rather than between individual QDs, and formation
of inter-domain coupling using surface lattice resonances or plasmonic coupling.
MOPM enhances QD-induced exciton-plasmon coupling significantly, aligning the
dipoles of QDs in each domain while suppressing transfer of their energies to
the metallic nanoantennas. These lead to ultralong range inter-domain energy
transfer before radiative or non-radiative losses kick
in.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.