* 1917997
* Conference: Support for Conferences and Mentoring of Women and Underrepresented Groups in Political Methodology
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Suzanna Linn, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,308.00

Diverse voices and diverse methodological approaches are essential for solving
the challenges facing society today. This project supports educational,
training, and networking opportunities for members of under-represented groups
to engage and give voice to these future and young scholars. First, we build a
support-network and provide methodological education for a cohort of
undergraduates, creating a potential pipeline of diversity into the field by
recruiting women and students of color. Second, we provide explicit support for
a women's conference in methodology, building a supportive community for women
methodologists. Third, we provide explicit support for the field's annual
national meeting to support the participation of women and students of color. In
this way, we are able to address the most critical weaknesses in the field of
political methodology and provide meaningful growth and attention to each, in
particular allowing relationships to build in ways that both diversify the field
and allow for expansion into new communities of scholars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With rising interest worldwide in data science
and measurement, the field of political methodology is increasingly central to
the study of political science. This proposal supports multiple efforts by the
Society for Political Methodology to engage and give voice to a diverse array of
scholars. These efforts include (a) providing undergraduate students in
underrepresented groups educational training in partnership with the ICPSR
Summer Program in Quantitative Methods of Social Research, (b) supporting the
Visions in Methodology Conference for women in political methodology, (c)
supporting the attendance of women and students of color at the Society for
Political Methodology Annual Meeting, and (d) fostering greater dialogue and
data-sharing across constituent groups. By attending to each step in the
pipeline, we maximize the chances that our efforts to meaningfully diversity the
field will be successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.