* 1917857
* Development of Neocortical and Vagal Function in Self-Regulation
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kirby Deater-Deckard, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 09/30/2023
* USD 390,483.00

This project will investigate how nervous system coordination between brain and
heart activity regulates thoughts, emotions and behaviors across a period of
rapid development (3-to-5-years) and across a wide range of family socioeconomic
contexts. Self-regulation is a key aspect of typical and atypical cognitive and
social-emotional development. The project will advance basic knowledge about how
the brain's frontal lobe develops to more effectively and efficiently regulate
cardiac activity, and how this brain-heart coordination influences developmental
improvements in self-regulation. As part of this effort, the project will test
several foundational theories and establish novel brain imaging methods that
will benefit developmental cognitive neuroscience and physiology research.
Evidence of how brain and heart systems coordinate their functioning will move
the field of research on early developing self-regulation toward a more
integrated systems perspective. The project team will collaborate with local
schools to (1)provide hands-on experiences involving tasks and games that assess
brain and heart functioning, and (2)inform students how the nervous and
cardiovascular systems work together to influence their learning. The team also
will conduct professional development workshops on these topics with school
personnel, to translate research results into teaching practices. More broadly,
the results of the project will contribute to basic and practical knowledge
about preschoolers' development that can be applied by early childhood educators
and policymakers, to improve child development outcomes across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyvagal and Neurovisceral Integration theories
predict developmental changes in the coordination or integration of neural and
cardiovascular factors that are essential to effective self-regulation. To test
these theories, prior research has identified key developmental patterns and
predictors in early childhood, but that work has generally focused on brain and
cardiac factors separately rather than simultaneously. Therefore, this project
will address gaps in knowledge about developmental changes in the associations
between brain activity and heart rate variability (a key indicator of cardiac
regulation), along with measures of cognitive and emotion regulation behaviors
in early childhood. The study participants will be 200 children from an
ethnically and socioeconomically diverse community that includes urban, suburban
and rural settings. A cross-sectional design will involve comparing 3-, 4- and
5-year-olds. Children will visit the laboratory to complete cognitive and
emotion regulation tasks, while neural and cardiac activity (using functional
near-infrared spectroscopy [fNIRS] and electrocardiogram [ECG]) are both
recorded. The study will identify how neural, cardiac, and behavioral indicators
of self-regulation co-develop from 3-to-5-years of age. The project team
hypothesizes that children with more advanced self-regulation skills will show
stronger activation in specified frontal lobe brain regions as well as higher
heart rate variability. In addition, the team hypothesizes that neural, cardiac
and behavioral self-regulation indicators will show either stronger associations
(developmental integration), or weaker associations (developmental
specialization), at older versus younger ages due to developmental changes. To
test the hypotheses, the data will be analyzed using multivariate general linear
and structural equation modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.