* 1917142
* A New Paradigm for Large-Scale System Design Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* John Hwang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2023
* USD 320,072.00

Design optimization is the computation of design variable values that minimize
or maximize&lt;br/&gt;an objective subject to constraints, where the objective
and constraint functions are the outputs of an engineering model. Applying
large-scale optimization - which involves up to thousands of design variables -
to engineering design is challenging, because of the conflicting requirements of
efficient derivative computation for scalability and coupling multiple
disciplines for system-level modeling. However, state-of-the-art gradient-based
optimizers, combined with the PI's recent work in developing a unified theory
for multidisciplinary derivative computation, have made it feasible to solve
large-scale design optimization (LSDO) problems in only hundreds of model
evaluations. The objective of this project is to accelerate large-scale system
design optimization algorithms by an order of magnitude compared to the state-
of-the-art approach. This improvement will be achieved through a paradigm shift
enabling a novel optimization algorithm that uses a hybrid of reduced-space and
full-space optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate a
new, intrusive paradigm in which the internal components of the model are
exposed to the optimizer. An intrusive paradigm enables a novel optimization
algorithm that would achieve the robustness of a reduced-space formulation and
the efficiency of a full-space formulation if the two formulations can be
unified. The difference between the two formulations is that full-space treats
the model's states as design variables. This research will result in theoretical
and algorithmic contributions to sequential quadratic programming (SQP), which
is the most common optimization approach in LSDO. The research project will
broaden the unification to general SQP algorithms and leverage adjoint-based
error estimation and inexact Newton methods to determine methods for adaptively
selecting the hybrid of reduced and full space. The resulting algorithms will be
made available through open-source licensing, allowing the efficiency
improvements to benefit students, researchers, and practitioners. Moreover, the
hybrid algorithm removes the need for practitioners to choose between reduced
and full space problem formulation; therefore, less effort and expertise will be
required for LSDO. The largest impact will be on industry, where the efficiency
and usability improvements will significantly lower the barrier-to-entry for
using LSDO to help design complex engineered systems, which will be demonstrated
in collaboration with General Atomics Aeronautical
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.