* 1917254
* IIBR Multidisciplinary:  Exact internuclear distance and dynamics measurements in RNA molecules by a novel nuclear magnetic resonance technique
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Beat Vogeli, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 09/30/2022
* USD 484,759.00

An award is made to the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Center to
develop a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) protocol to routinely determine high-
resolution ribonucleic acid (RNA) structures and their dynamics based
exclusively on empirical data with modest experimental effort. Although the
conversion of the NMR data into interatomic distances requires in-depth
understanding of the underlying physics and mathematics, the software to be
developed will render this knowledge unnecessary. The project specifically
concerns RNA, but some of the methods will boost the applicability to proteins
as well. In combination with the anticipated reduction in measuring time, this
will make the protocol attractive to the NMR spectroscopy and structural biology
communities. Educationally, structural dynamics studies of RNA molecules have
been largely unrepresented while the scientific communities' focus has centered
on average structural representation. Macromolecules and their interactions are
dynamic in nature and this is why it is critical to learn how to evaluate
motions in parallel with structure. Thus, mentoring students on how to bridge
this gap is a critical part of this proposed project, especially considering
that the general field of macromolecular dynamics experimentation has moved
quickly within recent years. A summer student from the RNA Bioscience Initiative
\ Summer Internship Program at the University of Colorado will be recruited,
which offers access to top-level research experience for students from
institutions with limited research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA not only
is the template for translating the genetic code into proteins, but also carries
out diverse important cellular functions. Understanding these functions
absolutely depends on knowledge of the structural arrangement at atomic
resolution, and, as is becoming increasingly evident, the conformational
dynamics of RNA molecules. Almost one-half of the determined RNA structures have
been solved by NMR. However, high-resolution RNA structures can rarely be
obtained from the most popular and successful NMR probe alone, the Nuclear
Overhauser Enhancement (NOE). Instead, many additional semi-empirical restraints
and labor-intensive techniques only accessible to experts are required to obtain
a structural average, and there are only a few experimentally derived ensembles
of structures representing realistic spatial sampling. Therefore, the structural
biology community is in need of novel methods that improve the pool of
structural data that can be collected and used for RNA structure determination.
In principle, the NOE directly depends on the distance between two atoms.
However, the NOE is employed as a semi-quantitative upper limit distance
restraint. The non-exact nature of this restraint means that important
information about structure and dynamics is lost. It is our idea to measure the
NOE exactly (eNOE), which can be converted into a tight distance limit. In ideal
cases, such a distance can be measured to an accuracy of ca. 10-11 meters and
can be obtained for hundreds of proton pairs in an RNA molecule. These project
proposes to establish an efficient protocol to improve NMR structures of RNA of
all sizes using the exact NOE (eNOE) approach, enabling RNA researchers to
calculate multi-state structural ensembles for small RNAs, and improving average
structures or specific local structural aspects for larger RNAs. It is the
intellectual merit of this project that the eNOE distance will improve all types
of determined NMR structures: i) structures of small RNAs (up to 20 nucleotides)
may be defined at high resolution without any other restraints; the eNOE can
also be used to calculate multi-state structural ensembles to realistically
sample their conformational space, ii) larger RNA molecules will result in
improved average structures. We will offer NMR pulse sequence codes and our eNOE
analysis program eNORA for free download from our webpage. This protocol should
help researchers to study RNA structures at higher resolution, a prerequisite
for better understanding of RNA function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.