* 1917511
* Multipolar Orders and Interplay with Hybridization in non-Kramers Kondo Lattice Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Andriy Nevidomskyy, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2023
* USD 345,000.00

I. Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past decades, intensive
research in condensed matter physics has focused on materials with strong
electron correlations. These materials behave differently from ordinary metals
such as aluminum or copper because the electrically charged particles of which
they consist do not always behave like “ordinary” electrons. For instance, when
an electric current or thermal heat flow travels through an ordinary metal, the
electrons move independently and interact only very weakly with each other.
However when a current travels through a metal that has strong electron
correlations, the electrons lose their individuality and form collective
excitations, compelling researchers to call them “strange metals.” A classical
example of a collective behavior is the complex pattern of a flying flock of
birds, seemingly behaving as one unit despite comprising thousands of individual
birds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fascinating class of “strange metals” is realized
in the Kondo lattice materials, so named in honor of the Japanese physicist Jun
Kondo who first explained the mechanism behind the unusual electric current flow
in materials of this type. While the theoretical underpinnings of the Kondo
effect, in its simplest form, were explained in the 1970s, a recent discovery of
a novel class of Kondo materials based on the chemical element praseodymium has
puzzled scientists. The electrons in these materials are forced to choose
between two kinds of collective behavior — as if birds in the above example were
forced to choose between two different “flocks” traveling in different
directions. In the materials that are subject of this research, one direction
leads to an emergent order in the shape of praseodymium orbitals, while the
other results in electrons forming a “strange metal” whose properties are not
yet well understood. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will elucidate the nature
of these collective behaviors, including superconductivity, using a toolbox of
innovative theoretical and computational methods. If successful, the proposed
research has the potential to significantly advance the state of the art in the
field and improve our understanding of the fundamental aspects of the “strange
metal” behavior in these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also seeks
to integrate educational and outreach activities with the fundamental research.
Recognizing the national need for high-quality, well-informed career mentoring
for graduate students in the physical sciences, the principal investigator will
organize a series of workshops to train faculty in how best to provide this kind
of mentoring. These biennial COMPASS (Career and Occupational Mentoring for the
Professional Advancement of Science Students) workshops will introduce faculty
to career planning and mentoring resources and prepare them to implement
effective graduate student mentoring at their institutions. It is hoped that
such robust mentoring will help adequately prepare science graduate students to
translate their technical knowledge into skills needed across the full range of
STEM-related careers. The need for such efforts is recognized nationwide, and
with the NSF’s support, we hope to make this series of workshops available to
faculty at as many institutions as possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over
the past decades, intensive research in condensed matter physics has focused on
materials with strong electron correlations. Kondo lattice materials containing
f-shell elements are a class of strongly correlated electron systems with a rich
history, and the key challenge is to understand the interplay between magnetic
ordering of the local f-moments and their hybridization with the conduction
electrons. &lt;br/&gt;In this research, we focus on elucidating the solution for
a specific type of Kondo lattice problem whose ions, such as praseodymium 3+,
contain an even number of f-electrons, with a ground state that is a non-Kramers
doublet. A recent discovery of a family of such materials, in particular
PrV2Al20 and PrTi2Al20, has shown very rich behavior, including unusual
quadrupolar magnetism, a non-Fermi liquid metal phase, and unconventional
superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: To date, most of the
theoretical research on non-Kramers f-ions has focused on either the nature of
the quadrupolar ordering, or on the effectively mean-field description of the
multi-channel Kondo effect, which occurs when the non-Kramers doublet is
screened by conduction electrons. The principal intellectual merit of this
proposal is to combine these two aspects in an integral way, aiming to answer
the questions of how the magnetic multipolar order gets suppressed by the Kondo
hybridization; what the nature of the quantum critical point is and how the
observed non-Fermi liquid behavior arises; and what the nature of the
superconductivity is. Importantly, the proposed research will go beyond the
mean-field description of the multipolar order to include the effect of quantum
fluctuations, and will employ advanced analytical and numerical techniques to
elucidate the effect of Kondo hybridization beyond what has been done
previously. If successful, the proposed research has the potential to
significantly advance the state of the art in the field and improve our
understanding of the fundamental aspects of strong electron interactions in
these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Recognizing
the national need for high-quality, well-informed career mentoring for graduate
students in the physical sciences, we propose to organize a series of biennial
COMPASS (Career and Occupational Mentoring for the Professional Advancement of
Science Students) workshops that will introduce faculty to career planning and
mentoring resources, provide them with descriptions of how to use these
resources, and prepare them to formulate concrete action plans to implement
graduate student mentoring at their institutions. It is hoped that such robust
mentoring will help adequately prepare science graduate students to translate
their technical knowledge into skills needed across the full range of STEM-
related careers. The need for such efforts is recognized nationwide, and with
the NSF’s support, we hope to make this series of workshops available to faculty
at as many institutions as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.