* 1917497
* Expansion of the Arizona State University Teotihuacan Storage Facility
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Deborah Nichols, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 145,804.00

The Basin of Mexico, today home to Mexico City, has been one of the most
urbanized places in the world for 2,000 years and is a key region to investigate
the origins and development of states and cities. The Basin of Mexico settlement
pattern survey led by Drs. Jeffrey Parsons (University of Michigan) and William
T. Sanders (Penn State) stands as one of the most important regional studies of
modern archaeology. The survey has served as a model for regional settlement
pattern projects in other parts of Mesoamerica, including Michael Smith's survey
of the Yautepec Valley in Morelos. This project will organize, conserve, and
make more accessible the survey collections for future scientific research. The
Basin of Mexico and Yautepec surveys together recorded over 4,500 sites,
including in the core of the Aztec empire. Many of the sites have since been
obscured or destroyed by urban growth and agricultural activities. The
maintenance of archaeological collections is crucial as they comprise the
material record of excavations and surveys and are themselves part of the
archaeological record of the human past. Artifact collections and records are an
on-going database for scientific studies with new methods and techniques.
Analysis of collections also can conserve and help manage sites for future
investigations. In Central Mexico urban growth, construction, and other land use
changes have destroyed or obscured many prehispanic and Early Colonial sites,
making these collections irreplaceable. Dr. Deborah Nichols, Dartmouth College
and colleagues from Arizona State University will provide for the long-term
access and management of the survey collections as irreplaceable scientific data
by 1. Developing storage space at the ASU Teotihuacan Research Laboratory to
archive the collections there for future research and education; 2. Organizing
and creating a catalog of the collections of surface artifacts from the Basin of
Mexico; and 3. Integrating the artifacts from the surveys with the master
collections inventory of the ASU Teotihuacan Research Lab to facilitate future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archiving and analyzing the collections addresses
several areas identified by the National Science Foundation as priorities. This
project will enhance the infrastructure for research and education. The primary
goal of this project is preserving and making more accessible archaeological
survey collections from the Basin of Mexico and the Yautepec Valley as key
scientific data for future research and education, by developing space to house
them at an established institution. This project will improve the public
understanding of science. These data document major historical changes in human
societies of broad public interest: the adoption of agriculture and
establishment of village lifeway, the formation of the first cities and states
in Central Mexico, and the "rise and fall" of empires. The proposed work will
also increase the participation of diverse categories of people in science.
Analyses of the survey data and collections have provided numerous educational
opportunities for students and early career archaeologists, including U.S.,
Mexican, and other foreign personnel; women and men; and many individuals with
U.S. protected minority status. Information from the surveys also is used in
heritage. planning, and museum exhibitions. These public outreach activities
will be continued and enhanced with the better access to the collections
provided by the ASU Teotihuacan Research Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.