* 1917979
* FMitF:Collaborative Research:Track I:Formal Techniques for Monitoring Low-level Cross-chain Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Borzoo Bonakdarpour, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 02/28/2021
* USD 375,000.00

A blockchain is a data structure distributed over a network of computers, often
used to manage assets such as cryptocurrencies. A blockchain protocols is a
distributed application that allows participating parties who do not trust one
another to benefit by trading assets in a secure way. The project will
investigate the design, analysis, and implementation of protocols capable of
making coordinated changes to multiple blockchains. The project will develop
techniques where a monitor observes a running system of blockchains to detect
and react to changing conditions that might threaten the protocol's integrity
and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three important cross-
chain protocols: atomic swaps, off-chain recurring swaps, and atomic
transactions. These protocols require the underlying network to display certain
critical properties, and runtime verification is expected to play a prime role
in monitoring their health. The project will investigate (1) how algorithms and
techniques adapted from distributed runtime verification can make cross-chain
protocols robust and effective, and (2) how runtime verification algorithms can
be augmented with classic results from distributed computing to develop low-
bandwidth distributed monitoring systems appropriate for blockchain applications
and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society will benefit through more secure and
trustworthy software and electronic commerce. As modern society becomes
increasingly reliant on software systems for commerce and governance, it becomes
increasingly vulnerable to disruption from security breaches. More trustworthy
software will provide economic benefits through faster, cheaper, and simpler
electronic commerce, cheaper and more effective regulatory compliance, and more
transparent and accessible public records. Trustworthy software will enhance
individual privacy, making sensitive data accessible only to authorized parties.
Truly trustworthy software requires making formal methods a core aspect of
distributed system design, not an afterthought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
generated as part of this project, including software artifacts, papers and
reports, logs generated by experimentation, programming projects, lecture
materials, and the project website, will be managed using existing IT and data-
protection infrastructures provided by the participating institutions Brown
University and Iowa State University. The project will maintain active
repositories in BitBucket (www.bitbucket.org) and GitHub
(www.github.com).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.