* 1917140
* RAPID Collaborative Proposal: Characterization of upland watershed contamination from wildland-urban burning
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Edward Kolodziej, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2021
* USD 13,982.00

The multi-institutional team will characterize the effects of the Camp fire on
watershed water quality. This was the most destructive wildfire in California
history, resulting in 15,000 structures burnt. The extensive number of
structures and vehicles that burnt has resulted in concerns that the ash can
transport toxic metals and organic contaminants into the surrounding waterways.
The upland watershed drains directly into Lake Oroville, the largest reservoir
in the California State Water Project. This reservoir provides drinking and
irrigation water to millions of users. The potential for mobilization is strong
because precipitation occurred prior to emergency clean up and erosion mobilized
fire debris into downstream creeks and reservoirs. This research will help
understand the concentrations and persistence of contaminants in the watershed
post-fire. Such information is necessary to identify potential threats to human
and ecological health. Broader impacts to society result from an increased
understanding of upland fire impacts on water supplies. Such information can
lead to better management strategies to protect water quality.

The Camp Fire in November 2018 was the most destructive fire in California
history, resulting in 15,000 structures and thousands of vehicles being burnt.
There is concern that overland flow of ash and debris from burned structures,
cars, and other buildings may transport toxic metals such as arsenic, copper,
cadmium, mercury, lead, as well as toxic organic chemicals such as polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons, polychlorinated biphenyls, brominated fire retardants,
dioxins and other contaminants into the surrounding waterways. This is
particularly important given that the watershed drains directly into Lake
Oroville, the largest reservoir in the California State Water Project that
provides drinking and irrigation water to millions of users. In addition to the
threats to Lake Oroville, Butte Creek hosts the last stable Chinook spring run
Salmon population in all of California. The potential for contaminant
mobilization following the Camp Fire is strong because precipitation occurred
prior to emergency clean up, and erosion mobilized fire debris into downstream
creeks and reservoirs. To better characterize these potential threats, a multi-
institutional team with complimentary expertise in environmental chemistry and
transport will assess the concentrations of these and many other heavy metal and
organic pollutants in the Camp Fire watershed for 12 months post-fire. The
research team will use this information to evaluate the fate and transport of
contaminants from the burn area. Specific research will seek to understand 1)
how does burning, ash deposition, and rainfall influence contaminant
mobilization within the urban area and in downstream waters, 2) how long will
contaminants persist in the watershed post-fire, and 3) what are the acute and
chronic threats to human and aquatic health associated with contaminant
mobilization into surrounding surface waters. The results of this research will
improve our understanding of contaminant fate, persistence, and transport
following burning. This information will help urban/rural planners, as well as
forest and watershed managers to better identify, mitigate, and reduce threats
to water quality resulting from forest fires.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.