* 1917198
* Game-based Assessment: An Interdisciplinary Workshop Across Assessment, Business, and Education
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Richard Landers, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Chao
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,963.00

Game-based assessments (GBAs), defined as interactive experiences created
through game design methods in which human knowledge, skills, abilities, and
other characteristics (KSAOs) can be measured, and sometimes referred to as
"assessment without tests", are becoming increasingly common across public and
private organizations, education, and the military. Unfortunately, GBA research
has been split across three fields -- organizational science, game science, and
education -- without any systematic coordination or even much interaction
between these silos. Meanwhile, GBA vendors have developed their own approaches
to GBA with little guidance from researchers, sometimes creating biased and
otherwise problematic assessments that are currently in use within the US
education system, the hiring and promotion processes for US businesses, and the
US military. Thus, the purpose of this workshop is to bring both researchers and
vendors across applications domains together to create a roadmap for future
research, to integrate knowledge across disciplines, and to connect researchers
and vendors directly to facilitate basic research using real-world GBAs. We
therefore recognize GBAs as a prime area reflecting two of NSF's "Big Ideas":
Growing Convergence research in the context of the Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier. By bringing these fields together, we will create a
research roadmap to better assess the complex KSAOs needed as work continues to
evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We currently lack an integrative theoretical
understanding or empirical evidence of the various cost-benefit trade-offs
inherent to GBAs versus traditional measurement approaches, across relevant
disciplines. There are two primary trade-offs commonly cited: 1) broader and
more responsive KSAO measurement at the expense of focused measurement and 2)
improved overall assessment utility despite increased development cost.
Development of engaging and psychometrically meaningful GBAs to overcome these
problems is more complex and multidimensional than survey development because
prototype development requires large teams with diverse multidisciplinary
expertise, yet researchers generally remain in tightly-defined disciplinary
silos, developing parallel research literatures on GBA despite a general
recognition of how this slows theory development. We aim to break across these
disciplinary barriers with this workshop, to take the first steps towards an
integrated research literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.