* 1917614
* Collaborative Research: Terrestrial microplastic pollution: understudied sources, source tracking, and citizen science
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Shannon Bartelt-Hunt, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 209,683.00

Microplastics are plastic particles smaller than 5 millimeters. Microplastics
are found in aquatic and terrestrial environments across the globe. Past
research has established that stormwater, wastewater effluent, and runoff from
urban areas and agricultural fields can carry microplastics into rivers, lakes,
and streams. However, the details of how microplastics move in the environment
is largely unknown. The goal of this research is to address this gap in our
knowledge by measuring plastics in urban, suburban, and rural areas. These
results will determine the influence of land use on microplastics entering into
aquatic systems in the US. Results from this study will be used to assess the
impact of legislative bans on microplastics in consumer products. The research
will be facilitated by using citizen science groups trained and engaged to
measure plastic levels in water in their communities. The impact of the citizen
science efforts will increase the scientific literacy of the engaged groups, and
results will be disseminated to the public, stakeholders, and regulatory
agencies tasked with managing microplastics wastes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Although research has shown that over 12.7 million metric tons of
microplastic waste enters the ocean on an annual basis, the relative importance
of microplastics from different terrestrial sources (e.g., land application of
biosolids, urban stormwater) is poorly understood. A multipronged study of
microplastic transport in the environment involving field surveys and controlled
field studies will be performed to address this knowledge gap. The specific
objectives are to quantify loading rates, particle morphology, and composition
of microplastics for two under-reported terrestrial transport routes and
evaluate microplastic source tracking techniques in freshwater across disparate
geographies. To date, no study has evaluated source tracking consistently across
geographies. To overcome these limitations of past research, polymer
identification will be performed using various techniques including FT-IR and/or
micro-FT-IR. The project team will leverage ongoing collaborations with citizen
scientists to carry out the research. Scientifically defensible measurements of
terrestrial and aquatic microplastics will be achieved through an extensive
quality control program that includes the analysis of spiked and FT-IR evaluated
samples. At the conclusion of this project, the project team will disseminate
quantitative information to the scientific, stakeholder, and public communities
on microplastics loading across diverse geographies that will allow assessment
of the influence of microplastic usage bans and voluntary phase outs. This study
represents one of the first to directly evaluate the flux of plastics from land
application of biosolids and stormwater. Importantly, this work will advance
science by evaluating source tracking techniques across geographies in
freshwater systems, which has not been performed previously using consistent
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.