* 1917266
* FSML:  Increasing Capacity for Water Quality Research  at the Shannon Point Marine Center
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,10/31/2021
* Kathryn Van Alstyne, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 10/31/2021
* USD 151,704.00

Marine water quality analyses, which are measurements of the physical, chemical,
and biological composition of seawater, are critical to marine science research.
For example, these measurements are used to study processes that change the
composition of seawater, such as alterations of land-use patterns and climate
change, and the effects of changes in water quality on marine plants and
animals. They also are used to monitor the performance of research equipment at
marine laboratories. At Western Washington University's (WWU's) Shannon Point
Marine Center (SPMC), measurements of water quality are used to understand the
dynamics of the waters of the Salish Sea, and the biology and ecology of the
organisms that live in the local waters. Researchers at the Marine Center also
use water quality measurements to monitor the laboratory's seawater system and
its ocean acidification facility. In order to measure concentrations of nitrate,
nitrite, ammonium, urea, phosphate, silicate, sulfate, dissolved oxygen, and
chlorophyll in seawater more efficiently, at lower cost, and more safely, SPMC
will purchase new instrumentation for processing seawater samples and conducting
water quality measurements. The instrumentation will be used by resident
scientists at the Marine Center, by affiliated faculty from WWU's main campus in
Bellingham, Washington, and by visiting scientists. It will also support
educational activities, including WWU marine science courses held at SPMC,
graduate student thesis projects, and research and internships activities
pursued at the Marine Center by undergraduate students. Thus, this project will
promote understanding of processes affecting Washington State's marine
ecosystems and will contribute to the training of the next generation of marine
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The equipment to be purchased on the project
includes an automated chemistry analyzer for measuring seawater nitrite,
nitrate, ammonium, urea, phosphate, silicate, and sulfate; a titration system
for measuring dissolved oxygen; and a UV/Vis spectrophotometer for measuring
chlorophyll and other pigments. Supporting instrumentation for conducting these
analyses including a refrigerated centrifuge for processing samples for pigment
analyses, an analytical balance and ultrapure water filtration system for
preparing reagents, and a multi-port filtration system for processing water
samples will also be purchased. The equipment will be housed in the Shannon
Point Marine Center's Marine Chemistry Facility and will be available for use by
resident, WWU, and visiting scientists and students. The equipment will restore
and expand the capacity of SPMC to conduct measurements of the chemical,
physical, and biological properties of seawater; enable new or expanded studies
of marine organisms and ecosystems; and allow SPMC to better monitor its ocean
acidification and seawater system infrastructure. It will also allow staff at
the facility to continue to add to its existing water quality database, which
began in 1974 and is one of the longest running water quality databases in the
region. For more about Shannon Point Marine Center, visit their website at
https://www.wwu.edu/spmc/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.