* 1917950
* Broadening Participation for Remote Communities: Situated Distance Telepresence Mentoring through Embodied Communications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Francis Quek, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2023
* USD 773,999.00

As workplaces change, people will need to develop stronger and more flexible
skills around technology. Schools are one place students might learn these
skills, but in the case of electronics, 3D design, and similar Making
technologies, many students lack access to technically-oriented teachers and
mentors. To help address this gap, this project will develop technologies,
processes, and training to develop programs where STEM university students
provide distance mentorship for rural students around technology. New
technologies are needed because of the hands-on nature of Making activities,
which makes remote mentoring through screen sharing or videoconferencing
difficult. Thus, the project will develop technology to enable mentors to
provide instruction that includes gesture, eye-gaze, and speech interaction
through distance telepresence robotics and augmented reality. New processes and
training are needed as well, to help the university mentors be effective
teachers; this will be done through a MentorCorps program that provides
education on classroom pedagogy and technology learning. The technologies and
training programs will be developed and validated with high school students in
three rural school districts, who will participate in a career and technology
education (CTE) course. The course will provide knowledge in 3D design,
fabrication, electronics, computer programming, and basic manufacturing; the
high school students will use these skills in turn to prepare science learning
kits for elementary schools in their districts. In addition to advancing the
science of remote technology education, the project will have a number of
broader impacts. The chosen school districts in the Colonias region at the
Texas-Mexico border serve students who are underrepresented in STEM, and the
work will improve their STEM education and work preparedness. The university
mentors, meanwhile, will gain service learning opportunities that develop
educational, interpersonal, and empathy skills beneficial to future professional
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how embodied communication
involving speech and gestures may be mediated through mobile telepresence robots
and augmented reality to support hands-on distance mentoring. At the heart of
this project is what a situated distance mentoring experience really means. The
project is informed by the psycholinguistics of embodied communication where
meaning is expressed through gesture, gaze, and speech as an indivisible whole.
Four design-implement-test-deploy-evaluate cycles are planned to learn whether
and how powerful multimodal language may be mediated over distance through the
designs to support explanation and mentoring. In addition to in-lab workshops to
test design versions, the project will deploy and evaluate the finalized design
of each cycle in CTE classes in three rural high schools. College science and
technology students will pilot the augmented telepresence robots to teach these
classes that combine hands-on Maker-based skills and knowledge with engineering
principles of manufacturing in three rural high schools to produce learning kits
for their local elementary school. The scientific contributions of the project
are fourfold: 1. It studies the nexus of embodied communication of space, gaze,
and gesture with technical explanation, using resources like artifacts for
demonstration and illustration, diagrams and drawing to support distance
mentoring for hands-on technology learning. 2. It studies how this multimodal
communicative compound may be engaged distally through a mobile telepresence
robot extended to provide gaze and gaze awareness and gestures in augmented
reality that blends the project space of the student and the gestural space of
the mentor. 3. It combines the science and technology research with the real-
world educational mission of rural technology education, thus bringing context
to the research. 4.It contributes across the fields of psycholinguistics,
computer science/HCI, and education. To psycholinguistics: the technical
implementation enables the exploration of the embodied language behavior on a
platform that can be manipulated to provide new insight. To computer
science/HCI: the project investigates embodied interaction techniques that
enable powerful multimodal communication strategies via remote platforms. To
education: the project investigates means to deliver remote mentoring for hands-
on learning that typically requires physical co-presence, and advances Maker-
based learning to the engineering practices of
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.