* 1917573
* States and Security: Border Orientation in the Modern World
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Beth Simmons, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 492,352.00

Border security is one of the most significant policy issues of our time. How do
states benefit from globalization, while at the same time protecting a national
space from unwanted influences, people, goods and activities? Answering these
questions requires a firm understanding of a state's border orientation, or the
state's commitment to the public, authoritative, and spatial display of its
capacities to control the terms of penetration of its national borders, often in
response to perceived vulnerabilities to external "threats." To better
understand this concept, this project collects global data on state presence
along international borders, locating border fences and walls, and identifying
the location, and extent, of state presence at international border crossings.
This project will yield significant broader impact through several policy-
relevant insights central to understanding the causes and consequences of
international border security policies. By developing the concept of border
orientation, the PIs are better able to evaluate which factors lead to and
emanate from societal concerns over security and why these are expressed as
physical barriers at the border. The data generated will allow for comprehensive
analyses of the comparative utility of different kinds of border security
infrastructure. The granularity of the location data produced here will
contribute to scientific knowledge about (sometimes localized) positive and
negative externalities associated with various kinds of border control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop data and conceptual tools
necessary to evaluate whether and how physical border investments impact a
variety of political and economic activities. This research endeavor is guided
by an innovative spatial concept of state governance, which the PIs call border
orientation: a latent concept tapping a state's commitment to the public,
authoritative, and spatial display of its capacities to control the terms of
penetration of its national borders, often in response to perceived
vulnerabilities to external threats. Empirically, the study builds on this
concept by collecting original information on state presence along the border.
The intellectual merit of this project centers around its primary deliverables:
two data collection efforts aimed at better understanding and measuring border
orientation. The first is a database documenting the exact location of every
border crossing in the world for the years 1990-2018. At each location,
satellite imagery will be collected to infer the extent to which states attempt
to filter the movement of goods and people at these border crossings. The second
effort will tap existing data on international border walls to locate wall and
fence segments geospatially and temporally through 2018 as precisely as
possible. Such data are essential for understanding changing patterns of
traffic, transactions, and settlement and will therefore provide a means of
accumulating knowledge on border politics across a variety of social science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.