* 1917678
* Parity-Time Symmetric Wireless Telemetry Systems for Implantable Microsensors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Pai-Yen Chen, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2022
* USD 349,264.00

The capability to accurately and continuously monitor physiological parameters
(e.g. pressures) in body organs enables effective management of many chronic
diseases, as the world is ageing rapidly. In the year 2010, US already had 40.3
million people aged 65 and older (accounting for 13 percent of total
population). The ratio is projected to reach 20.9 percent by 2050. In this
research, a novel class of wireless biomedical implants will be investigated for
sensitive, long-term monitoring of physiological parameters in human bodies,
needed for managing chronic diseases (e.g. eye disease, heart failure, or brain
injury), and for improving patients' quality of life. Battery-free implantable
sensors have been growing rapidly in clinical uses because they have advantages
of zero power consumption, potentially allowing for long-lifetime and
maintenance-free operation. Nonetheless, one of the primary challenges for these
implantable sensors lies in how to accurately and robustly detect physiological
parameters from electrically-lossy small sensors using radio-frequency (RF)
signals. The proposed parity-time (PT)-symmetric wireless sensor system will
enable new ways to manipulate the RF interrogation between the implantable
microsensor and the external reader, aiming to realize wireless sensing and
detection with high sensitivity, high sensing resolution, and large modulation
depth. The educational impact of this proposed project will also be significant.
The integrated outreach program will be effective due to the visually appealing
nature of micro-/nano-devices, sensors, and circuits. The PIs will develop new
courses and outreach activities in Michigan Science Center and Wayne State
University's established channels, including ReBUILDetroit Program and Richard
Barber Interdisciplinary Research Program, for recruiting under-represented
minorities in the Detroit area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
project is to experimentally demonstrate the generalized PT-symmetry theory in
RF and microwave electronics, as well as their envisaged applications in high-
performance wireless sensors. The sensitivity and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of
the passive wireless micro-/nano-sensors are often hindered by low modal quality
factor (Q-factor), due to the limited space and power dissipations associated
with the skin effect, dielectric losses, eddy currents, and etc. The concept of
PT-symmetry (spatial inversion and time-reversal symmetry) was first discovered
in quantum theory, and has recently become an active research area in
fundamental physics, including optics, acoustics, and electromagnetism. A
telemetry system with its equivalent-circuit topology obeying the PT-symmetry
has not yet been investigated for biotelemetry and wireless sensing applications
(13.56 MHz - low GHz). This new telemetry system, although having a non-
Hermitian Hamiltonian, may exhibit purely real eigenfrequencies that lead to
sharp and deep resonances, with the effective quality factor (Q-factor) beyond
limitations for passive systems, in which conventional loop-antenna is deployed
as a reader. A sharp, narrowband reflection peak has been a long-sought goal for
telemetric sensor systems, because of its substantial implications for superior
detection and low cumulative noises. If successful, the proposed PT-symmetric
wireless sensor system will resolve the long-standing problem of low Q-factor
and limited sensitivity in wireless microelectromechanical and nanotechnological
sensors, composed of inductor-capacitor (LC) resonators with miniaturized
footprints. This proposed research will advance fundamental knowledge in
biomedical implants, wearable electronics, medical diagnosis, healthcare
internet of things (IoT), microwave imaging, wireless communication, and non-
Hermitian PT-symmetric physics.