* 1917310
* RUI: Evaluating the Limits and Capabilities of Plasma Chemical Oxidation for Accelerator Mass Spectrometry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ruth Ann Armitage, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 122,630.00

Knowing the age of ancient artifacts helps archaeologists better place human
activities into absolute time frames. Radiocarbon dating is one of the most
important developments in archaeology from the 20th century, making it possible
to directly date materials from the past. However, many artifacts are too small
or fragile to survive the standard methods for preparing samples for radiocarbon
dating. Dr. Ruth Ann Armitage, of Eastern Michigan University, and her team of
collaborating archaeologists and students will evaluate the use of plasma
chemical oxidation (PCO) for preparing samples of small, fragmentary or fragile
artifacts for radiocarbon dating by accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS). The
focus of the project is dating endangered rock art, burned bone, and fragments
shed from fragile textiles that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to
radiocarbon date directly. PCO has been used for decades as a way to extract
organic carbon from inorganic carbon matrices to date rock paintings. It is also
a way to date fragile organic materials without destroying them, allowing for
repeated dating of the same sample. However, much remains to be learned about
the capabilities and limitations of the PCO technique. Validation of the PCO
method is critical to applying it in a meaningful way to answer questions about
the age of artifacts that might otherwise be overlooked. The Armitage group has
a long track record of collaborative work between chemists and archaeologists to
better understand past human society and behavior through radiocarbon dating and
chemical analysis of artifacts. This project will develop a method for handling,
processing and radiocarbon dating archaeological samples that could not be dated
otherwise, adding to what is known about people and their activities in the
past. The award supports a diverse group of scientists and students at a
predominantly undergraduate institution (PUI) doing novel, anthropologically-
relevant archaeology research in collaboration with
archaeologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Armitage and her team seek to
demonstrate the accuracy, precision and minimum sample size that can be AMS
dated with PCO sample preparation through comparative studies of rock painting
samples, calcined bones, and textile fragments. Their work will aid in
understanding the effects of chemical pretreatments on samples dated in this
way, as well as improving the method so that it can become more widely
applicable. The proposed project will investigate the fundamental limitations of
the PCO method in order to optimize its use for otherwise difficult to date
archaeological materials. The project examines minimally-destructive and rapid
methods for reliably dating these types of samples with AMS radiocarbon
analysis. Successful completion of the proposal's objectives will improve the
ability to date archeological materials. The team seeks to validate PCO as a
sample preparation method for AMS radiocarbon analysis through comparative
measurements and chemical analysis. The project results will be disseminated
through a conference symposium, workshop, and book to disseminate the results of
the project to a diverse audience of anthropological archaeologists and physical
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.