* 1917343
* I-Corps: Non-Contact Remote Breathing Analysis through Visualization of Thermal and CO2 Flow
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Min-Hyung Choi, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in providing
new medical diagnostic devices, software, and services for broad respiratory and
pulmonary disease groups. Respiration monitoring is an important physiological
measurement taken to determine the health of an individual. Due to the
advantages of this project's remote sensing, the technology is expected to have
a potential for commercial success for both in-clinic care and a home-based long
term monitoring, contributing toward improved health outcomes.

This I-Corps project is based on recent innovations in remote sensing for
breathing activities. Conventional respiratory monitoring systems in a clinical
setting require patients to wear devices, such as elastic bands around the chest
or use invasive masks or tubes connected to the face, which cause patient
discomfort and are ill-suited for long-term monitoring. Existing remote sensing
techniques are not accurate enough due to the indirect nature of inferring
breathing behaviors through chest movements or utilizing correlation functions.
This project's system aims for both patient comfort and accurate and
comprehensive analysis of patient breathing behaviors. It employs a specifically
designed IR imaging camera and a novel software system to directly capture and
visualize the human exhale carbon dioxide (CO2) activities in front of the face.
This remote sensing helps promote patient comfort for a long-term measurement
and it extracts clinically valuable information in a non-invasive way. Since it
measures the breathing activities directly from the turbulent exhale behavior,
it is accurate and comprehensive enough to obtain breathing rate, speed,
strength, tidal volume, and nose/mouth distribution which could be crucial for
the diagnosis of obstructive breathing, sleep apnea, and various pulmonary
diseases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.