* 1917639
* The Dynamics of Inhibition in Social Cognitive Development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* David Sobel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 520,876.00

This project will investigate the role of distinct mechanisms for inhibition on
children's developing social cognition, specifically focused on their
understanding of others' mental states, their trust in others' knowledge, and
their understanding of fairness. In addition to enhancing knowledge about how
specific mechanisms of inhibition develop, the project will address long-
standing debates in social cognition regarding the role of inhibition in
development. Isolating the role of different inhibitory processes in children's
social judgment specifies the mechanisms through which children develop social
cognitive knowledge, and cognitive development more generally. Understanding how
these processes unfold also applies to real-world practice. By examining how
children understand others' mental states, the researchers will be able to
provide a framework for describing how children resolve conflicts with others.
By examining how children develop concepts of fairness, the researchers will be
able to identify factors contributing to cooperation and moral development.
These findings have the potential to impact curriculum design and interventions
designed to promote social cognitive development. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project uses a technique called reach trajectory tracking (RTT), which measures
how children engage in reaching behaviors in response to scenes shown to them on
a screen. Different mechanisms of inhibitory control are reflected by the speed
and trajectory of children's reaching responses. Three lines of research in
social cognition will be addressed: children's theory of mind, selective social
learning, and prosocial behavior. Each line of research targets the
developmental trajectory of a social-cognitive process and discerns the role of
distinct inhibitory processes in that development. In this way, the research
team can articulate ways in which children's social cognition develops and what
role inhibition plays in this development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.