* 1917667
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor Dynamics in Maritime Commerce
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Karen Strassler, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 20,160.00

We live in a world where material goods and products are moving at an ever-
increasing speed and scale. In the United States, approximately 90% of
everything we consume on a daily basis is now shipped to us by sea. The
stability of maritime commerce depends on a workforce of over 1.6 million
international seafarers, the dynamics of which have yet to be fully mapped. In
particular, we know little about whether the trends that we associate with the
globalization, industrialization, and automation manifest within the maritime
commerce industry. This project, which trains a graduate student in how to
conduct rigorous, scientifically grounded fieldwork, asks how the labor market
that services this critical, yet understudied commercial space, is changing with
increased automation, acceleration, and globalization of production. Research
findings will be published in professional journals and presented at maritime
conferences to create media exposure and foster exchanges between academia and
the shipping industry regarding labor relations. Based on his findings, the
researcher will also develop college-level curricular materials aimed to
innovate higher education pedagogies and to disseminate critical anthropological
knowledge of global supply chains to a diverse body of business, international
law, and global studies students, thereby engaging a wider audience with the
scientific process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liang Wu, under the supervision of Dr.
Karen Strassler from the Department of Anthropology at the Graduate Center of
the City University of New York, will explore labor dynamics, human and capital
mobility across maritime circuits of commerce. He will study contemporary
seafarers working on board ocean-going container ships of the international
shipping industry, the majority of whom are now outsourced from China, the
Philippines, Indonesia, India, Russia, and Ukraine among other labor exporting
countries. Research will be conducted with seafarers on board a container ship
and in the ports of New York and Hong Kong as hubs of transatlantic and
transpacific trades. Drawing on wide-ranging language skills and more than a
decade of field experiences, the researcher will investigate seafarers' work
routines and relationships on board, backgrounds and aspirations, job cycles,
port duties, shore leave, port-based welfare facilities and services, and
shipping infrastructures and logistics management. Methods include combination
of ethnographic fieldwork on board a container ship and at the ports of Hong
Kong and New York, as well as social network, geospatial, and other methods of
data analysis. The project will make theoretical contributions to scientific
understandings of the terraqueous circuits of global capitalism, mobilities, and
labor dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.