* 1917270
* Synthetic bacterial communities to dissect and direct plant microbiome function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jeffery Dangl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 09/30/2024
* USD 670,000.00

Plants live in soils that harbor extraordinarily diverse microorganisms, and in
these environments, plants serve as fertile sources of nutrients for these
microbes. Indeed, roots create a distinct physical and chemical environment that
is colonized by specific microbes, and microbial colonization of the root and
the above-ground plant organs occurs despite a plant immune system whose primary
function is to defend the plant against pathogens. Thus, plants have evolved
mechanisms to distinguish beneficial interactions from pathogenic interactions.
In the soil, in the area immediately surrounding the plant root, there exists a
thin layer - a community of microorganisms - that provide benefits to the plant.
These include contributing to plant growth, productivity, carbon sequestration,
as well as can protect against pathogens. This work aims to deploy specific
bacterial strains, or collections of strains, into wild microbial communities
with the goal of improving plant performance. To date, most experimentally
defined plant probiotic strains of bacteria or fungi fail in the field. This
suggests that to successfully deploy beneficial microbes into wild microbial
communities, we need to better understand the rules that govern their invasion
into, and persistence in, existing communities. To achieve this long term goal,
one needs to understand the specific host and microbial genetic and chemical
signaling mechanisms that govern the winnowing of complex soil microbial
communities into specific and less complex plant-associated communities that
contribute to plant performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
define the organizational network rules and molecular mechanisms that govern the
assembly of strains and small consortia of bacteria resulting in colonization
and alterations of plant performance. The ultimate goal is to understand the
principles that make bacterial strains able to invade and persist into standing
heterogeneous microbiome communities as either single strains or as small, well
defined, resilient synthetic consortia. Success will require experimental
expertise in the genomics, genetics and physiology of both host plants and
microbes, in the chemistry of inter-organismal signaling, and iterative
experimental perturbation of a tunable ecosystem. This research is significant
and feasible from various disciplinary perspectives, including the control of
plant-microbe interactions, chemistry of life processes and community ecology.
To accomplish this goal, the project will employ the use of novel collections of
sequenced microbes that provide specific plant growth advantages; many taxa in
this collection are amenable to mechanistic studies in both mono-association,
and as members of defined complexity synthetic communities, with the host. The
project moves beyond descriptive views of plant-associated microbial communities
to generate and test mechanistic hypotheses. The research will ultimately
contribute to rational design and molecular engineering of synthetic microbial
consortia that take harness Nature's complexity. The research will ultimately
lead to predictive interventions that will increase plant health and
productivity, facilitate carbon sequestration, and modulate endogenous plant
immune system function through the rational utilization of probiotic microbes
and mixtures of microbes tuned to function in particular soils and local
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.