* 1917627
* CAREER: Light-Weight and Fast Authentication for Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Attila Yavuz, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 12/31/2023
* USD 405,162.00

Internet of Things (IoT) is a heterogeneous system comprising interrelated
smart-objects, sensors and actuators. IoT systems are expected to ultimately
usher significant advances in critical domains such as transportation, energy,
and healthcare. Due to IoTs' pervasiveness and impact on the cyber-physical
world, it is a vital requirement to guarantee their security. In particular,
authentication is one of the most fundamental security services required for any
viable IoT, since it is necessary to establish trust and secure the
communication among parties in a network. However, despite their merits, the
vast majority of existing authentication techniques may not fully meet the needs
of IoTs, especially when such systems involve heterogeneous IoTs with resource-
limited devices or, must meet real-time requirements for safety reasons (e.g.,
delay-sensitive networks). Hence, there is a critical need for developing
authentication techniques, which are lightweight, fast and scalable for
heterogeneous and delay-sensitive IoTs. The objective of this project is to
establish an integrated program of research and education to develop practical
cryptographic techniques towards the creation of secure IoTs, as well as to
develop academic course materials and outreach activities for the education and
broad dissemination of the proposed techniques. The successful completion of
this project is expected to provide new opportunities to significantly enhance
the trustworthiness of IoTs by enabling practical authentication techniques,
thereby greatly contributing towards a broad adaptation of
IoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities in this project will be
focused on the creation of a suite of lightweight and low-latency digital
signatures. Expected outcomes include: (1) A new suite of highly lightweight
digital signatures for resource-limited and heterogeneous IoTs. (2) A new series
of high-performance, compromise-resilient and compact digital signatures. (3) A
new suite of low-latency digital signatures for delay-sensitive IoTs. (4) A
comprehensive formal security analysis, optimization and hardware-acceleration
of the proposed techniques. (5) A new IoT testbed that will be used for the
evaluation, improvement and education of the proposed techniques. (6) An
industrial secure IoT research platform and open-source cryptographic framework,
in which the proposed techniques will be deployed and improved on real-life IoT
systems in collaboration with research laboratories. The educational objective
is to design, implement and evaluate educational modules and outreach activities
to educate students at various levels (i.e., high-school, undergraduate and
graduate) in the field of cyber-security for IoT. This will be achieved via
newly introduced course modules that focus on hands-on experience of the
proposed techniques on real-life IoT platforms, and with various cyber-security
outreach activities designed to target middle-school and female high-school and
undergraduate students.