* 1917058
* Through the Ocean to the Mantle: Seismic Study of the Pacific Mantle with Long-Lived Autonomous Floating Seismic Sensors
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2019,09/30/2022
* Frederik Simons, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 550,406.00

Seismometers record seismic waves generated by earthquakes. Changes in seismic
wave speeds are caused by variations in the temperature and composition of
Earth. These changes in wave speeds are the primary observation used to
understand the structure and evolution of Earth, from the scale of mantle
convection and the way heat is transferred from the core to the surface to the
interaction between deep Earth and surface processes such as tectonic plate
motion and crustal deformation. Geographical data coverage by seismometers that
record the seismic waves is not uniform, however, and this remains the
fundamental limiting factor in seismic studies. Because two thirds of Earth's
surface is covered by oceans, and it is difficult to deploy seismometers in the
oceans, instrument coverage in these areas is sparse. Thus, all three-
dimensional models of Earth are marked by blank spots in areas where little or
no information can be obtained. An autonomous robotic earthquake sensor has been
developed and deployed in the Pacific Ocean near French Polynesia. This project
will analyze the data from this fleet of mobile sensors to image small-scale
structures in Earth's mantle and provide a better understanding of the thermal
history of Earth. An Adopt-a-Float smartphone app will be developed during this
project and used in K-12 outreach projects. The project supports the training of
students in marine geology and geophysics and mantle tomography, and in software
design, education and outreach, statistics and applied
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resolving power of global
seismic-tomographic wave speed models in the mid- to deep mantle remains limited
due the lack of seismic data from the oceans, hampering a more detailed
exploration and interpretative understanding of Earth's uncharted interior.
Deploying and recovering ocean-bottom devices is technically challenging and
expensive. Low-cost, freely-floating, autonomous hydrophone arrays are enhancing
the resolving power of P-wave tomography. With an international consortium,
floats have been deployed in French Polynesia to record teleseismic wave
arrivals over the next five years. In this first two-year phase of the project,
the data recovered in near-real time will be collected, quality-controlled,
archived, documented and publicly disseminated. The first-arrival travel-time
anomalies will be analyzed with respect to one-dimensional velocity reference
models with an eye towards creating a curated high-quality data set suitable for
regional tomographic inversions. The seismological analysis of travel-time
anomalies from the oceanic array will be compared with new results obtained from
mantle transition-zone receiver functions constructed from records collected at
nearby land stations. The aperture of the array is a substantial improvement
over the handful of stations in the global networks, hence the results of both
lines of study will represent concrete improvements on understanding of the
mantle. Mantle tomography is limited by data availability; sampling is poorest
in the southern hemisphere, which is home to a number of mantle plumes that
drive the heat engine that cools deep Earth. The connections of hot spots to
mantle structure at great depth remain uncertain. The new data analyzed during
this project will be used to frame and ultimately answer major questions on
present-day mantle dynamics and on the thermal evolution of
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.