* 1917306
* Meeting Support for the 2019 OSA Quantum Bio-Photonics Incubator, 28-30 April 2019
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Michael Duncan, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The study and identification of quantum phenomena in biological systems is an
interdisciplinary field that has attracted increasing attention in the past few
decades but hasn't developed as robustly as needed. The main goal of this
proposal is to gather experts in nanofabrication, quantum optics, single
molecule biophysics, energy harvesting, physical chemistry, theoretical and
experimental quantum biology to understand how quantum behavior affects bio-
molecular function. This workshop will bring young and senior scientists
together from different scientific disciplines. The proposal will explore
questions such as measurements of quantum coherence about quantum dynamics in
photosynthetic processes, impact of molecular environment on the preservation of
quantum coherence for the function of such systems, engineering electro-optical
devices beyond the current state of the art, realization of bio-inspired devices
or algorithms to exploit quantum dynamics phenomenon and the use of synthetic
biology methods to modify biomolecular systems to improve their quantum
performance. This workshop will foster increased partnership between academia
and industry and will aid in the development of a diverse, globally competitive
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Biological Sciences Directorate&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.