* 1917015
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Quantifying mechanisms by which Hurricane Michael facilitates a stable-state reversal on oyster reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* David Kimbro, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2020
* USD 56,297.00

Ecosystems can exhibit "tipping points" whereby an environmental disturbance
pushes an ecosystem into an altered state from which it does not recover, even
when the environment normalizes. This may have happened to valuable oyster reefs
in Northwest Florida in 2012, when drought and low river flow allowed predators
of oysters to flourish and consume nearly all the oysters. Despite subsequent
years of normal rainfall and river flow, oysters have not recovered, suggesting
the ecosystem may have crossed a tipping point. However, the timing and
magnitude of the disturbance from Hurricane Michael (2018) may have pushed the
ecosystem back towards its original, healthy state. In this project,
investigators make field observations to gauge how predators and oysters are
responding to Hurricane Michael and conduct lab experiments to test how
predators and oysters respond to hurricane rainfall conditions. Additionally,
they use mathematical models to predict whether effects observed in the field
and lab could lead to a shift back past the tipping point. This is a rare
opportunity to study how oyster ecosystems can shift back from altered to
healthy states. However, a rapid response is essential before seasonal changes
in the weather and bay obscure hurricane impacts. This research has several
broader impacts. First, it will expand the ecological theory of tipping points.
Second, it can support the management of the Apalachicola Bay oyster fishery,
such as insight into the likely success of restoration efforts. The team
coordinates with the Apalachicola National Estuarine Research Reserve to this
end. Finally, research outputs are incorporated into ongoing public education
and training efforts.

Ecosystems can rapidly shift from their original, high-value state to a new,
degraded one. Such shifts have been observed in many ecosystems, but it is
sometimes difficult to identify the mechanisms that mediate the shift beyond a
"tipping point" and - to a greater extent - those that could mediate a shift
back to the original state. Improving our understanding and predictive
capability of tipping points depends on identifying the mechanisms that underlie
bi-directional system shifts. In 2012, the oyster reefs of Apalachicola Bay, FL
abruptly shifted into an oyster-less state when prolonged drought and low river
flow allowed marine oyster predators to flourish. Despite subsequent years of
normal rainfall and flow, there has not been a return shift, suggesting this
ecosystem may have entered an alternate stable state. The hypothesis of this
work is that in 2018 Hurricane Michael provided a sufficient disturbance to
shift the system back into the attracting basin for its original state (prior
observations support this prediction). This project couples field observations
and lab experiments with population modeling to test whether and how Hurricane
Michael initiated a reversal shift. A rapid response is essential before
seasonal variability in this ecosystem obscures hurricane effects. The
proposal's intellectual merit is based on its ability to address a central goal
in ecology: identifying and predicting ecosystem tipping points. Combining
empirical observations and models is a promising approach to advance this goal,
but has not been widely applied in the field, mainly because researchers are not
in place at the time of a shift. Hurricane Michael provides a unique opportunity
to address this knowledge gap.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.