* 1917976
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Building the Contractile Ring in the Early Embryo
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* John Henson, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,966.00

The process of dividing one cell into two - termed cytokinesis - is fundamental
to all life on Earth and this project seeks to further elucidate the structure
and function of the protein-based machinery that mediates the splitting of the
cell. The machinery that accomplishes animal cell cytokinesis is known as the
contractile ring and it consists of a transiently assembled belt of cytoskeletal
proteins which generates the force required to divide the cell. Employing a
variety of imaging technologies in combination with computational modeling, this
project will test the hypothesis that in animal cells the contractile ring
assembles from nodes of contractile proteins that aggregate into a functional
contractile assemblage. The resulting increase in knowledge of the architecture
and dynamics of the contractile ring derived from this project will have
significant impacts on research in the fields of cell proliferation, movement,
shape change, as well as differentiation and development. This project will
train students from a four-year liberal arts college (Dickinson College) and a
minority-serving research university (New Mexico State University), who will
work not only at their respective institutions but also collaboratively at the
University of Washington's Friday Harbor Laboratories (FHL). A computational
modeler with experience in agent-based modeling of cytoskeletal protein dynamics
will provide training in agent-based modeling. Lastly, the investigators will
engage in a number of activities that will broaden the impact of the project
through the broadening of participation of URM students, the integration of
research and education, and public engagement and improvement of science
literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project will test the
hypothesis that the contractile ring assembles from nodes comprised of the
cytoskeletal proteins myosin II, actin, septins and anillin, which then congress
into a mature contractile machine that generates the force necessary for
cytokinesis. This node-based mode of ring assembly occurs in fission yeast, but
had never been demonstrated in higher order animals cells until the
investigators described the presence of node-like structures in the early
contractile rings of sea urchin embryos. Using this report as a foundation, the
investigators will apply super resolution, electron, and live cell microscopy to
examine node composition, assembly and aggregation during cytokinesis in sea
urchin and sea star embryos. Using empirical data as well as existing models for
yeast node congression, two- and three-dimensional, agent-based models will be
tested in silico, and results from these simulations will be used to inform
further experimentation. Lastly, these approaches will be applied to the study
of polar lobe formation, which uses a contractile ring-like structure that forms
during cytokinesis in many early embryos, but whose composition and
spatiotemporal regulation may be quite different from a standard contractile
ring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.