* 1917528
* Greenhouse Gas Dynamics Across the Land-to-Ocean Continuum in the Canadian Archipelago
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Anna Michel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 868,229.00

Current and future warming has the potential to impact the cycling of methane in
the Arctic, and the contribution of the region to the global methane budget
remains poorly constrained. Thawing of permafrost, as well as melting of ice,
has the potential to mobilize significant quantities of methane. This project
focuses on understanding the connection between lakes, rivers, and bays across
the land-ocean continuum in northern Canada. Methane and carbon dioxide from
terrestrial and freshwater systems can be mobilized during the spring thaw and
rapidly transported into the coastal ocean. The investigators will use unmanned
vehicles to study the fate of these gases as they are transported via small
river networks to the coastal ocean and subsequently outgassed as sea ice breaks
up. Broader impacts of this project include developing new technology for Arctic
research, training a female graduate student in polar field work and
engineering, and engagement with local indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contribution of Arctic fresh water bodies
to the global methane budget is poorly constrained. This project will use a
cutting-edge autonomous surface platform to measure dissolved methane, carbon
dioxide, salinity, nitrate, and oxygen in surface waters of Cambridge Bay,
Canada. The investigators will quantify the magnitude of the rapid burst of
outgassing of methane and carbon dioxide with two field seasons of intensive
spatial and temporal sampling during the weeks surrounding the spring freshet.
The specific objectives are to: characterize the rapid lateral pulse of
greenhouse gases entering the coastal ocean from terrestrial aquatic systems
during the freshet; determine the extent to which methane and carbon dioxide
accumulates under ice; quantify the geographical extent and rate of rapid
outgassing to the atmosphere; and close a mass balance of the Cambridge Bay to
determine if the majority of methane and carbon dioxide delivered to the coastal
ocean outgasses. The investigators will also provide proof of concept for
autonomous vehicles carrying sensor technology that can expand our spatial and
temporal sampling capability in dangerous or harsh
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.