* 1917829
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating Risk and Uncertainty in Urban Infrastructural Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Jean Comaroff, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 10,503.00

Large-scale infrastructural planning proposes that increased investment in a
nation's basic systems and services might bring about a transformed future for
its citizenry. Yet, previous research on governmental investment plans stresses
that the futures promised by ambitious state-planning often remain out of reach,
given that expansive projects are rarely completed on time or as according to
plan. Thus, state planning might equally be a source of hope and a source of
fear for people impacted by the protracted implementation processes inherent to
complex plans. With proposals to invest in the rebuilding of national
infrastructure growing in popularity, both in the United States and in
industrializing nations across the globe, an understanding of the ultimate
effects of investment in long-term, large-scale infrastructure planning is
urgently needed. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology in scientific methods of rigorous data collection and
analysis, the project would engage a wider audience in the scientific process,
and broadly disseminate its findings to organizations invested in optimizing
urban infrastructural planning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Harvard University
doctoral student Courtney T. Wittekind, advised by Dr. Jean Comaroff, will
explore what strategies for investment, speculation, and planning are employed
in the context of a large-scale infrastructural plan. Extended ethnographic
research will be conducted in the city of Yangon (formerly Rangoon), Myanmar's
cultural and economic center. As the site for an impressive state-led plan that
proposes to expand the city by over 20,000 acres, Yangon is an ideal location
for the study of the advantages and disadvantages of large-scale state-led
planning. The researcher will focus on the Yangon region's southwestern
outskirts, including three townships targeted for redevelopment by this city
expansion plan. There, she will ask two sets of questions about the effects of
large-scale infrastructural planning. The first set asks about the relationship
between everyday decisions made by those living in the Yangon region's
southwest, and their perception of the city expansion plan, its progress, and
future potential. The second set of questions contextualizes the first within
Myanmar's ongoing democratic transition, asking how people's impressions of
municipal and regional planning relate to their perceptions of national
politics. The researcher will collect data through ethnographic research,
including participant observation, household surveys, semi-structured and
unstructured interviews, and archival analysis. The conclusions of this research
will provide new insights into the relationships between planning occurring at
the level of the individual, the municipality, and the nation, while also
helping policymakers and civil society organizations better assess the promise
of infrastructural investment, in light of its possible
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.