* 1917619
* The evidential-temporal connection in a language without tense
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Maria-Luisa Maria, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 169,323.00

Languages provide ways for speakers to indicate the type of evidence that forms
the basis of their statements. When speakers of English modify a sentence with
'apparently', they convey that their evidence comes not from direct first-hand
experience, but from either a report or an inference. Other languages make
evidential distinctions with specialized evidential morphemes, which encode
direct perceptual evidence or indirect reportative or inferential evidence.
There is great variety in how evidentiality is expressed grammatically across
languages, yet the kinds of evidential meanings that are conveyed are remarkably
few and consistent, suggesting the involvement of grammatical constraints. To
understand the grammar of evidentiality it is fruitful to study sentences with
embedding verbs that explicitly encode evidence type, like 'see', 'hear',
'gather', and others that allow a range of evidential interpretations, like
'say', 'think', 'believe'. In addition to providing a point of comparison for
evidential morphemes in terms of meaning, such verbs also allow the study of
whether evidence can be dissociated from the speaker and attributed to the
subject of the embedding verb. The mechanisms of evidential anchoring in
contexts of embedding can be compared to those of temporal anchoring. Temporal
morphemes situate events in time relative to the speech context, or to the main
clause event in contexts of embedding. Understanding the orientation of
evidentials in embedded contexts will advance our understanding of the role of
syntactic structure in encoding such aspects of linguistic
meaning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study the links between
evidentiality and temporality in Paraguayan Guarani, an indigenous language of
the Tupi-Guarani family. The language has no tense, and some of its evidential
morphemes express temporal meanings, providing a special perspective on the
typological tendency for temporal morphemes to encode evidential categories. The
researchers will ask native speakers of Paraguayan Guarani to evaluate and
produce sentences in context. A corpus study of written texts will supplement
the data gathered from participants. Of particular interest will be the
distribution and interpretation of evidential morphemes in clauses embedded
under verbs of speech, thought and perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.