* 1917696
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Louis Kuo, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 382,400.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Nikolaus Loening from Lewis and Clark
College and colleagues Louis Kuo and Casey Jones are acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of
the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. The NMR studies improve understanding of
synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research performed by
undergraduate students during the summer research period, in independent study
projects during the academic year and as part of final-year undergraduate thesis
projects. Collaborations with researchers at Linfield College, Pacific
University and high schools are in place. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially
helpful in studies of how organometallic complexes are used to degrade
pesticides and to desulfurize fossil fuels to make them more environmentally
friendly as well as for developing and characterizing how compounds such as
resveratrol are released from metals which may be relevant for stent design. The
spectrometer is also useful for developing surface-supported catalysts for
organic synthesis, and for characterizing the structures of venom
peptides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.