* 1917552
* 2019 17th International Summer School on Crystal Growth (ISSCG-17)(Granby, Colorado)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Joan Redwing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 06/30/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This award from the Division of Materials Research provides support for the 17th
International Summer School on Crystal Growth (ISSCG-17) to be held at the YMCA
of the Rockies - Snow Mountain Ranch in Granby, CO from July 21-26, 2019. The
event is organized and hosted by the American Association for Crystal Growth
(AACG) under the auspices of the International Organization for Crystal Growth
(IOCG). The school is scheduled the week prior to the 19th International
Conference on Crystal Growth and Epitaxy (ICCGE-19) which will be held in
Keystone, CO USA from July 28-August 2, 2019. The international meetings
(ICCGE/ISSCG) represent a 60-year history of international cooperation in the
field of crystal growth and epitaxy. The summer school was last held in the USA
in Park City, UT in 2007. The technical program consists of about 15 lectures
covering both theoretical and experimental aspects of growth and
characterization of semiconducting, oxide, metallic, organic and biological
crystals by leading researchers in the field. The format of the school is
designed to encourage interaction between lecturers and attendees. Informal
discussions will be facilitated via technical and social events. The YMCA venue
has numerous outdoor activities which will provide additional opportunities for
attendees to interact in a rustic and scenic outdoor setting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.