* 1918545
* Two-verb predicates in sign languages: Typological Variation and Emergence
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Marie Coppola, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 427,688.00

The sign languages used by Deaf communities around the world are still somewhat
understudied when compared to their spoken language counterparts. This research
will answer two related questions about sign language verbs. Specifically, we
ask when and why signers use one verb (e.g., [she-puts-planes-in-a-row]) vs. two
verbs (e.g., [she-puts] [planes-in-a-row]) to describe a particular event. This
structure is commonly studied in spoken languages, sometimes expressed as serial
verb constructions, but it has not been studied in sign languages. Project
researchers will examine how signers produce this structure and also how they
understand it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a series of studies, researchers will
investigate whether certain language-specific differences about two-verb
predicates in sign languages are attributable to typological class (rather than
to random variation or historical relatedness). Data from three well-
established, national sign languages that are unrelated to one another will be
studied: American Sign Language, Hong Kong Sign Language, and Turkish Sign
Language. Typology has been an important tool in predicting variation among
spoken languages, and it is hypothesized to have the same explanatory power in
signed languages. Project investigators will also examine how two-verb
predicates emerge in sign languages and what factors are the first to trigger
two-verb predicates in historical time. To address these issues, the research
team will analyze data from homesigners (individuals who have not acquired a
conventional language but develop their own gestural communication systems) and
signers from Nicaragua. Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL) is an emerging sign
language that is roughly 40 years old. The results of these analyses will shed
light on the "nature" vs. "nurture" question, since the specific factors that
trigger two-verb predicates in homesigners (phonological, morphological,
semantic) are more likely to be ubiquitous in human language, both spoken and
signed. Although it is no longer possible to trace spoken languages back to
their roots in this way, the emergence of sign language in homesign provides a
window onto language creation, more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.