* 1918252
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying systematicity, iconicity, and arbitrariness in the American Sign Language Lexicon
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Naomi Caselli, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,838.00

This collaborative project will study how signs convey meaning in American Sign
Language (ASL) by analyzing the semantic organization of the ASL lexicon.
Understanding the structure and organization of the human lexicon is critical to
both linguistic and psycholinguistic theories of language. However, current
theories are predominantly built upon evidence from spoken languages, and may
underrepresent characteristics that are particularly common to sign languages.
For example, a core assumption regarding the organization of the lexicon is that
there is a sharp separation between semantic structure and phonological (form)
structure--the way words are pronounced is generally thought to be unrelated to
what they mean. However, mounting evidence suggests that iconicity, words or
signs that resemble their meaning, is pervasive in both signed and spoken
languages. Examples of iconicity in English are words like "ping" and "sizzle"
that sound like what they mean; examples of iconicity in ASL are signs like
DRINK and HAMMER which look like what they mean. While semantic and phonological
structure might not be fully independent from each other in ASL, we know
relatively little about how they relate to one another and whether or how
iconicity may shape the lexicon. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project represents
the first comprehensive quantitative analysis of the semantic organization of
the ASL lexicon. The project will collect valuable information about the
semantic similarity of ASL signs and the size of semantic neighborhoods, which
will be key to uncovering how knowledge about sign meaning is stored and
organized, as well as how this structure is acquired. Specifically, this project
aims to 1) conduct a lexicon-wide evaluation of the semantic associations
between signs, 2) characterize iconic and non-iconic systematic relationships
between form and meaning using visualization techniques inspired by network
science, and 3) implement a novel approach to quantify iconicity in a subset of
the lexicon in an effort to understand which semantic features participate in
iconic mappings and how iconicity might shape semantic processing. The data
collected under this project will be integrated into a large interactive lexical
database of the semantic, phonological, and iconic structure that is publicly
available (ASL-LEX: http://asl-lex.org/). These materials constitute essential
tools that will allow scientists and educators to create well-controlled stimuli
for use in research and the classroom. Finally, it is important to recognize
that deaf people often have difficulty pursuing research careers because of
communication roadblocks that hamper interaction with hearing scientists. The
researchers on this project have "deaf-friendly labs" (e.g., project staff are
fluent in ASL) and provide training that facilitates the entrance of deaf
students into scientific and academic fields. Thus, a parallel aim of the
project is to increase the representation of deaf people in science by including
deaf researchers on the project and by providing an accessible environment for
deaf students to gain training and research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.