* 1918667
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: RADAR: Real-time Advanced Detection and Attack Reconstruction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ramasubramanian Sekar, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,877.00

There has been a rapid escalation of targeted cyber-attacks, called Advanced
Persistent Threats (APTs), on high-profile enterprises. These skilled attacks
routinely bypass widely deployed protection mechanisms. Existing second-line
cyber defenses (e.g., intrusion detection systems) are helpful, but they often
generate a flood of information that overwhelms cyber analysts. Moreover,
analysts lack the tools to piece together attack fragments spanning multiple
applications and/or hosts. This project will hence focus on developing the
principles, techniques, and tools for accurate attack detection and real-time
reconstruction of attacker activities across large
enterprises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many intellectual challenges arise in APT
campaign reconstruction, including: (a) developing a wide range of policy-based,
anomaly-based and signature-based attack detectors, (b) connecting the dots in
the presence of unreliable detectors, (c) scaling to large enterprise networks,
and (d) resisting adversarial manipulation. To overcome these challenges, this
project will explore several novel directions, including (i) domain-specific
languages for cyber attack detection and forensics, (ii) novel detection
techniques that leverage natural language descriptions of recent attacks, (iii)
alternative dependence propagation semantics that mitigate dependence explosion,
and (iv) mapping attack steps to the high-level objectives ("kill-chain") of APT
actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber technologies are inextricably woven into the
fabric of today's society. Repeated cyber attacks undermine the society's trust
in this fabric. Even in purely economic terms, worldwide cybercrime led to $600
billion in losses in 2017 (Source: McAfee). This project will help arrest these
downward trends. It will also educate graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students
through cybersecurity coursework, research, and outreach activities. Enhanced
participation of women and minorities will be targeted through alliances with
partners, including the National Center for Women &amp; Information Technology,
Governor's State University, and Chicago Public Schools. Project-related data,
results, publications and tools will be made available through the web sites of
the research laboratories collaborating on this project:
http://seclab.cs.stonybrook.edu/ and
http://sisl.lab.uic.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.