* 1918245
* Conference: Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages 50: Austin, TX: April 2020
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Almeida Toribio, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 20,336.00

The 50th Linguistic Symposium on Romance Languages (LSRL) will be held at the
University of Texas at Austin from April 23-25, 2020. The LSRL attracts an
international body of scholars, and is a prominent venue for scholarly
discussion and dissemination of research findings in the subfields of syntax,
semantics, pragmatics, phonology, phonetics, historical
linguistics/dialectology, and second language, heritage and bilingual studies as
they apply to the Romance languages. LSRL50 will showcase research that employs
diverse methods and different types of empirical observations applied to various
Romance languages in the evaluation, testing, and revision of linguistic models.
The objectives of the conference include promoting a culture of open and shared
tools and data, bridging linguistics with STEM disciplines, providing a forum in
which scholars of different orientations communicate with one another, and
actively involving graduate and undergraduate students from languages and
linguistics and from STEM fields in conference activities. The conference
consists of 54 refereed oral presentations and 30 selected poster presentations.
Five keynote speakers will address multiple sub-disciplines and languages using
diverse methods of data collection: fieldwork, laboratory studies,
sociolinguistic interviews, archival recordings, and web scraping. In addition,
there will be a 'bring your own data' workshop to help participants visualize
and explore multilingual language data.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Funding from the
National Science Foundation will provide partial support for the keynote
speakers and the data science workshop convener. Funding will also provide
student participation support costs for up to 20 undergraduate students, many of
whom come from academic units that serve students of bilingualism and
multiculturalism, an interest that reflects the social makeup of Texas and of
the U.S. more generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.