* 1918340
* Liquidity, Exchange Rates and Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Charles Engel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 278,996.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three studies that
investigate the role of liquid and safe assets in the determination of foreign
exchange rates - the value of a country's currency in terms of other currencies.
Bonds issued by national governments with sound fiscal policies are generally
considered by investors to be safe investments because these bonds have a low
chance of default, relatively little price risk, and reflect high transparency
about the government. Because these bonds are safe, they are also easily traded
- they are liquid. Investors are willing to earn a lower rate of return on
government bonds relative to privately issued bonds because they are safe. The
difference between the market bond rate and the government bond rate can be
referred as "convenience yield". This research looks at the link between
convenience yields and exchange rates; examines how international linkages are
influenced by the convenience yield and how this affects exchange rates; and
appraises the special role of U.S. Treasury assets, which are valued globally
for their safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project builds a New Keynesian
model that then motivates an empirical model for exchange rates, which is used
to investigate exchange rates in major economies. The model uses traditional
fundamentals to explain exchange rates: interest rates, and an error correction
term for deviations from purchasing power parity. The innovation is to examine
the role of the liquidity yield on short-term government bonds, as measured by
the difference between the rate of returns on deposits and the government rate.
The second project studies how the supply of safe and liquid government bonds
influences the dynamics of exchange rates, and how it addresses a number of
exchange rate puzzles raised in the literature, in the context of a richer New
Keynesian two-country model. The third project concerns the role of constraints
on financial institutions, and how they propagate into the determination of
foreign exchange rates. As banks all over the world receive substantial short-
term funding denominated in U.S. dollars, U.S. short-term Treasuries not only
pay interest but provide liquidity to banks. In the model, banks value liquid
assets to meet short-term unexpected funding needs. This project documents
empirically that during times of particular need for liquidity by banks, the
liquidity yield on U.S. Treasury short-term assets is high, and the U.S. dollar
is strong.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.