* 1918352
* Urbanization and Rural Land Rights Negotiations
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Yi Wu, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 291,250.00

With more than one half of the world's population now living in urban areas,
urbanization is a global phenomenon that has been changing the world's physical
environment and social fabric. However, urbanization is experienced differently
across regions. The varying roles played by the government, local communities,
and ordinary citizens are at the root of the diverse urbanization processes
across the world. While the government can directly shape the outcome of
urbanization through its laws, policies, and regulations, the roles played by
local communities and ordinary citizens may be less visible and therefore
overlooked. Nevertheless, the various types of grassroots activities can
fundamentally affect the outcomes of urbanization (such as the spatial
distribution of social resources, the redefinition of urban citizenship, and the
reconstruction of property rights). Understanding how local communities and
ordinary citizens experience and respond to the urbanization process in
different social and cultural contexts can facilitate the development of
programs and policies that are appropriate to specific communities or social
groups. Such knowledge is especially important to developing countries where
urbanization often resulted in uneven distribution of resources and unequal
opportunities among social groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Yi Wu of Clemson
University will examine the social, political, and technological challenges
associated with creating an equal and inclusive society in the midst of a rapid
urbanization process. Because of it is urbanizing faster than most other
regions, China is an appropriate context for exploring these questions. For
example, 13% of China's population lived in cities in the 1950s, while the
number reached 53.7% in 2013. Moreover, such rapid urbanization was accompanied
by significant political changes, diverse social conflicts, and popular
resistance. Conducted by Dr. Yi Wu (Clemson University), this research studies
rural communities on China's urban fringes. Specifically, it examines whether
and how village communities and rural individuals have defended and redefined
their land rights within the context of rapid urbanization in the new-millennium
China. Empirical data will be collected from three villages in China that have
been experiencing urbanization at different rates and in different environments.
Through participant observation, interviewing, and documentary research, Dr. Yi
Wu collect data on (1) land loss caused by urban expansion in these communities,
(2) each village's land development plans and strategies, and (3) the rights-
asserting activities of rural individuals. Data from these villages will allow a
comparison of land use patterns associated with different stages of
urbanization, as well as a comparison of the varied perceptions of rural
populations on issues of rights, equality, and social justice. Furthermore, data
on how rural communities and individuals engage in land bargains may help social
scientists and policy makers assess whether and how hybrid and contested
property regimes can be conducive to economic development. In short, the
questions addressed by this research concern not just China, but other parts of
the world, especially developing countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.