* 1918455
* Elucidating the Physics of Flexoelectricity Through First-Principles Calculations of Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Cyrus Dreyer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2022
* USD 333,453.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research, and education on flexoelectricity.&lt;br/&gt;If a strain
gradient is applied to a piece of an electrically insulating material, for
example by bending it, a voltage will be created across the material. This
effect, known as flexoelectricity, has attracted attention because of the
possibility for technological applications such as actuators, deflection
sensors, and energy harvesters. Also, flexoelectricity is important since modern
nanoscale electronic devices may contain large unintentional strain gradients,
and thus flexoelectricity may play a crucial role in their properties. A pivotal
missing ingredient in developing a quantitative understanding of
flexoelectricity has been the lack of an efficient and accurate computational
methodology to predict the flexoelectric response of a material. In this
project, the PI will build on predictive methodology he has developed with
collaborators and apply it to explore and characterize the flexoelectric
response in materials more complex than could be theoretically investigated
before. The goal of this research is to better understand what materials
properties lead to an especially large flexoelectric response, which can be
utilized for technological applications. This will also help identify materials
with a suppressed flexoelectric response, which will be useful in cases where
the effects of unintentional strain gradients need to be mitigated. The research
activities in this project serve as an ideal platform for the education and
mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students in diverse aspects of condensed
matter physics, materials science, and computational science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports computational and theoretical research, and education on
flexoelectricity.&lt;br/&gt;The flexoelectric effect, where electrical
polarization is induced by a strain gradient, is universal in all insulators. As
devices shrink to the micro and nanoscale, large strain gradients can occur, and
therefore the flexoelectric effect may play a significant role in their
properties. Also, flexoelectricity can be exploited for novel paradigms of
electromechanical manipulation of materials, such as the development of
piezoelectric "metamaterials" constructed from nonpiezoelectric constituents, or
mechanical switching of ferroelectric polarization. In this work, the PI will
explore and elucidate the physics of flexoelectricity in complex materials,
utilizing recently developed density functional perturbation theory methodology
for accurately and efficiently calculating flexoelectric coefficients. The PI
will investigate the flexoelectric response in two materials systems with the
goal of addressing significant open questions relating to how flexoelectricity
is generally manifested in materials. The PI will focus on two-dimensional, van
der Waals bonded materials including, boron nitride and the transition-metal
dichalcogenides, and "distorted" perovskite oxides with lower symmetry than the
cubic parent structure. The PI will systematically explore how symmetry,
mechanical, and dielectric properties influence the flexoelectric response, and
how this response can be measured or manipulated by forming heterostructures or
superlattices, or modifying surface properties. The materials study performed in
this work, will enable the identification of specific materials and material
systems that have large flexoelectric responses which may be useful for
applications, as well as those with small responses, which are necessary in
applications where gradients are present unintentionally and flexoelectricity
must be mitigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.