* 1918769
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biosocial dynamics of intergenerational transmission of stress
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Marcia Inhorn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 23,064.00

This doctoral research project examines how trauma experienced by women may be
transmitted across generations, affecting their well-being and the well-being of
their children. Working with populations who have endured high-stress
environments, the investigators will conduct in-depth interviews with women when
they are pregnant and subsequently measure markers of stress in those women and
their infants, to understand how trauma affects women and children socially,
emotionally, and biologically. Through these bio-ethnographic methods, the
project will advance our understanding of epigenetic responses to the
environment in humans. The project will also contribute to graduate training and
mentoring and may inform public health research and behavioral health
interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers how biosocial
inheritance, or the means by which social adversity or advantage is transmitted
across generations, may play a role in intergenerational trauma. Specifically,
this project considers (1) how women enduring adverse environments subjectively
construct their traumatic experience; (2) whether maternal trauma may be
"molecularized" at the level of the epigenome; (3) whether maternal traumatic
experience is associated with neuroendocrine stress during pregnancy; and (4)
whether maternal epigenetic or neuroendocrine signals correspond to those seen
in offspring in early life. In this study of 112 mother-infant dyads, mothers'
subjective appraisals of trauma will be elicited through semi-structured and
life history interviews, which will be used to contextualize their responses to
a survey of traumatic exposure and a trauma symptoms checklist. Their biological
incorporation of trauma will be assessed with measures of DNA methylation and
hair cortisol concentration. Methylation will be measured at five genes that are
involved in the neuroendocrine stress response: NR3C1, FKBP5, BDNF, SLC6A4, and
MAOA. To evaluate for broader patterns of epigenetic modification, epigenome-
wide methylation analyses will also be conducted. To investigate the potential
for intergenerational programming, this project will measure chronic cortisol
secretion in mothers, cortisol reactivity following a modest stressor in infants
at eight weeks of age, and DNA methylation at these five stress-related loci in
both mothers and infants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.