* 1918828
* Effects of Nonresponse and Measurement Error on Earnings Volatility and Inequality: Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Christopher Bollinger, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 372,600.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earnings of workers change from year to year for
various reasons. This earnings volatility has important links to poverty, rising
income inequality, declining economic mobility, and the use of social welfare
programs. Much of what is known about volatility and inequality comes from
survey data, which generally offers a broad collection of variables. However,
survey data suffers from data quality issues such as non-response (for example,
refusing to answer survey questions about earnings) and measurement error
(failing to report earnings accurately). These data quality issues create
obstacles in drawing conclusions about earnings from survey data. Administrative
data on earnings and other related topics, on the other hand, avoids some of the
measurement pitfalls of surveys. However, administrative data alone do not
include important variables such as education, race, and family structure
necessary to fully investigate the reasons and trends of earnings volatility.
This project seeks to reconcile the diverging results from survey and
administrative data by linking a large survey data that is widely used to
understand U.S. poverty rate from income and earnings to administrative data on
worker earnings. By linking these two datasets, this project explores important
questions on earnings volatility trends through time, underlying demographic
elements that cause earnings volatility, the effects of economic shocks on
earnings and how compensation structure may lead to shifts in earnings. Overall,
these questions advance our understanding of how earnings change, which is
crucial in explaining rising inequality and designing social welfare
programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project consists of four studies that
utilize restricted-access survey and administrative from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) Annual Social Economic Supplement (ASEC) and Social Security
Administration?s Detailed Earnings Records (DER). The ability to observe both
multiple reports of earnings (administrative and survey) combined with the short
panel structure of the CPS and the full earnings history available in the DER,
allows identification of permanent income, as well as measurement error
structure. The availability of DER earnings for those who are non-respondents in
the CPS allows identification of the distribution of income for non-respondents.
Combining these two aspects allows the investigation of earnings levels and
volatility in ways that neither survey nor administrative data alone could
accomplish. The first project specifies a finite mixture model of earnings
response to examine differences between continuous survey responders to both
continuous non-responders and switchers from response to non-response or vice
versa. The second project examines whether there are differences in levels and
trends in volatility, adjusting for panel attrition, non-linkage between the
ASEC and DER, and measurement error. The third project provides new
(semiparametric) estimates of permanent and transitory shocks to earnings.
Finally, fourth project is on variance decomposition of volatility to isolate
how much of the level and trend differences are driven by differences in annual
hours of work, hourly wages, or the covariance of hours and
wages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.