* 1918713
* Collaborative Research: A Unified Framework for Optimal Public Debt Management
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mikhail Golosov, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 373,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Government debt has an important role in an
economy as decisions on government debt issuance has implications on fiscal
policy and the tax system. When issuing debt, government must decide on how to
rebalance its existing debt, how much new debt to issue and the duration of
borrowing - between short and long-term borrowing. These decisions must be made
by considering the state of the economy, including the growth rate, employment
levels, inflation, interest rates and the impact of government debt issuance on
bond markets. The goal of this project is to develop a framework to examine
current public debt management practices and suggest ways to improve them. The
project will deliver easy to use and easy to implement formulas that prescribe
the optimal maturity and the optimal frequency of public debt rebalancing along
with mathematical models that illustrate their
usefulness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Managing public debt is a crucial policy issue
that concerns economists, policymakers, and the general public. There is limited
practical guidance on the types of debt securities government should issue and
the frequency with which a government should rebalance its debt portfolio. This
proposal aims to develop a unified framework for optimal public debt management
that integrates the public debt literature that imposes commitment, the
literature on debt without commitment in closed and open economies, and the
finance literature on optimal portfolio theory. Methodologically, the proposal
will expand the "sufficient statistics" approach that is widely used in public
finance. The key deliverables will consist of formulas for optimal portfolios
that summarize the normative prescriptions from large classes of models in terms
of a small number of empirical moments. These moments will be estimated and used
as inputs in a quantitative structural model of debt management that can be used
for joint analysis of debt and tax policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.