* 1918338
* The Dufek Intrusion Ages:  Crystallization or Cooling?
* GEO,OPP
* 12/31/2019,12/31/2023
* Jill VanTongeren, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 301,763.00

Voluminous outpourings of iron-rich molten rock (magma), which can initiate from
deep within the earth, occur regularly throughout geologic time. Understanding
volcanic eruptions requires knowledge of the magmatic plumbing systems and magma
chambers that feed eruptions. While many magma chambers are typically emplaced
in the shallow subsurface of the earth, only rarely are the entirety of the
solidified remnants of these chambers later exposed at the surface of the earth
for study. One such magma chamber, the Dufek Intrusion, exists in Antarctica.
The Dufek Intrusion is part of the Ferrar magmatic event, which was triggered by
the separation or rifting of South America, Africa and Antarctic continents
approximately 182 million years ago. The research objectives focus on analyzing
existing samples to understand the thermal and chemical evolution of the magma
in the Dufek Intrusion magma chamber and deciphering whether the exposed
sections are part of the same magma chamber or represent two separate magma
chambers. Results from this study may result in the research community
questioning the assumption that small intrusions crystallized faster than larger
layered intrusions such as the Dufek Intrusion. This project supports multiple
early career researchers and provides laboratory training for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary high-precision U-Pb ages from zircon
throughout the Dufek Intrusion show that rocks thought to represent the
lowermost section of stratigraphy (the Dufek Massif) are younger than the rocks
thought to represent the uppermost section (the Forrestal Range). This study
tests whether the zircon ages represent a cooling profile of a single large
layered intrusion, or whether the Dufek Massif and Forrestal Range are two
separate smaller intrusions. Crystallization temperatures of the cumulus phases
(plagioclase and clinopyroxene) and the zircons, as well as cooling rates from
the cumulus phases will be obtained to test the cooling profile hypothesis. The
research team will construct thermal models of emplacement and cooling to
compare with the laboratory analyses. In order to test the two intrusions
hypothesis, the team will analyze zircon Hf isotopic compositions and whole rock
Sr, Nd, Pb isotopes from samples of the two intrusions to determine whether they
are similar and therefore genetically related. Results will provide important
constraints on the duration of magmatism associated with continental breakup and
present a coherent picture of the construction of (possibly) one of the largest
magmatic intrusions exposed on earth today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.