* 1918925
* Collaborative Research: A Generalizable Data Framework Towards Precision Radiotherapy
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Jun Deng, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2023
* USD 439,440.00

In treating cancer patients with radiation therapy, different patients may have
different responses to the same type of radiotherapy. Hence, it is critical to
individualize the radiation treatment based on the patient's health data,
clinical conditions, as well as response over time. The goal of this project is
to develop a generalizable data framework that can support precision
radiotherapy for individual cancer patients. Specifically, a deep reinforcement
learning model will be built and validated with multimodal imaging data acquired
during diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of individual patients. Harmonization
of the medical imaging data with genetic and clinical data will create an
invaluable repository of knowledge to draw from, while calling for new
analytics. The developed data framework will provide critical clinical decision
support for individualized radiotherapy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By leveraging the
wealth of data generated in the radiotherapy clinic, the project aims to develop
a generalized deep reinforcement learning (DRL) tool for cancer risk
stratification. Based on the DRL tool, an ensemble model will be built to
analyze all the data types useful to patient outcome prediction. The model will
be validated with independent datasets to ensure generalization. To account for
information from multiple imaging modalities combined with treatment plans, a
multimodal deep reinforcement learning (mDRL) model will be developed and
trained with patient data stored in the electronic medical record system, as
well as genomic information derived from blood and tissue specimens. The
detection tool will be used in both lung cancer and colorectal cancer patients.
Generalization to a variety of other cancers will be possible once the tools
become available to the clinical research community. The ensemble model will
allow integrated analysis of multiple data types recorded along the patient
outcome trajectory, provide better discrimination between tumor phenotypes and
superior predictive power. The framework will be designed to coordinate and
synthesize various types of evidence and measurements into scores for the
objective assessment and quantification of outcomes and endpoints. This strategy
will ultimately provide novel patient re-stratification and support clinical
decisions for highly individualized patient
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.