* 1918446
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Matteo Riondato, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 25,000.00

The SIAM (Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics) International
Conference on Data Mining (SDM) is one of the top-tier conferences in the field
of data mining. It provides a venue for researchers who are addressing problems
in data mining to present their work in a peer-reviewed forum. The doctoral
forum consists of a poster session for Ph.D. candidates in data mining or
closely related areas or Ph.D. students who have made significant progress
towards Ph.D. candidacy. The Ph.D. student forum participants will be able to
present their work, interact with their peers from other universities as well as
hundreds of leading researchers in data mining from around the world. Each
student participant in the Doctoral Forum will be assigned a senior researcher
to serve as a mentor on a variety of career-related issues and they also can
attend the technical sessions, plenary talks, and tutorials and workshops at the
conference to touch the frontier of data mining research. To encourage doctoral
student participation and to recognize outstanding dissertation research in data
mining being conducted by Ph.D. students, SDM 2019 will have awards for the best
posters presented at the SDM 2019 Doctoral Forum.

The 2019 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM 2019) is being
organized by the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics in cooperation
with the American Statistical Association. SDM 2019 will be held in Calgary,
Alberta, Canada from May 2 to May 4, 2019. Funds provide travel support for
approximately 10 graduate students from universities in the United States to
attend SDM 2019 and to provide travel support for approximately 16 Ph.D.
candidate from institutions in the United States to participate in a Doctoral
Forum that is to be held as part of SDM 2019.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.