* 1918241
* Emotional Adaptation and Incorporation Following Post-Disaster Relocation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Elizabeth Aranda, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 442,000.00

This project will examine how people moving from a region that has undergone a
natural disaster fare upon relocation to the continental U.S. The project will
advance scientific knowledge about the conditions under which those moving as a
result of a disaster struggle or prosper upon relocation and resettlement. This
study will contribute theoretical innovations to what we know about
incorporation and the ramifications for the emotional well-being of those who
relocate by examining adaptation after moving regions due to a disaster. This
research advances the health and welfare of a marginalized and vulnerable group
living in the continental U.S. by understanding the mechanisms that support
their resettlement and how the context that receives them creates the conditions
that would offer them opportunities to succeed, or otherwise blunt them. This
study will provide a knowledge base to guide the development of future work with
those who relocate following a disaster and will identify what interventions are
needed to uplift the economic, social, and emotional well-being of these
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study involves three stages of data
collection. First, 900 people who relocated subsequent to a hurricane will be
interviewed by phone. The second stage will consist of 50 interviews of about
two hours with heads of households. Third, members of a subsample of 10 families
will be interviewed. The project's main research question concerns how
individual attributes interact with the context of reception (e.g., the locality
or region, including the labor market reception, demographic characteristics of
a community, and the state and federal conditions that can facilitate or make
adaptation more difficult) to shape their pathways of incorporation into
mainstream society, including their emotional well-being, an oft-neglected
dimension of integration. This study will enhance our understanding of a
relocated community, its heterogeneity, and its resettlement experiences, and
possible linkages to civic incorporation and
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.