* 1918273
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Agricultural Modernization and Traditional Food Knowledge Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Virginia Nazarea, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,007.00

Fast-paced lifestyles, and a massive and commercialized food industry, have
contributed to the breakdown of traditional food systems. Nutritional science
has already extensively demonstrated that the disappearance of traditional foods
is disadvantageous to society because of the health, environmental and economic
benefits they offer. The loss can be acutely detrimental, as it has been in the
U.S., as the replacement of traditional diets has aggravated an obesity
epidemic. Recently, the promotion of traditional diets has re-surfaced as part
of initiatives advocating sustainable diets. There is, however, a need to
understand how the knowledge and practice of such traditional food systems are
lost, kept or modified. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in anthropology in scientific methods of rigorous data
collection and analysis, the project would engage a wider audience in the
scientific process, and broadly disseminate its findings to organizations
invested in optimizing agricultural production technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Melanie Narciso, under the direction of Dr. Virginia
Nazarea, will investigate the repercussions of agricultural modernization on
traditional food knowledge and practice. This proposed research focuses on the
culinary and gastronomic impact of a large-scale agricultural modernization, the
Green Revolution (GR), through the study of fermented rice traditions in the
Philippines. Starting in the 1960s, the GR introduced modern rice varieties,
fast-maturing, pest and disease resistant and high yielding rice varieties in
rice societies across the globe. These have been reported to replace traditional
rice varieties, narrowing the genetic rice base and revolutionizing the rice
landscape's tastes, odors, and textures. This research questions if the
resulting genetic erosion and sensory transitions are merely inert phenomena
without social ramifications. It specifically explores whether, and if so, to
what extent material manipulation of yield varieties translate into traditional
food knowledge loss. Using a combination of ethnography and food and nutritional
science methodologies, the investigators will probe into the changes in the
diversity and physico-chemical properties of the rice supply in the town of
Candaba, a GR technology adopting rice farming community known for its fermented
rice traditions. They will explore how these changes in material properties of
rice alter cognitive perceptions of rice, and subsequently how they prepare and
consume their fermented rice. This will provide evidence how the disappearance
of many traditional rice varieties and the material properties of rice influence
human interaction with their food environments, and how this erodes and/or
promotes cultural food knowledge. This will inform programmatic efforts on crop
improvement, sustainable diet promotion and biocultural diversity
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.