* 1918207
* Quantum Entanglement and Dynamics in Lattice Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Israel Klich, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
theoretical research and education aimed at advancing our grasp of quantum
aspects of condensed matter theory at low dimensions. The major fundamental
difficulty in describing and theoretically representing quantum many-body
systems is the vast number of parameters required. The number of such parameters
increases exponentially with the number of constituents of a system, and thus
quickly becomes intractable for numerical computations, even for small quantum
systems. Thus, efficient descriptions of quantum systems are of fundamental
importance to our understanding of complex systems and of their applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will study a new representation
for certain quantum systems that is exact and efficient. Another front of the
research is the development of models of quantum systems that efficiently
describe their dynamics, for example quantum detectors under the influence of
measurements and external disturbances. The detailed understanding of such
dynamics may find a crucial role in the development of a host of new
experimental diagnostic tools, and of platforms for quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will require the use and development
of new theoretical tools in the arsenal of theoretical physics of many-body
quantum states. Also, in tandem with the research, the project will involve the
training of graduate students in cutting-edge methods of theoretical physics,
which are vital for a scientific career but also form a core of ideas that often
find new uses in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education to advance our grasp of quantum aspects of condensed matter theory at
low dimensions through the study of entanglement, dynamics, and fluctuations in
many-body states. There are three main topics of study:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first topic is a study of the interplay of locality and entanglement and its
relation to variational methods like tensor network states. The PI will focus on
recently discovered Hamiltonians that exhibit highly entangled ground states and
new phase transitions, and unusual dynamical scaling
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second topic will deal with a set of
quantum nonequilibrium problems, a topic of current interest due to advancement
in theory and experiment. Theory lags significantly behind experimental
abilities primarily due to the inability to effectively simulate many-body
dynamics. Via a numerical framework based on closed hierarchies of equations,
the PI will study nonequilibrium current generation, effects of the motion of
detectors and sources in a Fermi sea, quantum wakes, and role of the interplay
between disorder and measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a third topic, the PI
will investigate a new class of boson impurity models that can be mapped into
certain photonic cluster states, with particular emphasis on relating these
states to ground states of interesting physical disordered systems that may
ultimately be amenable to quantum simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods
and approaches employed and developed will allow for a fruitful exchange of
ideas between researchers in condensed matter, quantum information, high-energy
physics, and in mathematics. Nonequilibrium quantum physics plays a role in a
wide swath of applications from fundamental physics understanding to the
development of devices. Finally, an essential component of the project is that
it will provide opportunities for the training of new researchers, whose
development as scientists is a vital goal of the proposed
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.