* 1918966
* Biomolecular Identification of Psychoactive Plants
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Gang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 231,299.00

There is an increasing recognition of the deep time co-evolutionary relationship
between humans and many psychoactive and medicinal plants, yet much remains to
be learned about their past use. Researchers aim to understand the complex
evolutionary processes through which societies and individuals interacted with
ancient drugs including tobacco, cannabis, caffeinated teas, coffee, chocolate,
and opiates. Few adults today have not used or been impacted by one or more of
these intoxicants, many of which have in recent times been refined into
incredibly potent and addictive substances, with global health consequences.
Archaeology offers a deep-time perspective into plant domestication, coupled
human-plant interactions, and addiction and drug use by people, who used an
array of plants not only as food but also for social, ceremonial, recreational,
and medicinal reasons. Chemical residue analysis of alkaloid biomarkers in
ancient materials offers a novel means of approaching these issues; recent
studies have produced compelling results demonstrating the global scale and deep
time use of intoxicant plants. However, major challenges remain, particularly in
terms of baseline experimental method development in controlled laboratory
settings. Washington State University (WSU) scientists Dr. Shannon Tushingham
and Dr. David Gang will undertake research designed to expand frontiers in the
biomolecular archaeology of psychoactive plants through a 3-year program of
hypothesis testing and experimentation in controlled laboratory settings aimed
at developing rigorous methods and cutting-edge technologies that will expand
understanding of past use of psychoactives among global societies. Analytical
methods include liquid and gas chromatography-time of flight mass spectrometry
(LC-TOFMS and GC-TOFMS), Matrix-assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Mass
Spectrometry (MALDI-MS), and metabolomics research tools to chemically
fingerprint key drug plants and test assumptions concerning their use in the
past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSU team focuses on two exciting research
avenues: (1) ancient metabolomics, which employs powerful metabolomic profiling
tools to evaluate the complete chemical fingerprint of plants and ancient
residues, with the goal of discriminating plants to the species level, and (2)
dental calculus studies, directed at refining identification of intoxicant
compounds in human dental calculus (mineralized plaque), which permits
identification of drug use of substances including tobacco, cannabis, and
opioids to the individual level. Improved dental calculus methods will provide
researchers the capability to ask anthropologically significant questions about
intoxicant use by individuals of varied circumstances and societal groups (e.g.,
use patterns by age, gender, status, health categories) and previously
"invisible" users (i.e., those not buried with artifacts indicating use such as
pipes), as well as effects on oral health, past and present. Hypothesis testing
involves method-building experiments with laboratory-produced artifacts (e.g.,
ceramic pots brewed with cacao, cassina tea, etc.) and modern dental calculus
(obtained through a collaboration with the University of Washington Department
of Periodontics), as well as a series of method validation/ directed pilot
studies on archaeological artifacts. Undergraduate and graduate students are
involved in every stage and gain valuable archaeometric skills. Broader impacts
are expanded through interdisciplinary educational, public dissemination, and
collaborative projects, and involve public displays/ presentations, research
partnerships with Tribal communities, and educational and outreach
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.