* 1918813
* RR: CompCog: A challenge suite for statistical word segmentation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joshua Hartshorne, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 706,549.00

A central scientific puzzle is how children manage to acquire language despite
limited and inconsistent explicit feedback. Numerous mathematical results seem
to suggest that acquiring a language should be impossible; the fact that
children do it every day reveals a deep gap in the science of learning. Some
research suggests that children make considerable headway by detecting patterns
in what they hear even without any explicit teaching or even knowing what is
being talked about ("statistical" or "unsupervised" learning). Indeed, much of
the recent progress in "teaching" computers to understand language has made use
of just this strategy. Even more compelling: numerous experiments have shown
that both adults and infants are able to learn at least a little bit about
language this way. How much they can learn remains unclear. A central difficulty
is that mathematically, there are many different methods for pattern-detection
and it is unclear which one(s) humans use. This is important because some work
better than others; and whether unsupervised pattern-detection can help solve
the mystery of language learning depends on which method is used. The purpose of
this project is to put together a "challenge suite": a dataset that can be used
to systematically evaluate and compare the possibilities. Such challenge suites
have been instrumental in advancing artificial intelligence. This project also
serves as a proof-of-concept to determine whether challenge suites are similarly
beneficial for the science of learning, and at the same time provide valuable
resources and training to the research community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To
develop the challenge suite, the investigators will first conduct a
comprehensive, quantitative literature review (meta-analysis) focusing on the
largest body of work on unsupervised pattern-detection: adult statistical word
segmentation. Aided by outside experimenters, the meta-analysis will be used to
identify 10-15 key experiments. As a group, these experiments will establish a
basic set of facts about adult statistical word segmentation that any theory
must account for. For these reasons, the project will focus particularly on
theoretically-central phenomena that distinguish different theories. To measure
different aspects of linguistic pattern-detection, each experiment will involve
large numbers of subjects (approx. 1,200 each) and a subset of 3-5 experiments
with an even larger number (approx. 24,000 each). A tool will be developed to
enable researchers to compare any mathematical theory of learning against these
data, determining how well it matches human performance. In order to determine
how the mathematical theory could learn language, a database of transcripts of
child-directed speech in 3-5 languages will be developed. Each theory will also
be tested/trained on the database to see how much it could learn about those
languages. The challenge suite will be made available to all researchers as a
download and also through a website where researchers can submit their models
and compare results against those of other models. This work will be publicized
to the scientific community through a closing workshop focused on models of
unsupervised word segmentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.