* 1918572
* RUI: Exact Dynamical Properties of Strongly Correlated Materials at Finite Temperatures
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Ehsan Khatami, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2023
* USD 235,829.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education on developing numerical methods for the simulation of quantum
materials. Understanding the microscopic mechanisms behind unexpected and often
technologically useful properties of certain solids at low temperatures has
largely relied on numerical findings for static (time-independent) relationships
between electrons in simplified models. This is despite the fact that their
dynamical (time-dependent) correlations can sometimes offer more direct insight
into the state of the system and be more readily accessible in experiments than
their static counterparts. For example, they can tell us about the reaction of a
system to small external perturbations, including electric or magnetic fields.
Our commonly used numerical methods, however, are not designed to deal with
dynamical properties as reliably as with static ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PI and his team will implement a novel idea for more reliable
calculations of time-dependent properties in certain numerical simulations of
interacting electrons that yield exact results. They will use the method to
study the temperature dependence of properties that can tell us about the
collective rearrangements of electrons and the different transformations they
can undergo. The results will help interpret observations in experiments that
emulate such systems and will ultimately improve our understanding about the
mechanism behind transformation of matter into exotic phases, such as insulating
and superconducting phases, with applications in the technology, energy, and
transportation sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activities will provide
several undergraduate students from the diverse population of San Jose State
University with hands-on research experience in the fields of computational
condensed-matter and atomic, molecular, and optical physics. In addition, the
students will have opportunities to improve their scientific communication
skills through writing papers, publishing them, and presenting their findings in
national meetings. The award also supports the PI's efforts towards integrating
his research with undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education on
developing numerical methods for the simulation of quantum materials. Probing
dynamical properties of correlated materials, for example, how they respond to
an alternating electric field, has always been challenging for theory. Our most
powerful and commonly used numerical methods for lattice fermions, such as
quantum-Monte-Carlo-based algorithms, are also not designed to deal with time-
dependent correlations as efficiently and reliably as their static counterparts.
The goal of this project is to expand the applicability and performance of the
state-of-the-art numerical linked-cluster expansions to study spin- and charge-
transport properties, spectral functions, and other dynamical properties through
real-time correlation functions. The latter will be calculated for a set of
widely-used quantum lattice models for strongly-correlated electronic systems,
namely, the Fermi-Hubbard, t-J, and Heisenberg models in one and two spatial
dimensions. The method works directly in the thermodynamic limit and will be
utilized to obtain results at finite temperatures, useful for characterizing
systems in experiments with ultracold fermionic atoms on optical lattices. The
PI and his team plan to employ other techniques, such as the time-dependent
density-matrix renormalization group and determinant quantum Monte Carlo, for
benchmarking and cross-validation, and for building consensus among results from
different numerical methods. The results will shed light on some of the most
challenging questions surrounding the dynamics and transport properties of
strongly-correlated materials and the extent to which we can understand them
through quantum simulations of model Hamiltonians. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities will provide several undergraduate students from the diverse
population of San Jose State University with hands-on research experience in the
fields of computational condensed-matter and atomic, molecular, and optical
physics. In addition, the students will have opportunities to improve their
scientific communication skills through writing papers, publishing them, and
presenting their findings in national meetings. The award also supports the PI's
efforts towards integrating his research with undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.