* 1918027
* FMitF: Track II: Programming by Demonstration for the Browser with Applications in Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Rastislav Bodik, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2020
* USD 98,929.00

Future work will revolve around consuming data, deriving insights, and making
data-informed decisions. While data analysis and machine learning can be
significantly automated, an irreducibly human part of the data-driven future is
data collection and curation. Currently, data collection is done either by
experienced engineers or through manual data collection. Programming by
Demonstration (PBD) has recently allowed non-experts to author automatic web-
scraping programs, which collect data efficiently and reliably. This project
will extend a previously developed system for browser-based PBD and evaluate it
in a large-scale deployment. The scale will be large both in terms of users and
the size of data that will be collected.

The system development part of the project will focus on two parts: (1)
Implementing and deploying algorithms for large-scale deployment of the Helena
browser-based PBD system. This work will include parallelization of synthesized
web-scraper programs, making programs robust to failures of web sites and the
network, and adapting the parallel execution to optimize for either the data
collection rate or the cost of datacenter time. (2) Developing a next-generation
user interface that will include support for debugging the synthesized programs.
The target audience of these tools will be teams of data-driven social
scientists with whom the PI team has had long-term collaborations. These teams
have been using the Helena PBD system for collecting datasets that improve
strategies of non-profits and influence government policies. The evaluation will
investigate both the system performance and the usability of the novel and
critical parts of the Helena ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.