* 1918104
* Workshop on Human Sentence Processing March 2020: Amherst, MA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Adrian Staub, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2022
* USD 40,567.00

Human beings use language on a day to day basis, producing and interpreting
novel utterances without much apparent difficulty. The interdisciplinary field
of psycholinguistics seeks to uncover and understand the cognitive mechanisms
that underlie the fundamental, complex, yet seemingly effortless processes of
language comprehension and production. With language technology now more than
ever forming a central part of our daily lives, the difficulty of reproducing
this type of easy, fluid language processing in computer software is evident.
The need to understand how human minds and brains successfully deploy language
in everyday situations thus remains as pressing as ever. Psycholinguistics
approach this question by bringing together insights from Linguistics,
Psychology, and Computer Science. This proposal highlights this highly
productive interdisciplinary link, and showcases recent breakthroughs that have
stemmed from it. The funding will support a special session workshop to be held
in concert with the 33rd Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence processing
(March 19-21, 2020), hosted at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. This
special session will highlight various areas of language use, from sound right
up to the neural computation of meaning, where young researchers in this area
have created new, lasting insight into the core research questions of
psycholinguistics. By highlighting recent insights this approach has brought, as
well as providing a blueprint for this type of interdisciplinary work, the
special session will also provide a valuable training opportunity for younger
researchers who are developing their own interdisciplinary research programs in
this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed special conference session is
titled The Role of Linguistic Theory in Psycholinguistics, and it will be held
together with the 33rd Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence Processing. For
decades, the CUNY conference has been the most prominent psycholinguistics
conference in North America, attracting approximately 400 attendees (faulty,
postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students) from the USA, Canada, Europe,
East Asia and Latin America. It is a three-day conference that typically
receives well over 300 abstracts, from which roughly 35 oral and 150 poster
presentations are selected. Importantly for the special session theme, this
conference has been highly successful as an interdisciplinary forum, and has
trained a generation's worth of psycholinguists at the intersection of
linguistics and psychology. The special session is designed to deepen this
interdisciplinary core of the CUNY conference that gave it its unique character,
by highlighting the numerous successes in this field that have been achieved
through the cooperation between linguists and psychologists in the study of
human language comprehension and production. The special session will showcase
recent interdisciplinary breakthroughs that have resulted from this approach, in
areas ranging from prosodic signaling of linguistic and extralinguistic
information, to cross-linguistic variation in language processing strategies, to
the neural processes that support the computation of linguistic meaning.
Workshop participants will explore the deep connections between linguistic
theory in a range of different domains--prosody, syntax, and semantics--and
psycholinguistic research into the cognitive and neural mechanisms that underlie
language use in everyday situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.