* 1918227
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Models of Body Image and the Development of Mental Illness
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2021
* William Dressler, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 15,756.00

Body image disturbance and disordered eating behaviors accompany the deadliest
of all mental illnesses and are increasingly prevalent. However, relative to
women, researchers know comparatively little about how men experience eating
disorders and body image. Scientific confidence in the validity of findings
related to eating disorders also requires more representative samples that
explore what variability there is in responses to these illnesses. In addition
to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in
the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project
would enhance scientific understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to
organizations invested in discovering more effective methods for communicating
science to the public. The findings of this research will be disseminated in
such a way to aid researchers, clinicians, educators, and policymakers develop
better policies and programs that anticipate and mitigate the effects of such
cultural body attitudes on and mental health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lawrence
Monocello, under the supervision of Dr. William Dressler of the University of
Alabama, will explore cultural models of body image and the structural
influences that they have on development of mental illness. Responding to
uncertain and shifting economic environments, rapidly globalizing media, and
changing gender norms, cultural ideas about men's bodies and body image in the
United States increasingly focus on aesthetic presentation over physical prowess
(i.e., valuing the body as an object to be looked at rather than a tool for
athletics, labor, or protection). This kind of body attitude that significantly
increases vulnerability to eating disorders. By contrast, this research studies
a population of men already mired in a cultural system that venerates an
aesthetic male body image. This research will be conducted in Seoul, South Korea
which is the economic, educational, and cultural capital, hosting its most
successful companies, most celebrated universities, and major entertainment
conglomerates. Researchers will focus on how men, ages 18-30, conceptualize male
body ideals, attempt to enact them in their own bodies, and make meaning of
their own individual body image experience within the larger cultural
environment. They will develop a measure of body dissatisfaction that considers
the culturally particular body ideals endorsed by that culture. Using
demographic variables alongside measures of individuals' knowledge of male body
ideals, concordance with body ideals, and body dissatisfaction, followed by
long-term, in-depth interviews, the researchers will explore how each of these
factors affects the development of disordered eating behaviors in men. Findings
from this research will provide insight into how men living in cultural
environments that endorse male aesthetics over brawn navigate pressures to
conform to body image standards. These insights can then be used to develop
interventions that will combat deadly body image-related
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.