* 1918322
* A Mixed Up Mantle Beneath Ocean Islands?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* James Day, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2024
* USD 244,097.00

Basaltic volcanic islands, which occur in all major ocean basins, do not fit
particularly well in plate tectonic theory. The lavas from these islands have
distinct compositions from basaltic rocks erupted at mid-ocean ridges,
indicating the presence of subducted oceanic crust in some of their mantle
sources. Current models for the generation of ocean island basalts favor either
partial melting of mantle sources with two different rock-types, pyroxenite and
peridotite, or sources with only "fertile" peridotite that can readily partially
melt. The models are driven by the observation that direct partial melting of
recycled oceanic crust cannot generate basaltic compositions. Both source types
are therefore thought to form by melting and melding of subducted crust with
peridotite in Earth's mantle. How these sources form and melt, in detail, are
quite different, with pyroxenite indicating large-scale mantle heterogeneity. An
accepted means for detecting pyroxenite is through precise measurement of
olivine compositions in basalts. Precious metals such as osmium can also be used
to examine between peridotite versus pyroxenite-dominated melting, and the most
sensitive method for detecting recycled crustal contributions is from long-lived
radiogenic isotopes, like strontium. This work will combine these methods to
test whether pyroxenite exists in oceanic island sources through study of two
locations where significant recycled crust components are known to exist;
Mangaia in the Cook Islands, and the Canary Islands archipelago. New results,
which will be partially generated by undergraduate students engaged in research
and in the Scripps Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF) program, and who
will also help publicly communicate the work, will enhance understanding of the
fundamental process of basaltic melt generation, and enhance understanding of
how ocean islands fit in plate tectonic theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will examine the role of pyroxenite-peridotite or fertile peridotite
melting in the generation of ocean island basalts (OIB) through examination of
two key OIB localities. The first locality is Mangaia (Cook Islands), where
long-lived radiogenic isotope (Sr-Nd-Os-Pb) variations will be coupled with
olivine compositions to examine a location without a strong pyroxenite melting
signature but that does have a strong recycled crustal signature (HIMU). The
goal of this task is to quantify mantle source composition for an extreme
recycled endmember composition in OIB petrogenesis. The second task is to
evaluate pyroxenite-peridotite contributions to Canary Islands that also have a
HIMU signature. Studies have argued for pyroxenite contributions, but with
different endmember compositions. Here, new high-precision electron microprobe
data will be collected for olivine grains in lavas from the islands to combine
with Sr-Nd-Os-Pb isotope variations and highly siderophile element abundances.
With these data, it will be possible to discriminate between depleted or
enriched pyroxenite sources and to investigate if high pressure-temperature
melting of fertile peridotite might offer an alternative. Research will include
integration of undergraduates and underrepresented minorities who will also be
engaged, along with the PI and graduate student, in outreach events that will
take place in the San Diego region and in the Canary Islands, and through
participation in organized STEM events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.