* 1918217
* PFI-TT: Development of Aerogel Materials for Automotive Pollution Reduction
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mary Carroll, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,971.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is the development
of a sustainable, environmentally-friendly material for reducing pollution from
automobiles. The existing technology used to reduce pollution, a catalytic
converter, contains expensive, rare metals and does not perform well when an
engine starts. An aerogel is a special lightweight material with many features
that make it an attractive addition to a catalytic converter. Aerogel-based
catalytic converters would provide an economically attractive and sustainable
approach to reducing automotive pollution, and thereby have a significant
positive economic and environmental impact on the nation. This project will
develop new aerogels to achieve these goals. In addition, the project will
develop a research/entrepreneurship practicum to engage students (including
those from traditionally underrepresented groups) in developing entrepreneurial
ideas and learning about bringing technology developed through fundamental
research to the marketplace. This new model for the undergraduate curriculum
will provide students with substantial entrepreneurial experience at precisely
the point at which such training could have maximal impact: prior to entering
graduate school or the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will develop and test new aerogel catalysts to be used in the development of a
superior technology for reducing automotive pollution. One of the primary
technical challenges of the current technology, the catalytic converter, is its
inability to minimize or eliminate emissions under cold-start conditions.
Aerogels offer many features (high temperature stability, large surface area,
low mass and tunable chemistry) that make them viable candidates for an
alternative technology and they have been shown to be active in reducing exhaust
pollution. By tuning their chemistry, aerogels can be made catalytically active
and are effective at promoting conversion of exhaust gas pollutants. The
proposed project will address several technical challenges associated with
developing this potentially transformative alternative technology to reduce
cold-start emissions by: (1) developing catalytically active aerogels with
alternate chemistries to improve activation characteristics; (2) demonstrating
the high-temperature survivability of these materials (3) investigating the
potential of the catalytically active aerogels for lowering thermal inertia; (4)
incorporating aerogels into conventional washcoating methods; (5) integrating
aerogels into a prototype catalytic converter; and (6) developing transferable
models of broad-based training and leadership development in innovation and
entrepreneurship for undergraduate STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.