* 1918404
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Lexical Acoustics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Allard Jongman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2023
* USD 9,923.00

This project will document which acoustic properties of the speech signal
English listeners use to communicate by looking at patterns in both their
correct recognition of words, and their confusions between words, when listening
in a noisy environment. The project will enhance understanding of speech
production and perception, particularly regarding how acoustic features are
distributed throughout the words of a language to minimize misperceptions and
therefore facilitate reliable communication. More broadly, this work is relevant
for research on the relation between speech sounds and word knowledge in both
adults and children, contributing to the identification of unique distinctions
between languages that affect second language learners, and ultimately informing
models focusing on various types of hearing impairment in everyday
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two general models of the structure of the
sound system of a language are contrasted. The first model, referred to as the
"inventory model", is the canonical approach that forms the basis for most
phonetic descriptions of sound systems in speech perception. Under the inventory
model, the sound system is structured as a fixed set of contrastive consonants
and vowels, where this set is treated as homogeneous in weight such that all
elements play an equal role in defining the system and determining the relative
importance of individual acoustic cues. The second model, referred to as the
lexicon model, considers the system of contrastive sounds to be critically
distributed over the lexicon, such that the relative weight of different cues
now depends on the number and configuration of words those cues serve to
distinguish. In contrasting these two approaches, two main questions are asked:
(1) how well do the models agree in their estimates of cue weights, and what
accounts for points of agreement and disagreement; and (2) what does each model
entail for the stability of the system in the presence of background noise in
the environment. The inventory model uses a database of controlled productions
of syllables to predict prior-published confusion patterns between sounds, with
cue weights then measured as the relative importance of each cue in the model
predicting listener perception patterns. For the lexicon model, a database of
nearly 27,000 words produced by a single speaker is used to predict listener
word recognition patterns when these words are embedded in noise in a series of
six experiments utilizing different tasks (open, fill-in-the-blank recognition,
and closed choice between two similar-sounding words) and different stimuli
(naturally produced, enhanced, and degraded). The cue weights from these two
model fits are then compared to address the first question. To answer the second
question, simulations of noise added to different cues, and the resulting change
in predicted similarity between sounds (in the inventory case) and words (in the
lexicon case), are used to study the stability and adaptive response of each
system to uncertainty in the acoustic signal. As such, these experiments will be
able to address key claims about the structure and organization of sound systems
in language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.