* 1918143
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The constraints of dual morphological systems on visual word processing in Maltese
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Jonathan Geary, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 07/31/2021
* USD 18,004.00

All languages have strategies for combining independently meaningful linguistic
units, called morphemes, to build words. Most languages, like English, primarily
combine these units by linearly appending them to one another (e.g. re- + write
-&gt; rewrite); such languages are said to have linear morphology. Semitic
languages, like Arabic, are famous for having nonlinear morphology:
discontinuous units which express meaning and grammatical information are
combined non-linearly (e.g. Arabic k-t-b 'writing' + aa-i 'doer, NOUN' -&gt;
kaatib 'author'). Maltese is particularly unusual in its morphological
characteristics: as a Semitic language, Maltese has primarily used non-linear
morphology historically. However, for the past millennium it has been in close
contact with a series of languages that use linear morphology (Sicilian,
Italian, French, and English), and speakers have heavily borrowed words and
adopted linear morphological strategies from these languages. Today, Maltese
comprises a "mixed" language: at least half of all words are borrowed from non-
Semitic languages (and so do not exhibit non-linear morphology), and speakers
use both linear and non-linear word-building strategies extensively. This
project investigates how the presence of distinct morphological systems in
Maltese affects word processing, exploring differences in how Maltese readers
recognize Semitic words vs. non-Semitic borrowings. It explores the impact of
historical language mixing on the processes underlying daily language use, and
so has implications for the study of languages in similar contact situations.
The results of a series of experiments will comprise the data analyzed in the
Co-PI's dissertation. The project will also produce a database of Maltese word
recognition data, the first such database for a language with non-linear
morphology, which other researchers may use to study language
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI, a doctoral student at the University
of Arizona, will conduct a series of psycholinguistic experiments investigating
how the existence of distinct lexicons exhibiting unique morphological
characteristics (native Semitic words vs. non-Semitic borrowings) affects visual
word recognition in Maltese. Previous research has found (1) that Maltese
readers are faster to recognize Semitic words than non-Semitic borrowings and
(2) that, when primed by letter strings consisting of a subset of a word?s
consonants (e.g. frx primes FIREX 'to spread'), they are faster to recognize
Semitic words (for which such strings comprise a morpheme) but not non-Semitic
ones (for which such strings are non-morphemic). The latter finding conflicts
with the "subset priming" effect found in non-Semitic languages, namely that
exposure to such letter strings typically facilitates word recognition (e.g.
'csn' primes CASINO), owing to the role of consonant letters in constraining
lexical candidates, and suggests that language-specific morphological properties
such as Semitic nonconcatenative morphology may further shape the role of
consonant letters in lexical processing. The proposed research includes (1) a
Maltese visual lexical decision megastudy which explores processing differences
between Semitic and non-Semitic words across a wide range of items when
potential confounding factors like orthographic neighborhood density and
morphological structure are controlled for (and which will result in the
publication of a database of Maltese lexical decision responses) (Experiment 1);
and (2) a series of visual masked priming studies which test for subset priming
effects in non-Semitic Maltese words when confounding factors, namely the
morphemic status of the prime, are controlled for (Experiments
2-3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.