* 1918445
* Economic Impact of Investments in R&amp;D and Science and Engineering Workers
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Richard Freeman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 548,099.00

The U.S. economy is a global leader in innovation, and its workforce is highly
mobile. This project investigates the link between innovation and labor
mobility, examining the role of the movement of workers (especially scientists
and engineers) in fostering and diffusing innovation in the economy. The
research addresses how the science and engineering workforce of firms and
establishments affect productivity: In a firm, does mixing together workers with
diverse employment histories help generate new ideas and foster innovation? Does
movement of workers between firms help spread new ideas and transfer technology
across firms in the economy? Answering these questions provides a better
understanding of dynamic, regional agglomeration economies, such as Silicon
Valley, and the mechanisms behind economic growth. This research has
ramifications for policies relating to labor mobility, innovation, and
investment in R&amp;D and science and engineering workers. If the spread of
ideas and technology through worker mobility is important to economic growth,
then the formulation of policies that influence mobility of workers within labor
markets or among regions, states, and countries -- e.g., tax and health
insurance policies, housing and urban policy, immigration policy, intellectual
property rules and enforcement of noncompete covenants in employment -- need to
be sensitive to their effect on economic growth and
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses detailed, economy-wide
employer-employee linked data on workers' employment histories and employer
characteristics, combined with data on firms' R&amp;D, to analyze the diffusion
of technology through the economy. The project produces new estimates of the
private returns to R&amp;D, at the firm and business establishment level. There
is substantial evidence that R&amp;D spillovers between firms are important and
have an impact that is at least of the same order of magnitude as the direct,
private returns to R&amp;D investment. The project develops new evidence on the
sources of R&amp;D spillovers and the magnitudes of spillovers at the firm and
establishment levels. The research addresses two interrelated questions about
R&amp;D spillovers: (i) Are worker flows an important source of knowledge
spillovers between firms? (ii) How do labor mobility-mediated knowledge
spillovers relate to the technology spillovers between firms documented in
previous research? In particular, are labor mobility-mediated knowledge
spillovers the source of technology spillovers, or are they an additional and
separate effect? The project research contributes to the understanding of wage
formation for science and engineering workers, and workers in other occupations
that are exposed to or participate in R&amp;D activities; and expands
understanding of how scientific and technological advances stimulate economic
activity, and how investments in R&amp;D and in workers propagate through the
economy. The research approach is especially promising because of its use of
rich and comprehensive microdata at economy-wide scale. The research contributes
to NSF/Census R&amp;D survey data collection and utility, by developing machine
learning methods for identifying smaller R&amp;D-performing firms, and
allocating firms' R&amp;D investments to the relevant establishments of the
firm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.