* 1918983
* Collaborative Research: RUI--Lake Breeze Influence on Ozone Transport as Captured by an Unmanned Aircraft System
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Joseph Hupy, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 139,467.00

The research project seeks new understanding of the exposure to air pollutants
across large areas of land and water near Lake Michigan by taking measurements
of meteorological variables and ozone near the lake with an unmanned aerial
system (UAS) at altitudes near the surface up to 400 feet. Communities at the
shorelines of Lake Michigan have been negatively impacted by poor air quality
for decades. The main pollutant of concern is ozone formed from atmospheric
chemical reactions promoted by airborne emissions from urban activities, ample
sunlight, and the smooth stable atmosphere. Lake Michigan generates its own
local meteorology. When the warm air from the surrounding land flows over the
relatively cold water, the air flow can transport urban emissions over the lake
for a long distance with high pollutant concentration. Meanwhile the urban
emission can be transported upward over the heated land surface, forming large
spatial variations of ozone concentration. Consequently, air movements with
different pollutant concentrations and chemical reactions can impact air quality
in the area surrounding the lake. The field measurement will provide airborne
air-quality measurements beyond the traditional measurement at fixed ground
monitoring stations and airborne measurements with manned aircraft at higher
altitudes from previous field campaigns. These measurements are ideal for
improving air quality forecast models in the Great Lakes region for capturing
near-surface features. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UAS involved in this study will
be a C-Astral Bramor fixed-wing unmanned aerial system with a meteorological
sensor package on board. The specific objectives of flying the UAS are to a)
characterize lake-breeze characteristics of near shore circulation onset and
vertical variations along the shoreline of Lake Michigan, b) capture the
development or movement of convergence zones/fine scale circulations within a
lake-breeze frontal region from offshore to onshore over time, and c) monitor
ozone gradients, characteristics of chemical circulation patterns within marine-
influenced inversions at the shoreline over time at low altitudes. The use of
the UAS to fly pre-programed data collection missions would allow scientists to
elucidate pollutant transport in the region of lake-breeze circulation for
understanding connections between small scale circulations with broader air
quality repercussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.