* 1918064
* Nasal Segments and Nasal Harmony: Field Phonetics and Typology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Lev Michael, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 435,783.00

Almost all human languages have nasal speech sounds, such as the [m] and [n]
consonants of English, and the nasal vowels of French, making the study of the
phonetic and phonological properties of these sounds central to our scientific
understanding of the sound systems of human languages. Detailed instrumental
studies of nasal phenomena have been limited primarily to languages that are
easily accessible to linguists based in laboratories, which has resulted in a
focus on languages with relatively homogenous nasality systems. However, a
diverse and comparatively complex set of nasal phenomena, such as complex
consonants like [bmb] and [nt], or phonological processes such as nasal harmony,
in which the nasality associated with one speech sound can spread across an
entire word, have been described for languages spoken in communities more
distant from phonetics laboratories. Several aspects of nasality in these
languages pose challenges for current scientific theories regarding the
cognitive/phonological representations of these sounds, which have been
developed primarily on the basis of a geographically biased sample of languages.
By studying nasal speech sounds in indigenous languages of South America, which
exhibit an unusually rich and diverse set of nasal phenomena, this project
promises to yield important theoretical insights into the relationship between
the gradient nature of production of speech sounds and their discrete
cognitive/phonological categorization, one of the central issues in the
scientific investigation of human speech sound systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-researcher project takes advantage of recent
technological advances that have made equipment for studying nasal phenomena
more portable. Researchers in this project will be deployed with identical sets
of sophisticated phonetic equipment and field methodologies to work with
speakers of ten languages from six South American language families known for
their complex nasal phenomena. This research will both yield insights into the
nasal systems of these languages and contribute to the documentation of these
languages, many of which are highly endangered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.