* 1918490
* The Role of Individual and Social Networks in the Formation and Change of Beliefs
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Mirta Galesic, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,920.00

One unique feature of human thought is the development and maintenance of
beliefs. People carry with them an enduring sense of what is true or false, and
whether or not things exist in the world. Beliefs are central to what it means
to be human. The nature of human beliefs -- their structure, function, and
change -- has been the subject of study across many fields of science over many
decades. Past theories and research have approached the subject in two distinct
ways. One, most common in the behavioral and cognitive sciences, is to
understand how a single person's network of beliefs relate to one another.
Another, most common in the social and economic sciences, is to understand how
one person's beliefs are related to the beliefs of other people in one's social
network. All of these efforts to understand the nature of beliefs are motivated
by important broader impacts. For example, public health campaigns aim to change
beliefs, and ultimately behaviors, in service of the health and welfare of
society. The aim of this project is to develop a new theoretical framework that
integrates understanding of belief networks at both the individual and social
levels. One expected outcome is a better understanding of why some beliefs are
resistant to change while others are not.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
adopts a network perspective to study why some beliefs are more resistant to
change than others. Drawing from psychology, sociology, economics, computer
science, and statistical physics, a unifying theoretical framework is developed.
The premise of the model is that network dynamics of beliefs follow similar
principles at the individual and at the social level -- that people are
motivated to reduce dissonance (energy) both in their own belief network and in
their social networks. The model provides novel predictions about how networks
of beliefs on individual and social levels jointly affect belief's resistance to
change. The model is tested in a longitudinal survey conducted in four waves,
allowing an assessment of belief dynamics over time. An experimental
manipulation is introduced before the third wave, allowing for the assessment of
potential interventions. The data analyses rely on advanced statistical models
including statistical physics modeling, network modeling, structural equation
modeling, and multilevel modeling. The project will advance basic knowledge by
integrating previously disconnected literatures on individual and social beliefs
in a single theoretical framework, and developing and testing qualitative and
quantitative predictions about the joint effects of individual and social
network structures on belief change over time. The research will contribute to a
foundation of knowledge that informs the design of educational interventions
aimed at increasing scientific knowledge in the general
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.