* 1918350
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reproductive Subjectivity in the Context of Displacement
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Thomas Csordas, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 15,070.00

The universal human process of reproduction is imbued with diverse religious,
social, and cultural meanings. The interactions, negotiations, and contestations
that surround reproductive decisions are a rich source of ethnographic data that
speaks to the most intimate aspects of experience, not only in terms of gender
roles, marriage, family, and kinship but also in relation to foundational
notions of self, personhood, and meaning. Studying reproduction thus reveals
many of the fundamental cultural models and interpretive frameworks that
individuals use to define what constitutes a good life and strive towards it.
Social scientific research on war and displacement has shown how these
experiences can transform the cultural frameworks through which individuals
interpret and remake their worlds, form novel subjectivities, or cultivate new
desires. This project, which trains a graduate student in scientific methods of
rigorous data collection and analysis, explores a specific intersection of two
domains of human experience: the nearly universal experience of reproduction and
the increasingly widespread condition of
displacement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morgen Chalmiers, under the supervision of
Dr. Thomas Csordas of the University of California at San Diego, will explore
what factors influence reproductive practices in the context of displacement. It
has been well documented that displacement can influence the reproductive
experience by disrupting the social and familial networks through which
reproductive life is facilitated and made meaningful. But other research has
shown that displacement can have a paradoxical effect on fertility patterns, as
precarity creates a desire to rebuild kinship and social networks. In seeking to
understand in what ways precarity may shape subjectivity, this project examines
the context of Syrian displacement, where since the civil war began in 2011,
five and a half million Syrians have fled their home country and are now living
as refugees. This project explores the intersubjective processes through which
Syrian women reconcile histories of trauma and violence with the human
imperative to create new meaning in disrupted lives. Over 12 months of
ethnographic and person-centered, qualitative interviews fieldwork with
displaced Syrian families living in Jordan, this project will ask how
reproductive desires and practices are reshaped by the context of displacement.
Research at such a junction reveals the creative ways in which individuals cope
with the challenges of displacement despite loss and
adversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.