* 1918448
* Workshop Proposal: Analog Modeling of Tectonic Processes 2019: Memphis, TN - November 2019
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Eunseo Choi, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,983.00

This is a workshop award which will gather leading gescientists who use
numerical models, which are computer simulation, and analog models, which are
physical representations of Earth processes. The workshop will allow researchers
from these two areas to work on similar problems and discuss the strengths and
weaknesses of both appraoches as well as to share their best practices and
compare their approaches to modeling. This is expected to encourage the modeling
community to gain familiarity with different approaches and to foster new
collaborations. The broader impacts of the workshop include support for students
and early career researchers, especially those from underrepresented groups in
science to participate. In addition, these models are valuable in the classroom
setting, and the workshop will incorporate and share curriculum materials.

Both analog and numerical modeling are valuable methods of understanding
tectonic processes. This workshop will bring together the analog and numerical
research communities to provide a forum for discussion and deliberately and
thoughtfully provoke discussion of similar scenarios modeled by both analog and
numerical techniques. They will run three experiments to benchmark modeling
capabilities in different tectonic settings. The gathered research groups will
model the same scenario and discuss boundary conditions and the strengths and
weaknesses of each approach. The workshop will provide an opportunity for
researchers to share some of their best practices and compare and contrast
different approaches. The workshop will take place November 12-14, 2019. This
project is supported by the Tectonics program and Earthcube programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.