* 1918282
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Historical Memory, Temporality, and Cultural Identity
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2021
* Charles Briggs, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 24,501.00

The management of social differences within and across human collectives has
posed unique challenges for policymaking and civic participation. Socially
constructed ideas about difference continue to exert a powerful influence on how
individuals interact. However, although social scientists and historians have
connected notions of alterity to events and processes in the historical past,
few empirical studies have paid attention to how everyday actors themselves
participate in making links between identity and history over the course of
daily social life. Accordingly, this research project asks how the ordinary
experience of temporal change or continuity shape ideas about cultural and
national identity, and how these shifting notions of individual and collective
identity in turn impact the cultural significance of historical narratives. This
project, which trains a student in methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, conducts a case study of informal economic site.

Doctoral student Jesus Gutierrez, supervised by Charles Briggs at the University
of California-Berkeley, will explore how notions of social difference are
mediated by conceptions of temporality, memory, and history. The research will
take place in southern Brazil, an ideal site as this is a context where ideas
about race have been pronounced in informing public attitudes toward national
belonging and local history. As a case study, the research will be focused
around a network of artists who work across a variety of popular and outsider
art forms in the city of Porto Alegre. Through research methods that include
participant observation, media and document analysis, network mapping, and
ethnographic interviews, the researcher will examine both the significance of
race and the emergence of historical elements in each artist's craft and social
life. Through extended ethnographic engagement with proximate audiences,
customers and government officials, he will determine how the circulation of
artworks and performances participates in shifting perceptions of racial and
national identity that reach far beyond the individual and the local. Findings
from this research will advance scientific and popular understandings of the
relationship between history, race and national identity, and it will contribute
to the production of more precise theories about the historical and socio-
political significance of folk art forms around the globe.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.