* 1918123
* FMitF: Collaborative Research: Track I: Predictive Online Safety Analysis from Multi-hop State Estimates for High-autonomy on Highways
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Necmiye Ozay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 260,000.00

The goal of this project is to bring safety assurance to autonomous and semi-
autonomous vehicles. The approach is to lengthen the time that a car can predict
its driving path, and share this path with surrounding vehicles. With these
expanded predictions, it is possible to estimate the current and future
behaviors of vehicles, according to their design models. Currently, online
formal safety analysis can promise guarantees and oversight, but overly
conservative approaches can lead to bad driving. This is in contrast to the use
of test-driving data and machine learning to build driving models, which are
difficult to analyze. The project aims to discover the right balance by
computationally (1) estimating the current state of the autonomous vehicle and
its multi-hop environment from sensor data, (2) predicting vehicle trajectories
4-6 seconds into future, and (3) checking the models and predictions---all in
milliseconds. A new scientific workshop will be created to explore similar
issues in autonomy, in addition to a new undergraduate course on
autonomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to deliver (1) new sensor-fusion
algorithms over Vehicle-to-Infrastructure/Vehicle (V2X) systems, (2) a first-of-
its-kind open, machine-interpretable library of agent models for driving
predictions, (3) algorithms for model identification, and (4) algorithms for
checking safety online. These modules will be integrated in an end-to-end system
--- OmniVisor --- and evaluated in realistic accident-prone scenarios with real
vehicles in University of Michigan's Mcity facility. The research will build
connections across the disciplines of formal methods, hybrid dynamical systems,
estimation and detection theory, and mobile networking. If successful OmniVisor
will provide a scientific basis for obtaining safety assurances for vehicles in
mixed-autonomy scenarios and experimentally demonstrate the approach on the road
with real vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.