* 1918068
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic cues and speaker goals in the question/answer exchange
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Kristen Syrett, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 12,332.00

This project will analyze the linguistic and extra-linguistic factors that
influence the interpretations of questions and the answers to them. Linguistic
factors include surface-level cues such as a speaker's choice of lexical items
and the syntactic structure of the question. Extra-linguistic factors include
the discourse context and the speaker's goals in asking the question. The
project will address theoretical proposals regarding the division of labor
between syntax, semantics, and pragmatics in question-answer dynamics, and will
provide empirical data that bear on debates concerning what licenses certain
kinds of answers to certain kinds of questions. The proposed research seeks to
integrate corpus, psycholinguistic and developmental methods, and computational
modeling in a novel way. The project will provide valuable opportunities for
undergraduate students, from experimental design and running to the presentation
of results in scholarly venues. The researchers will disseminate these results
through academic conferences and publications, and engage in community outreach
events. Both the existing connections between the researchers and colleagues in
cognitive and computer science, and the proposed implementation of these results
in a computational model ensure that the results of the research will be
applicable to work in dialogue research, concerning the design of intelligent
conversational agents for AI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While previous work on
questions has focused primarily on the nature of exhaustive answers, what
licenses non-exhaustive (or mention-some) answers, which are frequent in natural
dialogue, has gone under-investigated. Thus there is a need to systematically
investigate the factors that determine whether and when a question is
interpreted non-exhaustively. This research uses a three-pronged
interdisciplinary approach, combining tools from experimental linguistics,
developmental psychology, and computer science, gathering empirical data from
natural language corpora and psycholinguistic and developmental studies, and
capturing the findings in a computational model. Corpus data inform us about
what speakers actually do. Adult psycholinguistic studies inform us about what
is allowed and assessed as likely or unlikely. Developmental studies inform us
about the trade-off between semantics and pragmatics, and the role of the input.
A computational model aims to capture these data in a probabilistic framework.
Together, these interconnected research approaches represent an integrated and
holistic study of the linguistic and cognitive underpinnings of questions and
questioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.