* 1918429
* FMitF: Track I: Injecting Formal Methods into Internet Standardization
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Lenore Zuck, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,725.00

The goal of the project is to develop a methodology, supported by tools, that
uses formal methods to gain clarity into the standards of network protocols and
test the conformance of implementations to these standards. The work will be
demonstrated on QUIC, a new complex protocol that is currently carrying about
10% of the internet traffic and is likely to carry much more of it in the near
future. The standardization of QUIC is ongoing under the IETF. The software and
the experimental results developed under this project will be stored in GitHub.
The methodology itself will be widely disseminated by the usual means
(publications, talks, etc.). The experimental results will be shared with the
developers of QUIC implementations and the IETF. The project will be used to
train graduate students who will be exposed to state-of-the-art techniques as
well as collaboration between academia (UIC) and industry (Microsoft). The
material of the course will be integrated in UIC classes. UIC is a Minority
Serving Institution (MSI), Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander-
Serving Institution (AANAPISI) and an Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network protocol standards are described by RFCs:
English-language documents that provide extensive guidance for those
implementing the protocol, but are nonetheless ambiguous and broadly open to
interpretation. The primary mechanism for resolving these ambiguities and
validating the protocol design is to produce multiple independent
implementations, and to test these implementations for interoperability which
often renders the RFCs obsolete and the implementations the de-facto standard.
The goal of the project is to inject formal methods into the standardization
process. The approach is based on a new methodology for specification-based
testing that allows to rigorously specify and test complex Internet protocols. A
primary objective is to demonstrate the practical value of formal specifications
in the standardization process, and in particular to show that formal
specifications have practical value beyond simply expressing the standard in a
more rigorous way. This has a good chance to gain entry for formal methods in
the Internet protocol development process, and thus ultimately to improve the
reliability, security and maintainability of Internet services. The project will
develop new methodologies, accompanied by tools, to apply lightweight formal
methods in the Internet protocol domain. The work will also develop a formal
specification of an emerging Internet standard of significant importance --- the
QUIC secure transport protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.