* 1918838
* PFI-TT: Development of Scalable Lightweight Aggregate Manufacturing from Waste Coal Combustion Ash
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Yaghoob Farnam, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to reuse the unused or waste products
of burning coal, known as coal combustion ash (CCA); this technology will
convert CCA into a type of concrete called lightweight aggregate (LWA). Every
year in the United States, nearly 120 million tons of CCA are generated, of
which only 40% is reused; few recycling avenues exist for the remaining CCA,
affecting the environment and human health. Simultaneously, increased demand for
LWA has impacted costs in the concrete and geotechnical industries. Converting
CCA to value-added LWA addresses not only the CCA risk, but both these factors
at once by developing a product with improved physical performance at lower
costs. CCA is abundantly available in the United States, and LWA can be produced
near its markets. This project will also encourage students, including
underrepresented minorities and females, in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will formulate, develop and validate
an innovative scalable thermodynamic-based manufacturing technology that can be
used to produce sustainable LWA from unused/waste CCA. Using thermodynamic
principles and phase equilibria, sintering process of CCA will be tuned to
partially melt the oxide compounds of CCA and subsequently combust emitted gas
during sintering to create porous CCA-based LWA materials. The developed
technology will enable identification of optimized raw material blending,
appropriate fluxing agent selections, and the sintering process despite CCA
heterogeneity, chemical composition and diversity, allowing conversion of
significant amount of unused and waste CCA into value-added CCA-based LWA. This
project will develop the technology by (1) looking at the chemical interactions
between various types and dosages of CCA and fluxing agents to produce LWA, (2)
identifying the thermodynamics of phase equilibria as a function of temperature
during sintering as dosage and compositions of CCA vary and (3) preparing a
robust technology guideline calibrated with experimental laboratory pilot-scale
works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.