* 1918156
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Plant-Based Biotechnologies and Petrochemical Security
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andrea Ballestero, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,089.00

What would plastic bottles, synthetic rubber, and even toothpaste be made of if
we stopped using petroleum? With mounting concern over the availability and
security of fossil fuels, much scholarly and public attention has been paid to
finding alternatives for petroleum-based fuels. However, less attention has been
paid to finding alternatives for petroleum-based chemicals, used to manufacture
of a vast array of everyday items. In the past decade, some scientists have
worked to develop an alternative to petroleum-based chemicals: the same
chemicals made from sugarcane. This is one example of a category of
biotechnologies aiming to utilize crops to manufacture a wide range of products
not imaginable even only a decade ago. Nonetheless, questions remain as to
whether these plant-based alternative materials are more socially,
environmentally, and economically viable than the petroleum-based originals. As
the United States and other countries continue to invest millions of dollars
into this kind of biotechnology and alternative manufacturing research, it will
be critical to understand what social, historical, and economic factors would
make plant-based petroleum replacements feasible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kathleen
Ulrich, under the supervision of Dr. Andrea Ballestero of Rice University, will
explore the social, economic, and historical dimensions of post-petroleum
biotechnological development. Research will be conducted in Sao Paulo, Brazil,
where in the past decade an unprecedented amount of scientific funding has been
allocated to sugarcane-based product development. This is also a particularly
notable research setting because Brazil is the top producer of sugarcane in the
world, and the country was originally built upon the slave-based sugarcane
industry starting in the sixteenth century. The investigators will examine how
sugarcane scientists, state funding agents, and sugar factory workers in Sao
Paulo conceive, develop, and implement sugarcane as a petroleum replacement. The
investigators will assess to what extent these actors understand the historical,
social, economic, and environmental characteristics of sugarcane in Brazil as
positively or negatively impacting the feasibility of making sugarcane-based
petroleum replacements. The investigators will carry out participant
observation, interviews, focus groups, and surveys among the sugarcane
scientists, funding agents, and sugar factory workers. This research will
increase understandings of how biotechnology, manufacturing, and agriculture are
coming together in new ways in the twenty-first century. Findings from this
research will be crucial to formulating socially, economically, and
environmentally responsible policies around plant-based manufacturing practices
in the future. Furthermore, this research will contribute to efforts to improve
cross-disciplinary collaborations between social scientists and biologists with
the aim of better understanding and communicating to the public the social
implications of new biotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.