* 1918987
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Intelligent Communication Fabrics to Facilitate Extreme Scale Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Anthony Skjellum, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 482,097.00

Advances in High-Performance Computing over the last several decades have
enabled various important applications throughout science and engineering.
Semiconductor technology increasingly faces fundamental physical limits. New
approaches to hardware/software co-design are now achieving higher performance
at extreme scales. This project will explore two new approaches: configurability
and integration. Configurability enables hardware to map better to applications.
Integration enables system components that have generally been single function
to gain additional functionality. An example is a network for the transport of
data. Such a network might also operate on that data as it is being transported.
Integration enables compute everywhere in the architecture and network.
Configurability and integration will lead to much more efficient use of
computing resources. Such resources include high-performance computers. Another
focus of this project will be in the use of Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs). FPGAs are a widely used type of integrated circuit. In FPGAs the
hardware can be configured to match the application. FPGAs will allow the
deployment of the research products into production systems. They will also
allow evaluation of changes in system design. This work will advance extreme-
scale computing applications. Such applications include medicine and new drug
discovery. This project will also include training of graduate and undergraduate
students. It will focus on students belonging to groups underrepresented in STEM
disciplines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central theme of this project is that
emerging centrality of hardware configurability and integration means that at
least two old systems abstractions must be broken. First, this project will
demonstrate that computation and communication should no longer comprise
separate silos. Second, it will demonstrate that applications should no longer
be mapped to fixed hardware. In their place, new hardware-software abstractions
must necessarily be built around the idea of the application-centric system.
This project will identify new computing modes -- computation
distribution/offload and configurable hardware -- that will be application aware
with tight mapping of applications to computer systems. This improved mapping,
in turn, will require deploying a number of mechanisms, starting with improved
compilers and high-quality application libraries but extending to lighter-weight
yet intelligent middleware (for instance, improved Message Passing Interface
middleware), automated application modification, dynamic autotuning, and machine
learning assisting in all of these components. The project will consider all of
these concerns in due course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.