* 1918225
* FMitF: Track I: NLP-Assisted Formal Verification of the NFS Distributed File System Protocol
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Scott Smolka, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 764,300.00

The Internet's success and growth is owed to standards that ensure computers can
talk to each other. These standards are human-written, technical design
documents that take years to develop and implement. However, such design
documents are often imprecise, and their software implementations do not always
conform to their designs. This project aims to speed up the process of designing
and implementing Internet standards using: (1) Artificial Intelligence (AI)
techniques to automatically process design documents so that flaws in them can
be detected and reported quickly, and (2) runtime analysis of software
implementations to detect deviations from their respective designs. The project
artifacts - software, source code, verified and fixed RFCs, data sets, traces,
and results will all be embodied in a system we call "NFS Validator". Results
will be disseminated using peer-reviewed publications and arxiv.org. All
artifacts will be made public through the project Website:
https://www.filesystems.org/nfsval, and will be available for at least ten years
following the end of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: (1)
conduct a major case study involving the complex, distributed Network File
System version 4 (NFSv4) protocol; (2) develop a theoretical model of NFSv4's
expected behavior using Natural Language Processing (NLP) AI techniques; (3)
analyze the model to detect inconsistencies; (4) check the model against another
reference implementation that is known to be correct; and (5) monitor an actual
running NFS implementation for compliance with our verified theoretical model.
The NFS is a popular and growing protocol that enables users to access their
files and data across any network. The NFSv4 design documents are fairly complex
and over 500 pages long. This project will (1) help accelerate NFSv4's ongoing
design, development, and adoption; (2) advance the state of the art in NLP/AI
techniques to understand human-written design documents; (3) advance the state
of the art in formally modeling and verifying such designs; (4) train and
educate graduate and undergraduate students; and (5) produce results that are
applicable to many other Internet standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.