* 1918989
* SPX: Automatically Parallelizing Approximate Data Analysis with Mergeable Summaries
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Justin Thaler, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 614,203.00

When analyzing massive data sets, generating exact answers to even very basic
queries can require huge amounts of compute resources (memory, compute time, and
network communication). Fortunately, in many settings, approximate answers
suffice. Nevertheless, designing algorithms that operate efficiently at large
scale remains a significant challenge. This project studies highly efficient,
highly accurate, and highly scalable algorithms for approximate query
processing. The key ingredient enabling such efficiency is streaming algorithms
that generate mergeable summaries. Streaming algorithms in general compute a
small summary of the data, from which it is possible to derive accurate (though
approximate) answers to queries. When these summaries are also mergeable, one
can process many data sets independently and combine their summaries to answer
queries about their combinations (union, intersection, etc). Mergeable summaries
enable massive data sets to be processed in highly scalable ways by distributing
the data across machines, summarizing each partition, and seamlessly combining
the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop mergeable summaries
for a variety of fundamental problems for which no practical mergeable summary
is known (such as entropy approximation and unsupervised-learning tasks
including k-means clustering and logistic regression). For other commonly-used
problems, such as estimating the number of distinct items in a data stream, the
project will substantially improve upon known, already practical, mergeable
summaries. This project is tightly entwined with the development of the Data
Sketches library, an open-source library of production-quality implementations
of mergeable summaries that is widely used in industry and
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.