* 1918541
* Shortening, extension, and drainage reorganization in the Andean fold-thrust belt and broken foreland basin of northern Patagonia, Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Brian Horton, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 440,314.00

The Andes Mountains of South America are a key location for mountain building
along convergent plate tectonic boundaries where an overriding continental plate
is deformed above a subducting oceanic plate. Although Andean mountain building
is generally associated with regional collision and shortening of continental
crust, recent studies point to important examples of extensional deformation.
This research project will address the long-term history of crustal deformation
in the northern Patagonian Andes, where alternations between shortening and
extension appear to have influenced the generation of topography, erosion, river
drainage systems, and sedimentary basins. The project will utilize a variety of
analytical techniques, including sedimentary basin analysis, geochronology, and
structural geology to determine the age, duration, and depositional processes
within the Patagonian basin of southern Argentina. The project will help define
processes within the Earth's crust and at the surface that influence the
formation of sedimentary basins produced by both shortening and extensional
deformation. The study will have implications for understanding the fundamental
geologic processes and associated geohazards along ocean-continent plate
boundaries, offering societal benefits in the form of information that will
enable improved risk assessment and infrastructure planning. In addition, the
project will initiate international scientific collaborations between academic
and industry scientists and support international research and training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will address an emerging debate for the Andes regarding the role of
extension during what has been long regarded as uninterrupted shortening,
thickening, and uplift along an extensive subduction margin. An orogenic system
that fluctuates between compressional and extensional stresses may govern the
structural and stratigraphic evolution of Andean-type convergent systems, due to
both margin-wide changes in mechanical coupling driven by plate kinematics
(rollback/retreating vs. advancing margin) and more-regional changes in
subducting-slab dynamics (slab shallowing vs. steepening). This project will
focus on an understudied segment of the Andean fold-thrust belt and broken
foreland region of northern Patagonia, which contains evidence of not only
Cretaceous-Cenozoic shortening and foreland basin evolution but also extensional
basin development and drainage reorganization during irregular advance and
retreat of the Andean magmatic arc. The research team will conduct a
sedimentary/structural basin analysis and restoration of a regional east-west
transect in southern Argentina, that will include an enhanced depositional and
deformational record, dating of basin-bounding structures, new U-Pb
chronostratigraphic and provenance constraints, and revised subsidence and
magmatic histories. The results will enable integration across several basin
systems in order to identify the patterns of basin genesis, unconformity
development, sediment routing, and drainage reorganization during contrasting
phases of shortening, extension, and stasis in the southern
Andes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.