* 1918554
* Historical Housing Price Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Allison Shertzer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 607,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Housing is central in an economy. It is both a key
service, the largest single component of consumer expenditure in the United
States, and an important asset, with real estate the largest component on
household balance sheets. Despite the centrality of housing to the American
economy, existing long-run price series on housing markets are very limited,
particularly prior to the 1970s. Sale and rental prices of housing provide a
very useful reference point for quantifying economic and social progress. This
project collects housing price data from newly digitized newspaper archives for
urban areas in the Unites States over the period 1880-1990. Using this data, the
project examines unresolved questions related to the evolution of real estate
values and the standard of living in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining state-of-the-art methods in housing price
index construction with newly digitized newspaper archives, the project will
make important improvements over existing housing price series. Three samples
will be created over the course of the project: one quarterly sample covering
large cities for the period 1880-1990, one annual sample covering small cities
for the period 1880-1980, and a set of census year samples for the period
1880-1930. Available data on housing attributes will also be collected, and
observations will be geocoded to a fine level of spatial resolution. The project
will use the housing price series to revisit the consumer price index over the
twentieth century and to study how housing prices evolved within cities during
crucial urbanization spanning the period from 1880 to 1930, when the Second
Industrial Revolution, the mortality transition, and the first wave of the Great
Migration occurred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.