* 1918028
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Interaction of Transitivity Alternations and Verbal Affix Stacking in a Morphologically Complex Language
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Patience Epps, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2022
* USD 18,900.00

All languages have ways to indicate who did what to whom, and grammatically
different strategies offer different perspectives on an event. For example, if
Pat is reaching for a cookie, for example, we might expect Pat's mother to say
"Pat broke the jar". However, Pat might prefer to say "The jar broke", or even
"My sister made me break the jar". In other words, Pat might choose a
grammatical strategy that obscures the breaker and the broken object (the two
participants in the event) for a reason like avoiding punishment. Such changes
in the expression of participants are known as valence alternations. While
probably all languages have strategies to manipulate valence, they vary in how
they do this: which participants can be added or subtracted, in what conditions,
and with what linguistic resources. To achieve the deepest understanding of how
this works, linguists must investigate languages which vary significantly from
English, including languages which use a greater number of suffixes and prefixes
on verbs. This project will contribute to these questions through an exploration
of valence alternations in an as yet understudied indigenous South American
language, Mocov&amp;#237;, which unlike English displays highly complex verbal
morphology. Broader impacts will include the training of community members and
undergraduate students in linguistic documentation and description, the creation
of community pedagogical resources, and the training of a dissertation student.
The corpus will be accessible to scholars and the general public via the Archive
of Indigenous Languages of Latin America. More broadly, this work contributes to
the scholarship on Argentina's indigenous cultural heritage. By supporting
indigenous language maintenance through activities such as the preparation of
illustrated booklets for Mocov&amp;#237; primary schools, this project will also
continue the strong binational ties between Argentina and the U.S. in the areas
of educational and scientific collaboration. In particular, this research will
benefit from the close cooperation between the Universidad Nacional del Nordeste
(Argentina) and The University of Texas at Austin
(U.S.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an in-depth investigation of
valence alternations in the central-northern variety of Mocov&amp;#237; [moc],
an underexplored Guaycuruan language spoken in northeastern Argentina. Linguists
still have much to understand regarding how the manipulation of participants
interacts with other aspects of a language's grammar, and how these resources
develop over time. Where in English, speakers tend to add words like "make" to
increase valence, languages with complex verbal morphology, like
Mocov&amp;#237;, often leverage different resources, such as combinations of
verbal affixes. Mocov&amp;#237;'s valence-adjusting mechanisms involve the
stacking of verbal suffixes according to strategies that are very different from
those seen in well-studied European languages. Fieldwork will be carried out by
a local team formed by two Mocov&amp;#237; community members and the co-PI, a
doctoral student at The University of Texas at Austin, and will create a robust
corpus of naturalistic speech across discourse types, together with elicited
data focusing on transitivity alternations. The integrated exploration of both
types of data allows assessment of possible differences in transitivity-related
phenomena across genre, style, etc., among other questions. The corpus will also
provide an important data set for further work on Mocov&amp;#237;, including the
exploration of dialectal differences and their social and linguistic motivations
within this region of intense language contact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.