* 1918045
* Developing Hands-on Virtual Reality Science Laboratory Experiences
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Wai Man Ng, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This project addresses our nation's urgent need for an agile and diverse science
and technology workforce by innovating cost-effective and scalable hands-on
chemistry and biochemistry laboratory training using virtual reality (VR) and
mixed reality (MR) educational technologies. Learning is optimized when theory
and practice are seamlessly integrated and when multiple senses (sight, sound,
and touch) reinforce each other to promote long-term knowledge retention.
Nowhere is this more evident than in traditional hands-on laboratory classes
where students apply theoretical concepts, carry out experiments and procedures,
and analyze data in an active, guided, and often open-ended manner using their
eyes, ears, and hands. Unfortunately, such hands-on learning experiences are
highly resource intensive and thus are severely limited in a number of ways.
Dangerous, long, complicated, or expensive experiments are often difficult to
offer. Students are often not free to make mistakes, redo experiments,
iteratively refine hypotheses or master techniques. Lack of scheduling
flexibility in traditional labs can reduce participation by low-income and
underrepresented students who often work while in school. Lab instructors,
industry trainers, and research mentors have limited time with students at the
bench preventing them from being able to correct the most nuanced types of
mistakes that students make when learning new techniques. Virtual labs, in
contrast, can be designed to be less resource-intensive and allow the immediate
illustration of the molecular basis for observations made at the virtual bench.
Unfortunately, virtual labs lack the authentic tactile feel of doing real
science experiments with real laboratory instruments and tools. In this project,
researchers will use emerging high-resolution active and passive optical motion-
tracking, 3D printing, and mixed reality (MR) technologies to "virtualize"
actual physical lab tools that can be held and manipulated by a user in a
completely naturalistic manner while interacting with the virtual world with
real-time feedback and just-in-time dynamic visualizations. This project will
examine whether the additional level of tactile feedback offered by such
authentic hands-on MR labs together with dynamic molecular visualizations can
improve student intrinsic motivation, engagement, self-efficacy, knowledge
acquisition, and long-term retention in undergraduate chemistry and biochemistry
courses. The project will reach out to local secondary school science teachers
and their students, offer professional development, and test the scalable
deployment of hands-on MR lab hardware and software to underserved universities
and secondary schools, addressing the outstanding problem of disproportionate
science, technology, engineering and mathematics attrition amongst these groups
of learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the following
learning research questions: 1) To what extent does authentic tactile sensory
feedback of MR chemistry and biochemistry lab activities impact student
learning, intrinsic motivation, and self-efficacy, and are the effects
significantly different for students with different incoming levels of practical
or theoretical experience with course content? 2) Do conceptually illustrative
dynamic molecular visualizations presented to students immediately as they are
performing "hands-on" MR experiments afford any advantages for student learning
within the context of chemistry and biochemistry, and are such effects
significantly different for students with different incoming levels of practical
or theoretical experience with course content? Researchers will produce twelve
user-selectable hands-on MR lab sub-modules distributed across four subject
areas: introductory, general, organic, and biological chemistry. The content and
assessments in each submodule will be user-selectable at either an introductory,
intermediate, or advanced level, making it possible to examine the impact of
each sub-module within multiple courses. Impact on student learning outcomes in
ten different courses, most of which have existing traditional, take-home, or
virtual lab activities while others are lecture-only courses, will be assessed.
Formative assessments will include: standardized and validated items embedded
within class quizzes and tests; internally controlled pre/mid/post/real-time
assessments administered before, during, and after completion of the MR
activities; online student surveys; and, for traditional lab courses, the time-
to-completion or data quality achieved for real lab activities when the hands-on
MR labs are used as a pre-lab activity. Results from the assessments will inform
the contexts and student populations for which hands-on MR labs and just in-time
dynamic molecular visualizations should be targeted and further developed. This
project will enable internet-scale hands-on MR investigations across
disciplines. The deliverables of the project will also include the hardware,
software, workflows, and professional development tools required to enable the
distributed and scalable creation of analogous "hands-on" MR labs in other
disciplines and educational settings. The outcomes of this project will
contribute to STEM workforce development among college and high school students
at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.