* 1918985
* Tests of Independence Conditions Using a Discontinuously Distributed Covariate
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,10/31/2022
* NESE YILDIZ, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 97,758.00

This research will develop statistical tests for selection on observables and
validity of instrumental variables assumption necessary for identifying causal
effects under mild restrictions on structural functions. Existing methods impose
other stringent restrictions to test identifying assumptions. This test will
avoid such stringent restrictions by exploiting discontinuities that arise in
the distribution of unobservable in the model conditional on the treatment
variable as well as the existence of another covariate. The testing procedure
will also exploit continuity of the structural functions in this special
covariate and monotonicity of the structural function in one of the unobservable
variables. The test is applicable to continuous or discrete treatment without
instrumental variables in the context of non-parametric, non-separable, single
equation model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will also develop a
procedure for testing validity of instrumental variable for continuously
distributed endogenous treatment variable in the context of a nonparametric
triangular model. For both problems, the models can be nonparametric and non-
separable in the unobserved heterogeneity, as well as settings with more
stringent parametric or semi-parametric restrictions. The research results will
encourage other researchers to identify such settings, and thus extend the range
of empirical problems in which identification conditions can be tested. The
results of this research will improve the ability to establish causal
relationships, hence improve economic policy making, policy evaluation, and
economic efficiency generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.