* 1918337
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Migration and Fertility
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Abigail Weitzman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 61,699.00

This project investigates the question of whether migrant women's fertility
reflects high desired family sizes or difficulties regulating fertility due to
high cost, lack of knowledge about services, and other obstacles. Society's most
vulnerable women often face great challenges with fertility regulation. This may
be particularly true of international migrant women who often lack healthcare
access, social networks, and/or financial resources that might be important for
fertility regulation. In this study, the association between migration and
fertility, family planning use, fertility preferences, and difficulties
regulating fertility is investigated by comparing international migrants to
women in their countries of origin who have similar background characteristics
but did not migrate. Findings will expand knowledge concerning population change
and will have the potential to inform outreach strategies and public health
campaigns that reduce unintended outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
explores the association between international migration and fertility by
combining data from both sending and receiving countries using a propensity
score matching approach. To date, most studies have been limited to the use of
data sources collected primarily in receiving countries and have typically
compared migrants to native-born residents of the receiving country, rather than
to residents of their country of origin with whom they share a common
background. In contrast, our project integrates cross-sectional data from two
surveys to create a novel data set that allows for matching highly similar
respondents who did and did not migrate from sending countries to a receiving
country. This enables: (1) investigation of the association between
international migration and fertility by comparing migrants in receiving
countries to similar non-migrants in sending countries; and (2) exploration of
the association between international migration and underlying reproductive
desires and behaviors that could help explain why migration is associated with
fertility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.