* 1918177
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Language, race, and Identity among ethnically diverse youths in Miami
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Nandi Sims, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2021
* USD 17,901.00

The relatively recent migration of Haitians to South Florida has rapidly changed
the demographics of Miami Dade County's majority Black neighborhoods. This has
caused tensions between the newly arrived Haitian ethnic group and the
historically established African Americans. Residents of both ethnicities note
that these tensions begin in middle school. This longitudinal study follows a
set of new sixth grade students through their first year at a middle school.
These participants will need to learn the middle school community's expectations
of acceptable racial and ethnic interactions and they will need to join or
create social groups that either uphold or abandon these social expectations. As
they are adapting to these social expectations, they will be subtly changing
their speech to show solidarity with their own social groups and to create
social distance from other groups. The life stage of these middle school
participants is incredibly important for their own growth into adolescent and
adult members of their communities which, in turn, is important for the further
development of the societies to which they belong. This work will advance the
scientific understanding of how youths learn social expectations and apply that
knowledge to their own linguistic behaviors. It will also expand research on
language variation by applying previous knowledge to understudied, diverse
social groups. This study's broader impacts include publicly available
recordings of youth speech, a workshop on language variation and ethnic bullying
for teachers and administration in the middle school, and the dissemination of
the sociolinguistic knowledge to the general public via press releases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CoPI, a doctoral student at the Ohio State University,
will conduct ethnographic fieldwork in a Miami middle school concentrating the
data collection and analysis on a set of 20 to 30 sixth grade students belonging
to the same homeroom. This project focuses on the ethnic make-up of the social
groups of African and Haitian American students and quantifies the changes in
speech that these new students experience as they become enmeshed into the
middle school's particular social environment. Two dependent linguistic
variables will be analyzed for this project: 3rd person singular verbal-s
absence and prosodic rhythm. 3rd person singular verbal-s will be coded as
present or absent for each present tense, present reference phrase. A number of
factors that influence -s usage, such as verb type and sentence structure, will
also be coded. Prosodic rhythm will be measured using a host of established
rhythm measures (PVI, %V, &amp;#8710;C, and varcoC). These two linguistic
variables have been shown to vary because of bilingualism and social identity;
as a result, this project has two primary independent variables: language
background and social network. This project employs a mixed methodological
approach that is becoming more common in linguistic anthropological and
sociolinguistic work. It includes diverse data collection methods: participant
observation, audio-recorded linguistic and ethnographic interviews, network
analysis, and a language background questionnaire. The data analysis includes
both statistical analysis and qualitative coding, which adds depth to the
results. The findings of this study will widen the sociolinguistic knowledge of
Miami, Black communities, and the US-at-large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.