* 1918277
* SBP: School attendance zone boundaries and the connection to neighborhoods, segregation, and access to educational opportunity
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Christopher Fowler, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 385,000.00

Schools are a critical site affecting social opportunity. Research shows that
ethno-racially diverse schools benefit all students, particularly black and
Latino students; they also benefit communities and society as improved school
outcomes generate benefits throughout a student's life. Nevertheless, school
segregation is rising even in diversifying communities. The reasons for this are
obscured by an absence of data on how school districts are adjusting the
catchment areas among their schools. These adjustments can be attributed to
changing demand for schools driven by demographic and housing market changes but
can also reflect changes linked to the end of court supervision, and the advent
of school choice policies, including the rise of charter schools. This project
will illuminate the mechanisms driving continued school segregation and those
that are producing integration to guide policy at all levels of government.
Because of the multifaceted effects of segregation, understanding the
relationship between residential sorting and school segregation will advance the
health, prosperity and welfare of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
role that school attendance zones play in shaping outcomes for students and the
housing market that drives residential sorting, it is remarkable that little
information exists on when, if, or how school districts have changed attendance
zone boundaries in recent decades. We know that school districts frequently
adjust attendance boundaries with outcomes that vary by district demographic,
legal, and policy characteristics. Such changes are likely to (a) be more
frequent, and produce higher educational segregation, in suburban and
heterogeneous districts; (b) strengthen the link between school and residential
segregation in recent decades for districts formerly under court supervision;
and (c) promote lower school segregation in districts with voluntary integration
policies. We also know that school choice has decoupled residential location and
school attendance, albeit unequally across racial groups. To evaluate the
operation of these mechanisms, this project will develop a new data source, the
Longitudinal School Attendance Boundaries (LSABs), to capture boundary and
population composition changes for 1990 to 2020. National-level data on
attendance zone boundaries exists but these data offer a snapshot between 2010
and 2015 with little opportunity to examine change over a longer period of time
corresponding with demographic and policy changes. This project will collect
data on both current (2019-20) and historic (1990 and 2000) school attendance
zone boundaries to permit analyses of how school districts have changed over the
past thirty years. When combined with demographic data as well as information on
school choice policies, these data will represent a significant advance for
understanding the links between residential and school sorting processes.
Unpacking the relationships among these demographic, market, and policy changes
contributes to sociological literatures that examine inequality through the lens
of residential sorting, racial segregation, school quality, and neighborhood
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.