* 1918367
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Civil Social Institutions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Peter Little, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 3,150.00

It has been scientifically well-documented that civil social institutions are
most effective and durable when they are fully inclusive of the broader
populations that they represent. This project explores what factors contribute
to and inhibit the participation of underrepresented groups in civil society by
looking at specific experiments that governments have used to increase
participation. While training a graduate student in anthropology in the methods
of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would broadly
disseminate its findings to organizations invested in discovering more effective
methods for communicating science to the public. The findings of this research
will be disseminated in such a way to aid researchers and policy-makers to
improve policies and programming aimed at increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in civil society. The project also contributes to
broadening the participation of individuals traditionally underrepresented in
science.

Miriam Kilimo, under the supervision of Dr. Peter Little of Emory University
will explore what impact government programs to engineer women's participation
in civil society have on social relations. To address the low numbers of women
in politics, numerous countries have adopted gender quotas in political
representation. The gender quotas include methods such as requiring political
parties to field female candidates during elections or to nominate them directly
into political office. Although much research has been conducted to investigate
which gender quotas work best to increase the number of women in political
office, we still do not fully understand how these women experience the gender
quota system. This research will be carried out in Kenya, where a 2010
constitution introduced gender quotas to increase women's political
representation. Kenya's gender quota directs that women should occupy at least
one-third of the seats in the 47 county assemblies. The gender quota has been
implemented in two election cycles since 2010. When few women won seats by
election, political parties nominated hundreds of women to county assemblies to
meet the gender quota. However, these women have been criticized as allies of
political parties that are dominated by men. Through observational methods,
interviews, and document and media analyses, the researcher will investigate the
experiences of female members of county assembly in Murang'a and Kwale counties
in Kenya. These two counties have different ethnic groups, religions, and
political histories. The study will address how female members of county
assemblies participate in the county assembly and in the community, and how they
relate to male members of county assemblies. The research will also examine the
ideas about female members of county assemblies that are circulated in the
public. The findings from the research will provide insight into how gender
quotas shape political systems and the experiences of women who occupy political
office.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.