* 1918173
* Gauging Continuity and Change with the General Social Survey
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Melissa Wilde, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 350,000.00

This project adds questions to the 2020 General Social Survey (GSS) to look at
the changing shape of faith-related attitudes and behaviors in America. Over the
past thirty years, the landscape of these attitudes and behaviors in America has
dramatically changed. While the broad contours of these changes have been
captured by public opinion surveys, their causes and consequences often remain
underexplored because of the limits of current survey data. The GSS is a
publicly available data source, which means that any scholar interested in the
study of faith-related attitudes and behaviors and culture can draw on these
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this project, a battery of approximately
40-50 survey questions about faith-related attitudes and behaviors will be
included on the 2020 GSS. The GSS is an ideal instrument through which to
examine this changing landscape and its connection to broader cultural values
for a number of reasons. First, the GSS remains the gold standard in survey
research, with an exceptionally high response rate (above 60 percent) and
interviews that are conducted face to face on a nationally representative sample
of Americans. Second, the GSS already has a wide variety of questions relating
to faith and on other social, cultural, and political attitudes. In combination
with these already existing questions, our module will allow scholars to tap
into different aspects of attachments, beliefs, and attitudes related to faith,
and to uncover important variation among Americans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.