* 1918450
* FMitF: Track II: Hybrid and Dynamical Systems Verification on the CPS-VO
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Taylor Johnson, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 03/31/2022
* USD 98,311.00

This project aims to transition recent research results that automate portions
of the verification process of Cyber-Physical Systems into broader practice,
particularly with industrial and student users. Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are
networked embedded computing systems coupled with physics, such as in motor
vehicles, aircraft, medical devices, and the electrical grid. Due to their
frequent use in safety-critical scenarios where significant losses may be
incurred, such as of human life or monetarily, the engineering process for such
systems devotes vast resources to the process of verification to ensure these
systems meet their requirements. The approach builds upon recent successes in
the hybrid systems verification competition (ARCH-COMP) hosted in the past three
years, in which several dozen hybrid systems verification tools have competed
across several problem and system categories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
the transition of verification research results for CPS models into broader
practice, this project develops a cloud-based framework to interface with and
execute state-of-the-art formal verification software tools from the hybrid and
dynamical systems verification community using NSF's CPS Virtual Organization
(CPS-VO). The project extends the Design Studio and Tool Integration frameworks
for the CPS-VO, to provide an easy-to-use interface for these verification
tools. It also serves as a repository for housing executable versions of the
tools and benchmarks, plus facilitating repeatability evaluations for ARCH-COMP
through a distributed, cloud-based execution architecture. The core technology
upon which the tool is built is the hybrid systems model source transformation
and translation (HyST) software tool, which performs semantics-preserving
translation between state-of-the-art hybrid systems verification
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.