* 1918259
* Mechanisms Supporting Experience-Driven Changes in Semantic Knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Catarina Vales, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 07/31/2023
* USD 614,848.00

Human knowledge about the world is structured in semantic networks in which
concepts are linked by relevant relations. This semantic structure is thought to
be crucially important for many day-to-day activities, including learning in
formal and informal settings, because it allows access to and use of stored
knowledge across many different contexts. Prior studies suggest that there are
marked individual differences in semantic structure based on factors such as age
and expertise in specific domains. However, paucity of methods appropriate for
studying semantic structure in young children makes it challenging to gain
insight into changes in semantic structure with experience and learning during
several key developmental periods, including the preschool years and transition
into formal schooling. Using recent advances in the measurement of structured
semantic knowledge in young children, this project will further our
understanding of how learning and experience in real-world settings (such as a
summer camp at a local botanical garden) promote rapid changes in children's
semantic networks. The results of this project will have implications for our
understanding of many cognitive processes thought to rely on structured semantic
knowledge, including memory encoding and retrieval, attention, reading
comprehension, and learning in formal and informal settings. Therefore, the
results of this project have the potential to provide novel evidence pointing to
the importance of enrichment experiences (such as field trips and summer camps)
to children's academic achievement. The findings from this project will be
disseminated to academic audiences and also to parents and educators in the
community. Therefore, this project will provide opportunities to engage members
of the public in conversations about improving the scientific literacy of
children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are (1) to develop and
validate developmentally-appropriate methods to study semantic structure in
children, (2) to directly test theoretically-driven predictions about the
learning mechanisms promoting changes in semantic structure in a real-world
setting, and (3) to examine how changes in semantic structure promote changes in
inferential comprehension, a cognitive process that is a component of reading
comprehension. In Study 1, the researchers will develop and validate new methods
to study semantic structure in children aged 4-9 years, and in so doing will
examine how changes in semantic structure across a number of early acquired
domains of knowledge (e.g., animals, clothes, foods) are related to changes in
the ability to make inferences in those domains. In Studies 2 and 3, the
research team will partner with a local botanical garden to directly test how
different aspects of children's informal learning experiences contribute to
changes in semantic structure and thereby affect children's inferential
comprehension. The results of this project will provide the research community
with new methods of studying semantic networks in children and will provide new
insights into the importance of enrichment experiences for semantic development,
including aspects of semantic development that are relevant for school
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.