* 1918342
* Generating High-Quality Verifiable Relational Data About News Coverage of Social Movement Events
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Pamela Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 383,999.00

Social movements reflect societal concerns with key issues and are important
vehicles for tracking social change. Yet activity surrounding specific social
movements ebbs and flows. It is important to know what happens when social
movements are in the periods of lower mobilization, or abeyance. This project
develops a better way of processing electronic archives of articles from
minority newspapers to classify stories about social movement events and uses it
to collect data on them between 1994 and 2016. This research fills an important
knowledge gap because there is no systematic information about minority movement
events during this interval. Creating a systematic dataset on events in this
period helps us to better understand not only long-term impacts of prior
gatherings, but also the contexts from which recent events emerged. These
newspaper data supplement existing data already collected from mainstream news
wire stories. The events themselves are important for understanding what
activists were doing, while the news stories about the events are important for
understanding how news media portrayed them and, thus, what the public learned
about them. We know that a small number of events receive a great deal of news
coverage and have a large effect on public perceptions, while most events are
mentioned only once. Comparing mainstream news coverage with that in minority
newspapers helps us understand how different groups perceive events differently
as well as allowing us to learn about events that are neglected by the
mainstream news. Findings from the project will allow both leaders and citizens
to better understand social movement trajectories, thus enhancing safety and
security as well as political influence in democracies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of social movements change over
time, with focus often shifting from one topic to another before the original
focus reappears. These changes are difficult to detect and verify, particularly
using standard news media sources. This project uses a previously develop
program to pre-process electronic copies of newspaper articles that have been
selected for containing one or more social movement-relevant keywords. It
creates new human-machine interfaces and uses relational database structures to
expedite the collection and storage of event data from news sources in a way
that identifies relations among events and articles about events. A previously-
developed interface will be updated to make this work even more efficiently. The
project will then develop new coding interfaces. One will match up events
between articles; assign each event a unique identifier; recognize and flag
relations between events including campaigns, episodes, and master- and sub-
event relations; and check the work of coders in marking text in events. The new
interface will be linked to a relational database to give the coder access to an
authorized list of events, locations, campaigns, episodes, and inter-event
relations as well as access to the original full-text articles. In a second
coding activity, variables are coded one at a time using automated routines and
interfaces appropriate for each variable (e.g. size, issue, form, actor type,
police actions). Programming routines will rough-code variables using keyword
searches and dictionaries; human coders will make the final coding judgments
using variable-specific interfaces. These routines and interfaces will be used
to process 7619 articles selected from 121,129 stories in 22 newspapers that
were retrieved in February of 2017 from a newspaper archive using our standard
set of broad event-relevant words. A database of events identified in the news
wires coded under previous funding will be accessible so that newly coded
newspaper articles about the same events can be given the same unique
identifier. Analysis of the data will combine events from both news wires and
minority newspaper sources to give a more complete picture of events and to
compare the portrayal of the movement in the two sources. The project will use
open source tools and deposit project source code in publicly available
archives, thus allowing researchers studying other topics via newspaper articles
to make use of newly-developed tools. Project findings will inform sociological
theory regarding social movements and social change, particularly regarding how
movement dynamics ebb and flow over extended periods of time. More generally,
the findings will inform theories of democratic participation, with a focus on
status differences in the evolution and change in movement
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.