* 1918244
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The role of animacy and obviation in the processing of Ojibwe relative clauses
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Brian Dillon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 01/31/2021
* USD 15,079.00

This project investigates how speakers of Southwestern Ojibwe use the language's
unique grammatical features to understand complex sentences. Southwestern Ojibwe
is a revitalizing indigenous language spoken by approximately 5,000 first and
second language speakers in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Southern Ontario. Its
grammar has been researched for decades, but little is known about how speakers
produce and understand Ojibwe sentences during normal language comprehension and
production. This is the focus of current project. Specifically, this research
addresses the question of whether listeners use Ojibwe-specific grammatical cues
to make predictions about how the meaning of the sentence will resolve, focusing
on what types of information Ojibwe speakers use to identify the grammatical
subject of a sentence. This project joins a small but growing body of research
that looks at endangered and understudied languages using experimental
fieldwork, and expands our understanding of how the cognitive capabilities
common to all humans are used to produce and comprehend languages that differ in
how their grammar expresses meaning. Furthermore, the results of this research
will be shared with the Southwestern Ojibwe-speaking community to bolster
language revitalization efforts.

All languages can refer to both living (animate) and non-living (inanimate)
entities, and have different ways of conveying the importance of different
characters in a story. However, Ojibwe is unique in that these functions play a
central role in the grammar of the language. In Ojibwe, nouns get different
grammatical markers according to whether they refer to animate or inanimate
entities. Furthermore, animate nouns participate in a unique "spotlighting"
system. When there are multiple animate nouns in a story, conversation, or
discourse, one of them is designated proximate (the character in the spotlight),
while all others are marked obviative (the characters outside of the spotlight).
Ojibwe further differs from languages like English in that word order does not
serve as the primary cue for understanding the meaning of a sentence. Instead,
Ojibwe has a complex system where the form of agreement on the verb and the
animacy/obviation information on nouns are used together to understand the
meaning of a sentence. The proposed study will look at how Ojibwe speakers use
these sources of information to understand who is doing a particular action, and
who is undergoing an action. Two methods will be employed. First, a language
production task, where speakers are given an incomplete sentence preamble and
are asked to use it to form a complete sentence, will be used to determine what
assumptions speakers make about the grammatical role of ambiguous nouns. Second,
a language comprehension task where participants will listen to sentences in
Ojibwe while looking at an array of pictures corresponding to different
interpretations of the sentence. Participants' eye movements will be recorded to
understand how the interpretation of the sentence unfolds and changes over time
in response to the input. The proposed study is the first of its kind on Ojibwe,
and will be of interest to linguists interested in the cognitive representation
of language, and to community members interested in revitalization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.