* 1918118
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Financial Investments and Digital Technologies in Industrial Farming
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Gary Wilder, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 19,530.00

In the past two decades, startup companies all around the world have deeply
transformed everyday lives with digital technologies. Recent research has raised
awareness to the multiple effects of these new businesses and the technologies
they develop. They have impacted multiple sectors, such as the hospitality
industry, transportation, logistics, and retail. Moreover, these startups work
with venture capital and private equity, attracting aggressive investing
behaviors. Although we typically associate these transformations in urban
spaces, startups are now becoming important in the rural world. Agricultural
startups develop software and hardware that promise farmers to increase their
productivity, reduce environmental pollution, and create better working
conditions. This research aims to investigate the impacts of startups and
digital technologies on agricultural production, on economic transactions and on
the everyday life of rural actors. Understanding contemporary agrarian
transformations is critical for developing programs and policies that create
balanced economic conditions. In addition to providing funding for the training
of a graduate student in anthropology in scientific methods of rigorous data
collection and analysis, the project would improve scientific understanding by
broadly disseminating its findings to organizations invested in formulating
policies around the use of digital technologies in the agribusiness
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ana Flavia Badue, under the supervision of Dr. Gary
Wilder of the City University of New York Graduate Center, will explore the
socioeconomic and political impacts of industrial farming digitization by
startup entrepreneurs and venture capital investors. This research will be
undertaken in Brazil, where hundreds of agricultural startups have emerged in
the past two years. As Brazil is among the largest producers of agricultural
commodities in the world, the transformations that occur in the country are
relevant to understand the impact of digital technologies and of new business
models in the rural sectors across the globe. This research will be composed of
(1) archival research to map how technologies in the past shaped industrial
agriculture; of (2) interviews with startup founders, farmers who adopt digital
technologies and financial investors who work with agricultural startups in
order to understand the motivations, interests and perspectives of different
actors engaged with agrarian transformations since the emergence of agricultural
startups; and of (3) observation of events and farms to identify the everyday
impacts of the technologies and investments on industrial agriculture. Gathering
data in loco is an opportunity to observe how changes take place in real time.
This research raises awareness to potential unexpected outcomes generated by the
recent changes in industrial agriculture, such as global and local inequalities,
uneven power relations and economic dependency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.