* 1918247
* RUI: Public Policy and Mobilization
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stephanie Gonzalez Guittar, Rollins College
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 169,996.00

Policy often responds to important social topics, and some policies can alter
individual behaviors, guide group actions, and result in unexpected
consequences. This study examines how policies related to immigration and sexual
identity can intersect, resulting in social mobilization and
countermobilization, and potentially weakening or reshaping social boundaries.
It is well known that policy can influence individuals' lived experiences, but
the consequences of policies focused on immigration and sexual identity are not
well known. Similarly, it is unclear how such a policy context might alter
individuals' assertions of rights and claims of belonging in certain social
contexts. Understanding the relationship between policy and social phenomena is
important in order to better understand how policy and legal processes shape
everyday life for people in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will use semi-structured interviews with elected officials, law enforcement
officers, and community-based organization leaders and members, as well as
participant observation with community-based organizations, to examine the
relationship between social factors and public policy related to immigration and
sexual identity. The study site is Orlando, Florida, where a number of
organizations grappling with these issues have recently emerged, and which has a
history of policy tension around these concerns. Findings from this study will
be disseminated through academic and non-academic products to community-based
organizations, policymakers, and the broader public through podcasts, reports,
and policy briefs, thereby making the results of the research widely available.
Additionally, the findings from this study can potentially advance knowledge in
several disciplines (e.g., anthropology, sociology, gender studies, ethnic
studies) and may be useful to elected officials, community-based organizations,
governmental agencies, and the general public. This study will also contribute
to educating and training undergraduate students from underrepresented groups in
STEM disciplines and enhance the research and teaching environment at an
undergraduate institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.