* 1918147
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor Dynamics, Migration, and Intergenerational Community Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Anna Reumert, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 10,266.00

How do social and historical factors direct migration? This project, which
trains a graduate student in methods of rigorous, empirical data collection and
analysis, explores how migrants form and sustain communities through histories
of connected movement. In tracking a South-South migration route, the researcher
aims to ascertain the historical processes by which migrants are channeled into
specific forms of labor in different places. In addition to providing funding
for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in scientific methods of
rigorous data collection and analysis, the project would improve scientific
understanding by broadly disseminating its findings to organizations invested in
formulating best practices for effective and sustainable migration
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anna Reumert, under the supervision of Dr. Naor
Ben-Yehoyada of Columbia University will explore what factors influence the
integration or marginalization of migrant workers across an understudied
migration route in the Global South. Through fieldwork with an intergenerational
Sudanese migrant community in Lebanon, the project explores the processes by
which identities are formed, negotiated and contested through histories of
migration. The project asks what new information the experiences of this migrant
population can reveal about age, gender, ethnic, and other forms of cultural
identity and hierarchy. The researcher will employ a range of ethnographic data
collection and analytical methods such observational research at cultural sites,
interviews with migrant workers, focus groups, and life histories, to map
intergenerational communal networks. The project advances anthropological and
other social scientific theory related to migration and
labor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.