* 1918557
* Scientific Program Overview: Troposphere High latitude INhibitors to multi-scale sea ICE Predictability (THINICE)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Parsons, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2023
* USD 22,613.00

This is an award to support continued planning for THINICE. It is not a
commitment by NSF to fund the field project, related analysis and numerical
simulation work. Those funding decisions will be determined by means of further
review.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent decades, the Arctic has transitioned to
more mobile and thinner sea ice and more expansive stretches of open ocean. One
outcome of these profound changes is the increasingly important role of Arctic
Cyclones (ACs) in the loss of sea ice, which can occur at an astonishing rate of
1/2 million km2 within a 3-day period, an area that is bigger than California
and approximately the size of Spain. An accurate prediction of such sea ice
losses and the interplay between Arctic cyclones, sea ice and the open ocean is
becoming increasing important for public safety, commerce, and national
security. Unfortunately, the accurate prediction of ACs and sea ice loss is
often a challenge, even on weather time-scales. This award supports continued
planning for the THINICE to address this challenge. The sampling plan will
include a 6-week international, multi-agency field campaign for July and August
2021 with a complementary numerical modeling and analysis component. This
Scientific Project Overview (SPO) project is to organize the first systematic
observational investigation to enhance our understanding of the critical
mechanisms that determine the location, strength, evolution, and characteristics
of TPVs, ACs and their potential for influencing sea ice break-up and decline.
THINICE will directly contribute to NSF's goal of 'Navigating the New Arctic',
which is one of the agencies ten bold ideas for future investment at the
frontiers of science and engineering. THINICE will also contribute to NSF
INCLUDES (Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science) through educational and
outreach activities that utilize NSF's Research Experience for Undergraduates
program to involve indigenous students, including through novel social media
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental differences exist between the
dynamics of cyclones in middle latitude and the Arctic. ACs have received
attention for their impact on the Arctic sea ice. In particular, Tropopause
Polar Vortices (TPVs) serve as an important precursor to the formation of ACs
with cyclogenesis taking place when these vortices interact with low-level
baroclinic zones. Another difference between weather systems in the Arctic and
middle latitudes is the increased importance at higher latitudes of radiative
processes relative to latent heating. Thus, the treatment of cloud and radiative
processes is likely critical to accurately defining the structure and intensity
of TPVs and ACs. While major field campaigns have been launched to study
cyclones in middle latitudes, detailed observational studies of TPVs and ACs
have not yet been undertaken. The THINICE SPO will coordinate efforts with plans
to utilize in-situ and remote sensing measurements taken from the NSF-NCAR GV
research aircraft to advance our knowledge of: (1) The dynamical and physical
processes that control the intensity, structure, and evolution of ACs and TPVs;
(2) The dynamical interactions between TPVs and ACs, including the role of TPVs
in cyclogenesis and how ACs are modified when multiple TPVs are interactive; and
(3) The coupling of TPVs and ACs with the underlying sea surface and sea ice
during the summer, and how such coupling can lead to rapid sea ice loss and
feedbacks that might, in turn, modify TPVs and ACs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.