* 1918396
* FMitF: Track I: Petr4: Formal Foundations for Programmable Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* John Foster, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,995.00

Most networks today achieve robustness not by adhering to precise formal
specifications but by building implementations that tolerate modest deviations
from correct behavior. But as networks have grown in scale and complexity, the
frequency of faults caused by these deviations has increased, leading to new
interest in techniques for formally specifying and verifying network behavior.
The goal of the Petr4 ("petra") project is to build a new foundation for
networking by developing a precise, formal semantics for the programs that
execute on network devices such as Internet routers. The project's novelties are
in applying programming language-based techniques to an emerging area and
building verified software tools, such as a compiler that generates code
guaranteed to correctly implement the semantics of a given source program. The
project's impacts are in developing open-source software, pursuing technology
transfer with industry partners, and designing material for an outreach workshop
aimed at undergraduates from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a
technical level, the project will focus on four distinct research thrusts: (1)
Developing a formal semantics for the P4 Programming Language, realized as a set
of mathematical definitions and an accompanying reference implementation; (2)
Building a verified compiler from P4 to eBPF, the language used to express
custom packet-processing in the Linux kernel; (3) Investigating new control-
plane APIs that are rich enough to capture key invariants and facilitate correct
composition of control applications; and (4) Developing a library of executable
protocol implementations that can be assembled into a modular Internet router.
The project will be guided by an interdisciplinary research team with expertise
in both formal methods and networking, and seeks to not only develop a new
foundation for networking, but also serve as a catalyst for follow-on efforts
that target higher layers of the networking stack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.