* 1918243
* SCHOLARS: Migration, Stress, and Obesity Risk
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Yolanda Covington-Ward, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 75,000.00

Overweight and obesity (OO) are a huge public health concern in many countries.
Globally, the prevalence of obesity has nearly doubled since 1980. One
population at increased risk for OO is immigrants. However, we still have a
limited understanding of how exposures to stressors over the migration process
interact with the life course to impact risk for OO. OO increases risks for
chronic diseases and the economic cost of obesity-related illnesses is estimated
at $190.2 billion annually in the U. S. Immigrants are increasingly at risk for
OO, and an estimated 18% of the US population will be immigrants within 50
years. Africans are now the fastest growing immigrant group, roughly doubling in
number every decade. Despite their growing numbers, less is known about the
factors that increase risk for OO among African immigrants. Africans are more
likely than immigrants from most other regions to come to the United States as
refugees or to seek asylum, and also have a higher prevalence of pre-migration
traumatic events. This is significant because studies have shown trauma exposure
and psychological distress increase the risk for OO. This training from the
Cultural Anthropology Scholars Award will allow Dr. Covington-Ward to explore
these questions and develop the methodological skills necessary to publish
several articles based on secondary analysis of datasets, eventually conduct a
larger, multi-sited project (post funded training) combining quantitative and
qualitative data analysis, contribute to the pedagogical and research programs
of several departments at her university, and share her research with local
communities and scholarly audiences. This project also has broader implications
for improved health policy, as the results will identify risk factors for
obesity for African immigrants and suggest strategies for supporting these and
other immigrant populations towards better health and well-being. The project
will also contribute to science in regards to examining how exposure to trauma
and stress increases obesity risk overall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Covington-
Ward of the University of Pittsburgh will investigate the following research
questions: How do stressful and traumatic events before your move, during your
move, and after your move impact obesity? And how does the age at which you have
these experiences affect your obesity risk? The proposed research and training
from the Cultural Anthropology Scholars Award will address this gap by examining
the relationship between traumatic life events and stressors, migration
processes, and OO among African immigrants. The award will allow Dr. Yolanda
Covington-Ward to obtain training in demography and statistical analysis in
order to study how stress and migration are related to obesity risk for African
immigrants at a larger population level. The award will enable her to be an
external affiliate with the Population Research Institute at Penn State
University, to take graduate-level classes in demography at Penn State and
statistics classes at the University of Pittsburgh, to take summer survey
research courses at the University of Michigan, and to receive one-on-one
guidance and mentoring in demography and analysis of several large
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.