* 1918100
* Cognitive, Physiological, and Mental Health Implications of Cultural Variation in Emotion Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Christopher Coe, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 585,175.00

Negative emotions happen every day and those thoughts and feelings can undermine
a person's success and health. Research shows that the harmful effects of
negative emotions are greater among Americans compared to East Asians. This
project focuses on understanding how negative emotions assert their negative
influence. It considers whether the way a person views and interprets negative
emotions influences the effects of those emotions. One theory is that
unfavorable beliefs about negative emotions make those negative emotions more
harmful. The primary hypothesis is that negative emotions per se are not
negative. How people respond to those negative emotions, however, produces the
negative outcomes. Research suggests that Americans, compared to East Asians,
view negative emotions as more harmful. Such differences in how people think
about negative emotions produce the negative outcomes. This project lays the
foundation for the design of interventions that promote more effective ways to
respond to negative emotions. The research will help teachers improve the
learning and success of their students and help counselors who work with
patients who have mood and anxiety disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines the cognitive, physiological, mental health, and performance outcomes
of cultural differences in beliefs about negative emotions. Multiple behavioral
experiments examine how people respond to stressful events. Measures of
cognitive, behavioral, and hormonal responses are used to compare American with
East Asian samples. Stress responses to emotional experiences and arousal are
measured via cortisol. Participants respond to different demanding tasks (such
as giving a speech or doing difficult math problems) to test for performance and
physiological reaction differences to the stressors. Interpretations of one's
negative emotions are measured to test for subsequent outcome differences in
stress and performance. This project helps to develop more general principles
about the causes and effects of negative emotions. In addition to advancing the
fields of psychology and affective neuroscience, this research offers many
practical and applied implications for improving student success and developing
interventions for patients with mood and anxiety
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.