* 1918424
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sovereignty, Displacement, and Land Titling Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2019,06/30/2023
* shannon speed, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 16,785.00

The increased dominance of large-scale, plantation-based production to meet
global demand for commodities has contributed to the displacement of smaller
communities, the loss of which has been well-documented as having adverse
environmental and social impacts. Having possession of a land base is essential
in order to generate revenues and prevent their own displacement, particularly
for economically disadvantaged and minority communities. Legal titling and
registration of those lands is often considered to be a critical method for
ensuring a land base, yet titling does not always translate into real possession
of those lands. Government policies, private sector forces, and natural
disasters, may gradually erode of a land base as they legally or economically
compel community members to sell or vacate their titled lands. Without the
ability to decide who can use the lands, manage the purposes for which they are
used, and enforce those policies, such communities have little security over
their land bases. This project, which supports the training of a graduate
student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection
and analysis, explores how such communities establish authority over land in
order to prevent their displacement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral
dissertation research centers the experiences of nine Indigenous Rama and
Afrodescendant Kriol communities in southeastern Nicaragua that received a
communal title to a territory that is four-fifths the size of Delaware in 2009.
This site is particularly appropriate for this project due to the recency of the
issuing of a title and the researcher's engagement with these communities during
a majority of the period since the title was issued, providing for an analysis
of the changing conditions of territorial control since that time. While
Nicaraguan law guarantees that communal lands under the title may not be sold,
mortgaged, or otherwise alienated except in extremely limited circumstances and
after consultation with the communities, the Rama-Kriol Territory is being
impacted by mestizo settlers from the interior of the country, who are seizing
growing segments of the territory for crops and ranching. This has destroyed
Rama-Kriol agricultural areas and hunting grounds, contaminated rivers, and
wholly displaced one Rama community. The investigation will focus on how the
Rama-Kriol Territorial Government and its constituent communities are seeking to
effectively use their territory through three key areas: the management of the
physical occupancy of the territory; the gathering and management of information
about the occupancy of the territory; and the contestation of the capacity of
different levels of government to decide on the management of the territory. To
do so, the researcher will interview community members, Rama and Kriol forest
rangers, communal and territorial leaders, government officials, and mestizo
settlers in the territory and carry out participant-observation in the daily
activities of land governance in the Rama-Kriol Territory. This will allow for a
fine-grained understanding of ways in which people experience and participate in
these processes. Archival research at the Nicaraguan national archives will also
add historical depth to this study of the processes of colonization and
dispossession under way in the Rama-Kriol Territory. The resulting research
products will contribute an understanding of the practices through which
Indigenous and Afrodescendant sovereignty is formed and preserved, which has
implications both for Indigenous and Afrodescendant peoples worldwide and for
the study of sovereignty, autonomy, and state formation across the social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.