* 1918093
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Moral and Ethical Foundations in Adoptive Kin Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Mike McGovern, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 21,672.00

Ethnographic evidence has repeatedly established that shared genetic material is
not a universal foundation for relations of kinship; kin relations cannot be
biologically or culturally predetermined in any general sense. One of the
clearer sites for examining the complexities of human kin relations is with the
social relations between non-consanguine adoptive kin. In some cases, for
example, prospective parents express adoption as a religious experience, as
opposed to a humanitarian endeavor or simply a wish to add to their existing
families. This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, explores the relationship between
religion and transnational adoption. The findings of this research will be
disseminated in such a way to aid researchers and policy-makers to better
understand how kin relations and religiosity are constituted. The project itself
also contributes to broadening the participation of individuals traditionally
underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Christine Chalifoux, under the
supervision of Dr. Michael McGovern of the University of Michigan asks whether
religious calling is the foundation for Evangelical nuclear families who choose
to adopt children, and what role this has in the practice of transnational
adoption. This research will be centered in Uganda, an ideal natural laboratory
for studying changes in transnational adoption as rates were rapidly rising
until the Children Amendment Act made it significantly more difficult for
foreigners to adopt children. Despite increasing obstacles, which include
residing in Uganda for over one year in order to legally adopt an eligible
child, some devout Christians remain committed to the adoption process in this
particular country. In investigation whether their religion is inspiring them to
live away from their family and in more austere conditions than in the United
States or other Western countries, this project will examine how faith is being
used to form families at an orphanage in Kampala. This project will use
ethnographic methods, including participant observation, life history
collection, and formal interviews, in order to comprehend the religiosity of
adoption. Doing so will enable an understanding of adoption beyond the current
debates that situate it as morally right or wrong, offering new insight into the
future of the practice. Archival research will also be used explore how this
context emerged as one sought out by Western missionaries, and eventually a
place from where they chose to adopt children. These insights inform debates
about the intersection of religion, kinship, transnational adoption, and the
lived worlds of Christians beyond often-superficial portrayals in the media and
academic literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.