* 1918510
* 2020 Collaborative Multiracial Post-Election Survey (CMPS)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Edward Vargas, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 939,427.00

The 2020 Collaborative Multiracial Post-Election Survey (CMPS) will expand the
highly-successful, groundbreaking 2016 CMPS, which broadens the scope of access
to high-quality national survey data with large and generalizable samples of
racial and ethnic groups in the United States. These samples allow for the
analysis of an individual group or comparative analysis across groups. The CMPS
is changing the way data is collected and shared in the social sciences and
collaboratively building a diverse and inclusive academic pipeline of scholars
in political science and the social sciences more broadly. With questions that
focus explicitly on race, immigration, and politics, as well as the inclusion of
large samples of White and non-White individuals, U.S.-born and foreign-born
respondents, voters and non-voters, the 2020 CMPS will provide essential
empirical information on the state of political inclusion, democratic
participation, and policy support in an increasingly diverse United States. The
2020 CMPS project will have a broad and positive impact on society in two ways.
First, the collaborative and inclusive model of data collection, research and
professional development activities will increase the participation of
underrepresented minorities, women and first-generation scholars in academia.
Second, the results of the survey will advance societal understanding of intra-
and inter-group relations, policy support, and civic and political
participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue the
Collaborative Multiracial Post-Election Survey (CMPS). The 2020 CMPS will
include an estimated total of 20,000 completed interviews among Asian (n=4,000),
African American (n=4,000), Latino/a (n=4,000), White (n=2,000), Native American
(n=1,000), Native Hawaiian (n=1,000), Black immigrant (n=1,000), Afro-Caribbean
(n=1,000) as well as a sample of Muslim respondents (n=1,000) and LGBTQ
(n=1,000). Survey data will be collected online in a respondent self-
administered format following the 2020 Presidential Election. The survey (and
invitation) will be available to respondents in English, Spanish, Chinese
(simplified and traditional), Korean, Vietnamese, and Arabic. The 2020 CMPS will
include adult, registered and non-registered voters. The survey will include a
demographic module and three additional modules: (1) group identities and
intergroup attitudes; (2) immigration; and (3) political engagement and civic
participation. Using the collaborative, inclusive model of resource-sharing the
PIs developed in 2016, the 2020 CMPS will expand research and professional
development opportunities for a larger number of junior and senior faculty, a
host of outstanding undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral
fellows from large research institutions, smaller liberal arts colleges,
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Tribal Colleges and
Universities (TCUs), and Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs), through direct
contribution to the content and analysis of the survey. The 2020 CMPS will
continue to invest time and resources in an inclusive group of scholars, but
particularly women, underrepresented minority and first generation undergraduate
and graduate students, junior faculty and postdoctoral fellows, through
conferences, workshops, as well as sustained mentorship, research and publishing
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.