* 1918858
* Unraveling Soot Inception in Diffusion Flames with State-of-the-Art Sampling, Conditioning and Analysis Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Francesco Carbone, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 02/29/2020
* USD 318,856.00

Emissions of carbonaceous particles, or soot, are associated with combustion
devices that are responsible for more than 80% of the total energy production
worldwide. Soot particles released to the atmosphere are harmful to human health
and are considered the second largest contributor to radiative forcing in
climate change. This project aims at unraveling the mechanisms of soot
inception, that is the formation of the smallest soot nuclei that subsequently
grow to be responsible for the bulk of the overall soot production in combustion
devices. While recent improvements in combustion technologies have reduced soot
levels to match current regulations, such improvements have resulted in the
release of a larger number of ever smaller particles. As a result, the negative
impact of soot emissions remains substantial because small sizes and high
toxicity of nano-sized soot particles. It is likely that a fundamental
understanding of soot inception will not only be beneficial for current
abatement efforts but also for future regulations to limit emissions in terms of
number of the smallest and most toxic particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
practical settings, soot inception in diffusion flames that tend to be the most
common configuration in which sooting conditions prevail. The proposed research
takes advantage of purposely developed aerosol sampling, conditioning and
analysis techniques to measure concentration, size, charge, and composition of
flame generated carbonaceous materials smaller than 2 nm and 3000 Da, regardless
of their physical state. The techniques will be adapted to the investigation of
diffusion flames of variable maximum temperature stabilized in a novel burner
configuration that allows for the necessary spatial resolution. The project will
result in the establishment of an infrastructure to study (carbon) nanoparticles
and molecular clusters in diffusion flames under well-defined and well-
controlled conditions. More broadly, the achievement of this goal will benefit
the understanding of the fundamentals of aerosol behavior, including ion
collision charging of nanoparticles and molecular clusters. The details about
the structure and behavior of soot nuclei provided with the proposed methods
will be valuable to improve the predictive capabilities of existing soot
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.