* 1918400
* FMitF: Track I: A Secure and Verifiable Commodity Hypervisor
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jason Nieh, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Hypervisors are widely deployed by cloud- computing providers to support virtual
machines (VMs), but their growing complexity poses a security risk as large
codebases contain many vulnerabilities. A compromised hypervisor risks the data
and privacy of all its VMs -- an undesirable outcome for both cloud providers
and users. In today's data-driven world, data confidentiality and integrity are
of crucial importance. This project will design, implement, verify, and evaluate
a fundamentally new approach to hypervisor design that provides a small,
verified trusted computing base (TCB) for commodity hypervisors to protect the
confidentiality and integrity of VMs running in the cloud. The project's
novelties are a new hypervisor architecture and formal-verification framework.
The project's impacts are providing a foundation for future innovations in the
verification of systems software, especially for cloud-computing infrastructure,
and verifying open-source virtualization technologies in Linux to drive research
innovation in a way that can be adopted in commercial systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs a novel hypervisor architecture that
partitions the hypervisor into a trusted core that performs basic
virtualization, and an untrusted host that performs other hypervisor
functionality and can be integrated with a host operating system. The
investigators examine features of traditional hypervisors and identify only
secure boot and basic CPU and memory virtualization as necessary for the core,
resulting in a significantly simpler and verifiable hypervisor core. This
project adopts a novel formal-verification framework named certified abstraction
layers (CAL) to reason about the correctness (that is, the implementation meets
its specification) and security (that is, the specification guarantees VM
confidentiality and integrity) of the hypervisor core with an untrusted host.
This project retrofits and verifies the Linux Kernel Virtual Machine (KVM)
hypervisor, demonstrating the ability of these verification techniques to work
in practice with commodity hypervisor software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.