* 1918523
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing theories of mutualism in the context of rapid culture change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Edward Hagen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 25,127.00

Human societies everywhere deal with adverse social and environmental conditions
that put livelihoods at risk, but they also tend to develop traditions and
institutions that help adapt to those conditions. In the American Southwest, for
example, droughts and floods can threaten cattle ranchers. In response, ranchers
have developed a social institution, called "neighboring," in which ranchers
help neighbors in need. What would happen to institutions like neighboring,
however, when the economy changes quickly? Around the world, herding can be a
high-risk livelihood, with herd sizes routinely prone to sudden fluctuations due
to drought, disease, and, in some countries, raids. Herders routinely have
similar stock friendships, or networks of cattle lending and sharing. Some
researchers suggest that stock friendships might be an example of informal
insurance systems to protect against cattle losses, whereas others claim that
they might be useful for accumulating cattle wealth and political influence
among households over time.

Aaron Lightner, under the supervision of Dr. Edward Hagen of Washington State
University, investigates Maasai pastoralists in Tanzania, who have made their
living by herding cattle for centuries. Recently, however, population growth,
drought, and urbanization have forced many Maasai herders to turn to agriculture
and cash economies, becoming less dependent on the high-risk business of herding
cattle, a sudden, fundamental change to their local economy. This research will
investigate how stock friendship institutions have adapted to the changing
economy, collecting data on household-level income from cattle, agriculture, and
other sources; partner preferences and reputations; past activity among stock
friends; and social networks among stock friends. Social network analysis will
help the researchers test existing ideas about how and why people are
participating in stock friendships, and to understand how these reasons might
vary among people who are highly impacted vs. less impacted by economic and
environmental changes at the field site. This research provides a unique
opportunity to investigate not only how stock friendships buffer economic risks,
but also how stock friendships are adapting to changes that are affecting
herders around the world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.