* 1918324
* Household Producer Effects of Rural Diet Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2020,10/31/2023
* Jeffrey Cohen, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 122,445.00

The Food and Agriculture Organization is encouraging people to return to
traditional foods, some of which many have abandoned because they have been
stigmatized by the spread of Western dietary tastes, foods, and norms. This
project looks at what the FAO-recommended change would actually mean: who would
produce, what factors would affect production, the downstream effects in the
household and the local economy, the connections to increasing mobility. This
project asks, can the development of niche traditional diet become a pathway to
economic success for rural communities? Understanding how the use of traditional
foods can promote healthy eating as well as economic growth for
socioeconomically disadvantaged rural communities is critical to the development
of sustainable food programs and fostering food security for at-risk populations
throughout our country and world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Jeffrey Cohen of the
Ohio State University will explore how marginalized residents meet the
challenges of a changing economy and the escalating costs of a changing rural
diet. The PI will investigate these questions through the lens of a relatively
accessible, low-cost source of protein that is produced at home. While once
looked down upon as not modern, traditional food demand has increased in recent
years, both for local consumption, as an alternative to expensive packaged
foods, and in response to increased interest from tourism. The project asks how
producers rethink production, the market, and labor, as they produce for the
market rather than domestic consumption; and how this impacts household
structure, household organization, and gender roles. Data will be collected
through surveys, market mapping, food journals, pile sorts and photo elicitation
to develop food taxonomies, and household food-focused
interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.