* 1918102
* FMitF: Collaborative Research: Track I: Embedding Constraint Reasoning in Machine Learning for Better Prediction and Decision-making
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Willem-Jan van Hoeve, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 343,185.00

The emergence of large-scale data-driven machine learning and optimization
methods has led to successful applications in areas as diverse as finance,
marketing, retail, and health care. Yet, many application domains remain out of
reach for these methods, when applied in isolation. In the area of medical
robotics, for example, it is crucial to develop systems that can recognize,
guide, support, or correct surgical procedures. This is particularly important
for next-generation trauma care systems that allow life-saving surgery to be
performed remotely in the presence of unreliable bandwidth communications. For
such systems, machine learning models have been developed that can recognize
certain patterns, but they are unable to perform under complex physical or
operational constraints. Using constraint-based optimization methods, on the
other hand, would allow the generation of feasible surgical plans; but
currently, there is no mechanism to represent and evaluate such knowledge under
complex environments. To leverage the required capabilities for real-life
applications, this project develops an integrated method that Embeds Constraint
Reasoning in Machine Learning (ECOR-ML). The researchers intend to demonstrate
the effectiveness of ECOR-ML in the context of medical robotics. Prior research
indicates that the integration of constraint reasoning and machine learning is
essential for the development of safe and efficient technologies in this domain.
The project aims to advance both machine learning and constraint reasoning
technology, and will promote the cross-fertilization of formal and applied
research in the areas of machine learning, constraint learning, and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach in this project provides a scalable
method for machine learning over structured domains. The core idea is to augment
machine learning algorithms with a constraint reasoning module that represents
physical and operational requirements. Specifically, this research proposes to
embed decision diagrams, a popular constraint reasoning tool, as a fully-
differentiable layer in deep neural networks. By enforcing the constraints, the
output of generative models can now provide assurances of safety, correctness,
and/or fairness. Moreover, ECOR-ML possesses a smaller modeling space than
traditional machine learning approaches, allowing machine learning algorithms to
learn faster and generalize better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.