* 1918134
* Collaborative Research: Thermodynamics and thermoelasticity of iron-bearing phases
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Kai Ming Ho, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The deep mantle of Earth and other solar terrestrial planets consists of iron-
bearing minerals. Earth-type planets orbiting other stars (terrestrial
exoplanets), including the large super-Earths, must contain iron-bearing phases
as well. These phases are subjected to the extreme pressures and temperatures
prevailing in deep planetary interiors. Investigating their thermodynamic and
thermoelastic properties is a fundamental step toward understanding the
processes responsible for planet formation and evolution. It is also important
when investigating planet internal structure and dynamics. Here, the researchers
explore the structure and properties of mantle iron-bearing phases at extreme
conditions. They carry out systematic calculations at the atomic scale, called
ab initio because they address electrons quantum mechanically. They use
innovative methods to quantify the electronic state of iron, a key player which
greatly impacts materials properties. The team also performs numerical
simulations of planet dynamics to constrain mantle evolution and present-day
structures. The project's outcomes have strong implications for the
understanding of Earth's mantle dynamics, notably its thermal convection which
constrains plate tectonics and associated hazards. The new simulation methods,
shared with the community, can be applied to other materials. This
multidisciplinary project - at the crossroad of materials science, mineral
physics, and geodynamics - provides support for postdoctoral associates and
graduate students. It also fosters educational outreach toward undergraduate
students and the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the team tackles a
fundamental class of problems in high-pressure mineral physics by bringing
together experts in the physics of strongly correlated electrons and Earth
forming phases. Iron-bearing oxides and silicates contain strongly correlated
electrons which are challenging for ab initio calculations. This is particularly
true at pressures in the TPa range (tens of millions of atm) and temperatures in
the 10,000 K range (tens of thousands of degrees Fahrenheit). The researchers
develop new codes to address this challenging problem and attendant effects,
such as spin transitions. They use state-of-the-art methods such as self-
consistent density functional theory plus Hubbard U (DFT+Usc) and an adaptative
generic algorithm (AGA). New codes will be release as stand-alone software or in
subsequent releases of the Quantum ESPRESSO software. This popular open source
software for ab initio materials simulations has a broad community of users
across disciplines. Results generated in the course of this research are made
available through a public database and interactive websites. The team also
fosters educational outreach toward undergraduate students and the public, and
international collaboration with the Netherlands and
Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.