* 1918162
* Multidimensionality of Race and Social Networks
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* David Schaefer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 319,885.00

As race and ethnic diversity in the U.S. continue to increase, it is vital to
understand the forces that perpetuate intergroup conflict, disparities in life
outcomes, and social segregation. Many of the interpersonal processes that
contribute to intergroup divisions and conflict begin during adolescence. The
teen years are a critical point in the life course when identity and beliefs
surrounding race/ethnic groups begin to emerge and crystallize. Concurrently,
youth attention shifts away from family toward school and peer contexts that,
unlike family, teens have a role in choosing. These contexts provide
opportunities to get to know people from different backgrounds and, under the
right conditions, can reduce negative beliefs and overcome stereotypes about
other race/ethnic groups, allowing genuine cross-group friendships to develop.
The leads to the questions: how do the right conditions come about? In diverse
settings, what leads adolescents to choose diverse friends or join diverse
activities, versus rejecting out-group friendships and peers? This project
investigates how race/ethnic identity and other factors affect social
relationships and, in turn, how social relationships affect ethnic-racial
identity. The project will then examine how these interrelated processes
contribute to patterns of race/ethnic segregation within social settings. These
findings help to understand how adolescents gain experience with diverse friends
and in diverse activities that produce positive intergroup contact attitudes,
thus assisting school and community leaders in promoting positive social
relationships during this critical time in the life
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the current study are to investigate:
(1) how various dimensions of race (i.e., ethnic-racial identity, perceived
race, and phenotypic features) manifest during friend selection; (2) how
friendships and extracurricular activity co-participation promote one another,
and their bidirectional association with dimensions of race; and (3) the
relative contribution of the aforementioned selection and peer influence
mechanisms to observed race/ethnic segregation in friendships and activities.
This latter step helps answer the question of how consequential different
pathways are for reproducing race/ethnic segregation. To address these aims this
project will consider two peer contexts: school-based friendship networks and
extracurricular activities. The project uses longitudinal data on more than
3,000 students and 200 activities from two racially diverse high schools
originally included in the Teen Identity Development and Education Study
(TIDES). Friendship networks and ethnic-racial identity were measured with
surveys during three in-school data collection waves. Activity participation and
phenotypic features will be coded from school yearbooks. The project's
statistical analysis uses a stochastic actor-oriented model to examine the co-
evolution of friendship networks, extracurricular activity participation, and
individual ethnic-racial development. Findings from the project will inform
sociological theories regarding inter-group cooperation, minority identity, and
the role of school settings in promoting adolescent
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.