* 1918128
* Collaborative Research: Social Construction of Legal Exclusion in Slums
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Anita Patil-Deshmukh, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 386,990.00

This project investigates how legal exclusion is socially constructed in legally
recognized vs. non-recognized slum settlements. Extensive research has
demonstrated that residents of slum settlements globally have considerably worse
outcomes on key social indicators, including poverty, employment conditions, and
exposure to violence, than formally housed urban populations. Despite the
recognition that legal status has significant impacts on the socioeconomic
conditions of slum residents, little is known about why governments withhold
official recognition and deny access to life-supporting infrastructure and
residential security for slum residents. This research investigates how legal
exclusion is constructed--as a political and bureaucratic entity, as a
geographic and social reality, and as individual lived experience. It is also
designed to explain how conditions vary in communities with different degrees of
legal recognition and access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's three research
aims are to identify the multi-level factors that produce the legal exclusion
experienced by residents of non-recognized slums; demonstrate how legal
exclusion is experienced as both a collective and individual level phenomenon
that shapes the wellbeing of slum residents; and disentangle the effects of
legal exclusions from other, more widely studied aspects of informal
settlements, by comparing slum settlements with different administrative and
legal contexts. The multi-level research design builds on insights from
ethnographic research on social exclusion and political action in slums showing
that legal exclusion is not only produced at the macro-level through policy and
public discourse, but also at the community-level through negotiations with
local administrators, police officers, and service delivery workers; and at the
micro-level within the inner lives and subjective experiences of slum residents.
This approach is rooted in longstanding efforts in sociology to integrate macro
theories of social structure with micro-level analyses of social action to
explain collective and individual outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.