* 1918356
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Speech Registers and Religious Soundscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Webb Keane, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 7,620.00

This linguistic anthropological research project involves a case study of a
context in which religiously conservative women work at the margins of a
religious soundscape as increasingly vocal participants of a specific genre of
preaching meant to deepen the audience's faith. This project, which trains a
linguistic anthropology doctoral student in methods of scientifically rigorous
data collection and analysis, examines how discussions of women's voices, both
in the sense of acoustic qualities and as a category of public discourse, are
central to debates about female piety and form a key component of how feminine
speech becomes a linguistic register. By examining how women navigate the terms
of their marginalization in linguistically creative ways, this project seeks to
broaden the participation of groups often underrepresented in science and
strengthens scientific infrastructure through international collaborations
between both linguistic and anthropological research communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moniek van Rheenen, under the supervision of Dr. Webb
Keane of the University of Michigan, proposes to explore how religiously
conservative women face the challenge of being public figures while
demonstrating appropriate piety in their linguistic practice. The researcher
will be conducted at two sites (in two major cities known for their active
preaching networks) and across different contexts of mediation, including face-
to-face interaction, social media communication, and mass media circulation.
Utilizing ethnographies of communication, participant observation, interactional
analysis, and elicitation tasks, the researcher seeks to identify how salient
linguistic variables such as pitch and prosody are taken up as part of an
emerging register of feminine language. This research will contribute to debates
in linguistic anthropology about how gender ideologies are constructed through
language, theories in the anthropology of religion about everyday lived
experience, and analyses of agency and activism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.