* 1918411
* Leaving the United States and working abroad: Building a framework for American scientific leadership
* SBE,NCSE
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Dongbin Kim, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 02/28/2023
* USD 243,232.00

This study examines the career experiences and outcomes of U.S.-educated
scientists and engineers who are working abroad. The U.S. remains the global
leader in science and engineering and higher education. In relative terms,
however, the U.S. position has declined, and continued scientific leadership is
no longer guaranteed. As scientific capacity expands elsewhere in the world,
competition for highly skilled science and engineering workers increases. Today,
U.S. higher education is at the center of a two-way global flow of scientists
and engineers. The outflow of U.S.-educated scientists and engineers holds
potential implications for innovation and economic competitiveness, but, to
date, there is no systematic examination of U.S.-educated scientists abroad.
This study fills the knowledge gap by: (1) identifying which scientists and
engineers are most likely to leave the country, (2) understanding why they
leave, (3) and their experiences abroad. Findings of the study provide specific
implications for policy aimed at retaining highly skilled scientists and
engineers in the country and maximizing their contributions to scientific
advancement and innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study features a two-
stage research design. Stage 1 uses data merged from surveys conducted by the
National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics within NSF. Quantitative
analysis identifies factors associated with residence and employment abroad
versus living and working in the U.S. among U.S.-educated scientists and
engineers. Stage 2 involves collecting and analyzing interview data from
U.S-educated scientists and engineers currently working at universities outside
of the country. The qualitative sample includes biologists, computer and
mathematical scientists, and psychologists, working in Canadian, Chinese, South
Korean, and British universities. Interview data uncover why researchers chose
to leave the U.S., their career experiences abroad, and their impressions about
the global status of American science and engineering. Findings from both phases
contribute to developing a policy-relevant framework for understanding out-
mobility among U.S.-educated scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.