* 1918497
* FMiTF: Track II: Rigorous and Versatile Float-Point Precision Analysis and Tuning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 12/31/2021
* USD 116,000.00

Floating-point numbers serve as the mostly commonly used representation within
computers of real-valued quantities such as the average global temperature on
Earth. Since computer storage cells have finite precision, floating-point
quantities must be suitably rounded, following standard rounding rules such as
promulgated by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).
Unfortunately, these rounding rules are sometimes incorrectly implemented in
existing pieces of important software. In other cases, key links in the software
transformation pipeline deviate from mathematical stipulations. This project
provides an integrated collection of tools called FPFormal that helps establish
mathematically rigorous estimates of round-off error. It assists designers
pinpoint exactly which links in the transformation pipeline must be enhanced to
attain certifiable calculation results. This research eliminates or vastly
minimize deviations in calculation results that inform critical scientific
decisions. The tools developed in this project will be open to the entire
scientific community, and also play a key role in promoting pedagogy at all
levels of computing education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FPFormal project
provides an integrated collection of point tools that help researchers in
science and engineering establish tight round-off error bounds for their
numerical calculations. Some of these tools employ symbolic differentiation
supported by a novel idea called Taylor Forms, feeding the results to a global
optimizer called Gelpia. Other tools in FPFormal will help pinpoint the sources
of result deviations through differently branching computations. They will also
compute inputs that cause the most roundoff errors. FPFormal will be released to
the research community and promoted at conferences and workshops specifically
targeting three groups: computational scientists at national laboratories;
companies invested in developing mathematical software; and individual
researchers in areas such as Physics where calculations are the only means of
exploring the unknown. A major emphasis of the investigators will be to adhere
to standards such as FPBench being developed by the community to supply well-
vetted benchmarks. Broader impacts of the project are to equip domain science
and engineering researchers and practitioners with tools that help them make
their computational software trustworthy as well as more energy efficient, by
enabling them to choose lower precision whenever the underlying specifications
allow. Potential impacts span both high-performance computing and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.