* 1918511
* Powering up and spreading out: An integrated investigation of three social psychological factors involved in middle school bullying
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sandra Graham, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 564,720.00

Peer victimization (or bullying) is a serious problem in American schools.
Anywhere from 20 to 60 percent of school-aged youth report that they have
experienced bullying, of whom 10-15 percent may be chronic victims. Bullying
appears to peak during the middle school years, a time when youth are
particularly concerned about status and fitting in. Victims tend to have low
self-esteem and feel more lonely, anxious, and depressed than their non-
victimized peers. These negative consequences partly explain why victims can
also struggle academically. Most school interventions target all students in the
school and are guided by the belief that reducing bullying is everyone's
responsibility. Those universal interventions often lose sight of the most
vulnerable youth who may have a history of being bullied and are already
experiencing one or more painful outcomes. This research tests the effects of
attribution processes, social networks, and group norms in an integrated model
("Powering Up") of bullying. The attribution processes often lead to a pattern
of self-blame ("why me?") that can have long-term negative effects. The research
further tests how to utilize social network patterns and group norms to reduce
bullying behaviors. This research will facilitate our understanding of the
social psychological processes involved in bullying and provide novel insight
into middle school group dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
the integrated effects of attributional processes, social network processes, and
group norms on bullying during middle school. These social influence processes
are integrated in "Powering Up", a program that focuses on victims during the
middle school years. Powering Up utilizes three social influence mechanisms to
combat peer victimization: (1) Why Power is a 12-lesson curriculum designed to
alter the maladaptive attributions of at-risk victims; (2) Friend Power uses
experimental techniques to build friendships between victims and influential
peers in their grade; and (3) Peer Power utilizes leadership models to change
peer norms about the acceptability of bullying. This multi-component program
will be implemented in urban (California) and rural (Missouri) communities with
6th grade students in schools that vary in ethnic diversity. Powering Up will
test these intervention strategies and focus on attributional change, building
new friendships between bullying victims and influential peers, and spreading of
anti-bullying norms throughout the peer networks. This research will advance
basic social psychological knowledge on peer influence processes and the power
of attributions to change behavior. The project will also provide new insights
into individual, social, and contextual factors that promote resilience and
academic achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.