* 1918564
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regionally-Led Processes and the Building of Civil Society
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Hannah Appel, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 22,554.00

What role do regional bodies have in the building and maintenance of civil
society? This project, which trains a graduate student in methods of rigorous,
empirical data collection and analysis, explores how notions of political
belonging are formed and sustained between nation and region. In particular, it
will explore new forms of political belonging and governance that exceed
national borders, asking what can be learned from supra-national regional
dynamics, processes, and imaginations that are becoming increasingly significant
in contemporary global politics. In an era when regional alliances and
strategies, from the European Union to the North American Free Trade Agreement,
are increasingly the subject of intense debate, the significance of region-
building more broadly will enhance our understanding of the comparative
geopolitics of regional bodies and their role in conflict prevention and
resolution. In addition, the project would promote scientific understanding by
broadly disseminating its findings to organizations invested in formulating
effective practices for the building of civil society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be carried out by University of California, Los Angeles doctoral
student, Zachary Mondesire, under the supervision of Dr. Hannah Appel. Through a
12-month multi-sited ethnographic study with South Sudanese political and
intellectual figures living and working in Khartoum and Nairobi, the project
will closely examine the complex ways that individuals understand the political,
racial, and geographic communities of which they are a part. To better
understand how regional ideas of belonging take shape, he will investigate South
Sudan's decision to join the East African Community (EAC), an intergovernmental
organization that includes Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Burundi, and Rwanda. He will
also trace the ways the South Sudan's ongoing relationship with Sudan continues
to shape conflict resolution and mediation in local politics. The participants
of this study will include South Sudanese journalists, students, professors, and
political figures. Data will be collected through interviews, participant
observation, media content analysis, and the analysis of memoirs of South
Sudanese political leaders. The findings of this study will lead to more robust
understandings of the political, economic, and cultural dimensions of
regionally-led processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.