* 1918074
* Fiber-Optic Hot-Wire/Hot-Film Anemometers for Turbulence Measurement
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Ming Han, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,914.00

Non Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The study and control of turbulence are
critical for the development of next generation jet engines, combustion
chambers, and power plants with maximum performance and efficiency, which are
expected to operate in increasingly harsh environment involving high
temperature, high corrosivity, and large electromagnetic interference. Hot-
wire/hot-film anemometry that can accurately capture and characterize the flow
parameters is crucial for the fundamental understanding of turbulence.
Traditional hot-wire anemometers often cannot survive or have significantly
reduced performance under these environments. Fiber-optic hot-wire/hot-film
anemometry is an emerging technology that has the potential to perform in these
environments because of their dielectric structure and optical operation.
Current fiber-optic hot-wire/hot-film anemometers, however, cannot meet the
speed, sensitivity, and spatial resolution required for the study of turbulent
flow. The research proposed in this application is aimed at drastically
improving the performance of fiber-optic hot-wire/hot-film anemometers and make
them a viable solution for turbulence measurement in harsh environment. The
project will also provide research and education opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students in the field of optics. K-12 school students and teachers
will be involved in the project through several existing outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate new heating and temperature sensing mechanisms on ultra-thin silica
wires and silicon films as well as novel sensor demodulation methods that can
drastically improve the speed, sensitivity, and spatial resolution of the
device. The project consists of five research objectives: 1) Investigate new
mechanism to minimize the "end-conduction" effect for improved anemometer
response to high-frequency flow components. 2) Develop novel epoxy-free
fabrication methods for sensor operation under harsh environment. 3) Study novel
mechanisms to increase the quality factor of the optical resonators for improved
anemometer performance. 4) Further increase the sensor speed through a new
constant-temperature operation mode that can automatically compensate for the
thermal inertia of the sensing element. 5) Characterize and test the fiber-optic
anemometers in room-temperature and high-temperature environments. The proposed
research will advance the field of turbulence study by enabling the new
applications of hot-wire/hot-film anemometry in harsh environments. Miniaturized
fiber-optic hot-wires/films also allow to characterize liquid/gas flows in
remote and/or difficult-to-access sites with applications in much broader
communities such as biology, health care, chemical engineering, and
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.