* 1918292
* I-Corps: An Argon Power Cycle for Zero Emissions, Flexible and Efficient Power Generation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Jyh-Yuan Chen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to address
the growing challenge of mitigating global warming and air quality deterioration
as a result of the present energy supply ecosystem. This challenge is further
exacerbated by periods of economic prosperity due to an increase in energy
consumption. With the power generation sector being the biggest consumer of
primary energy and one of the largest contributors to greenhouse and air
pollutant emissions worldwide, an accelerated deployment of renewable energy is
needed. However, due to renewables' intermittency as an energy source, there is
a need for solutions that provide a flexible and reliable supply at a
competitive efficiency while also aligning with global efforts to decarbonize
the economy. Today, this challenge is partially met with addition of distributed
natural gas fired capacity, motivating natural gas usage to nearly double in the
last two decades. This project will focus on a solution to provide flexible and
benchmark efficient power while generating zero atmospheric emissions. This not
only supports environmental efforts, but also aligns with basic economics,
making it an appealing case for carbon capture where both the consumer and
producer benefit.

This I-Corp project will explore the commercial potential of a novel power
solution based on the increasingly common reciprocating engine, by which its
efficiency is radically increased and both air pollutant and greenhouse gas
emissions are eliminated. Current solutions with traditional gas turbines and
reciprocating engines fail to address air quality concerns by emitting high
volumes of particulate matter and nitrous oxides. Efficiency benchmark
technologies such as combined cycle gas turbines are unable to follow power
demand fluctuations, nor are they able to cost effectively reduce their carbon
footprint through carbon capture measures. This project will potentially address
the unmet need for simultaneously flexible, efficient and clean power by
proposing a retrofit technology that provides a transition into a utility scale
hydrogen energy storage solution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.