* 1918174
* WORKSHOP: The Pioneers Workshop at the 2019 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Larry Leifer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This is funding to support a Pioneers Workshop (doctoral consortium) of
approximately 21 students (18 graduate participants, one undergraduate
participant, and two student organizers), along with distinguished research
faculty. This full-day event will take place as part of the first day of
activities at the 14th International Conference on Human Robot Interaction (HRI
2019), to be held March 11-14 in Daegu, South Korea, and which is jointly
sponsored by ACM and IEEE. HRI is the premier conference for showcasing the very
best interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research on human-robot
interaction, with roots in diverse fields including robotics, artificial
intelligence, social psychology, cognitive science, human-computer interaction,
human factors, engineering, and many more. It is a single-track, highly
selective annual international conference that invites broad participation. The
theme of HRI 2019 is "Collaborative HRI." The conference seeks contributions
from a broad set of perspectives, including technical, design, methodological,
behavioral, and theoretical, that advance fundamental and applied knowledge and
methods in human-robot interaction, with the goal of enabling human-robot
interaction through new technical advances, novel robot designs, new guidelines
for design, and advanced methods for understanding and evaluating interaction.
More information about the conference is available online at
http://humanrobotinteraction.org/2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pioneers
Workshop is designed to complement the conference by affording a unique
opportunity for the best of the next generation of researchers in human-robot
interaction to be exposed to and discuss current and relevant topics as they are
being studied in several different research communities. Participants are
encouraged to create a social network both among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development, to form
collaborative relationships, and to generate new research questions to be
addressed during the coming years. Participants also gain leadership and service
experience, as the workshop is largely student organized and student led. The
workshop provides a forum for students and recent graduates in the field of HRI
to share their current research with their peers and a panel of senior
researchers in a setting that is less formal and more interactive than the main
conference. During the workshop, participants talk about the important upcoming
research themes in the field. The formation of collaborative relationships
across disciplines and geographic boundaries is encouraged. To these ends, the
workshop format encompasses a variety of activities including keynotes, a
distinguished panel session, and breakout sessions. To start the day, all
workshop attendees briefly introduce themselves and their interests. Following
the opening keynote, approximately half of the participants present 3-minute
overviews of their work, leading into an interactive poster session. This
enables all participants to share their research and receive feedback from
students and senior researchers in an informal setting. After lunch, the
remaining workshop participants give their 3-minute overviews, followed by
presentation of their posters during a second interactive poster session. Senior
researchers (in addition to those on the panel) are invited to attend the
student presentations and poster sessions in order to provide feedback to
participants, and workshop participants are invited to present their posters
during the main poster session of the HRI conference as well. The day will end
with a working dinner for general discussion, reflection and career advice,
which will facilitate networking. The organizers have a strong commitment to
recruiting women and members from under-represented groups, and to attracting
students and postdocs from different areas of the world and from diverse areas
of research. To further ensure diversity, no more than two student participants
will be accepted from a particular institution, and if two are accepted then at
least one of the participants must be female.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.