* 1918797
* PFI-TT: A New Deep Neural Network and Internet of Things-based Screening Framework for Sleep Apnea
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Linda Powers, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to improve sleep apnea screening
precision. More than 22 million Americans are affected by sleep apnea. The
current home sleep test systems tend to underestimate sleep apnea severity with
a high false negative rate. Eighty percent of patients with moderate to severe
obstructive sleep apnea are never diagnosed. Because sleep apnea is a serious
medical condition and a major public health issue, we urgently need a new sleep
apnea screening framework. The proposed framework is one of the first deep
learning based sleep apnea screening framework using wearable and IoT sensors.
It has commercial potential: it can potentially improve screening accuracy by 40
percent with low cost compared with existing sleep apnea screening devices. The
proposed project also includes a broader participant plan. In order to further
enhance inclusion of students from all backgrounds, the PFI-TT project will
leverage existing programs with schools and programs at the University of
Arizona. Additional workshops and teleconferences will be provided for
underrepresented groups, particularly women, Hispanic, African Americans and
Native Americans, to mentor and coach students with interests in
entrepreneurship. The success of our program can be adapted at other
institutions nationally and globally through the Desire2Learn program at the
University of Arizona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides a new
sleep apnea screening framework that can addresses the need of low cost together
with the need of high precision sleep apnea screening. The intellectual merit of
the new sleep apnea screening framework includes a new integrated sleep
monitoring wearable sensor, two deep neural network algorithms, and a smart
phone based app to collect sleep data and provide screening results. The sleep
monitoring wearable sensor incorporates multiple sensors on a single platform
with non-volatile memory and low energy Bluetooth. The new deep learning network
models classifies the severity of sleep apnea using seven levels based on the
Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). The new models include bidirectional long-short term
memory layers and fully connected layers to explore and extract sensory data
together with static features such as users' demographic information, existing
chronic diseases, and general wellbeing. A post data processing procedure is
developed to translate the probability of sleep apnea at the output of deep
neural networks to sleep apnea severity using the maximum probability. A smart
phone based app is also developed to execute deep neural network algorithms and
display sleep apnea screening results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.