* 1918751
* Advancing the Science of Learning Data Science with Adaptive Learning for Future Workforce Development
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Vasile Rus, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 12/31/2024
* USD 3,439,035.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving training in data
science. Data scientists are needed to power the ongoing revolution in Big Data
that is transforming virtually every sector of the economy. Progress in training
data scientists is currently limited by a lack of understanding about how data
science is learned and by a lack of techniques to optimize that learning. This
project will advance understanding of how data science is learned by weaving
together statistics, programming, and machine learning and experimental results
about student learning. It will use this understanding to create an innovative
Artificial Intelligence-enabled data science tutor called “DataWhys.” The
DataWhys tutor can be integrated into JupyterLab, an established professional
data science tool, and will provide 250 hours of training
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance understanding of how data science is
learned and how to optimize that learning, this project will identify the most
effective scaffolds for worked examples across varying levels of expertise and
identify when scaffolds should be removed. It will then compare a data science
intelligent tutoring condition that implements these findings against worked
example and pure problem-solving controls. This approach will synthesize
previous work in the related fields of statistics, programming, and machine
learning education, each of which has used only a few of the scaffolds and
techniques that will be comprehensively investigated in this project. In
addition to cross-sectional studies with college freshman, STEM majors, and
graduate students, longitudinal studies will be conducted in partnership with
the data science division of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and through a
summer internship for STEM majors from LeMoyne-Owen College. These longitudinal
studies will provide additional evidence regarding workforce relevance through
usability metrics and progress in personal learning plans. Source code and
training material produced under the project will be publicly shared on GitHub
where it can be freely used and modified by anyone under the open-source Apache
license. This project is supported by the Accelerating Discovery: Educating the
Future STEM Workforce program, which funds projects to educate the STEM
workforce in the critical scientific areas defined by the Big Ideas for NSF
Investment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.