* 1918692
* Robust Diagnosis in Electronic Health Records Integrating Physics-based Missing Data Multiple Imputation, Fast Inference for Hemodynamic Models, and Differential Privacy.
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alison Marsden, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 880,203.00

This project will introduce new paradigms for dealing with missing values in
electronic health record (EHR) data, with the objective of developing novel
approaches for early diagnosis of diastolic ventricular dysfunction, a silent
disease responsible for one-third of the total heart failure-related deaths
worldwide. EHR are often messy and suffer from missing data problem for various
reasons, for example more frequent clinical exams after the manifestation of the
first symptoms of a certain disease and less frequent exams during routine
screening. Missing data often limits the ability to extract useful information
from these sources (e.g., early diagnosis). The goal of this project is to
leverage the fact that missing information sometimes satisfies mathematical or
physical principles to develop innovative model-based imputation approaches,
combining models and efficient privacy-preserving learning techniques in large
EHR datasets. Computationally efficient algorithms will be developed to train
numerical models while preserving patient privacy, and the feasibility and
practical usefulness of these approaches will be demonstrated at a scale that
has not yet been addressed in the literature. The approaches for predictive
numerical models developed for this project can be applied broadly in various
fields. Additional project goals include development of infrastructure for
research and education through freely available, open-source software libraries.
This project will also provide invaluable multi-disciplinary skills to
undergraduate and graduate students. Both research and outreach efforts focus on
increasing the participation of women, people with disabilities, and of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will develop novel
regularization approaches through numerical models, i.e., optimally trained
models able to suggest distributions of missing data based on the underlying
physics. For EHRs characterizing cardiovascular function, lumped parameter
hemodynamic models offer an ideal regularizer. Parameter estimation for these
models using Markov chain Monte Carlo is computationally expensive and therefore
incompatible with fast application to large EHR collections. Additionally,
optimally trained numerical models of the cardiovascular system can be thought
as a type of query, rising issues of patient privacy. The proposed research
tackles these issues through: (1) Acquisition and analysis of a large heart
failure EHR dataset. (2) Development of privacy-preserving variational inference
for hemodynamic models, enhanced using homotopy-based optimization. (3)
Implementation and extensive testing of novel imputation approaches for missing
data, combining uncertainty quantification and numerical models. (4)
Demonstration on a large patient cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.