* 1918687
* Collaborative Research: Lifecycle Savings and Retirement Planning
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Yue Li, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 13,906.00

Saving for retirement and the allocation of accumulated savings upon retirement
are two of the most consequential financial decisions that U.S. households make.
Yet, the available evidence suggests that individuals do not save adequately for
their retirement, despite access to tax deferred retirement accounts. Further,
upon retirement, households seem reluctant to make use of annuities which
provide insurance against longevity risk more efficiently than self-insurance.
Finally, many households claim social security benefits at the earliest possible
opportunity at a substantial reduction in their monthly benefits. This project
seeks to understand such decisions and what might be done to encourage
households to make better decisions using theory and experiments with paid human
subjects. Thus, the goals of this project are in line with the NSF's mission to
advance national prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of
three main studies, each of which place subjects in a realistic, individual
choice setting and explore the decisions they make in that setting, where the
decisions are incentivized by monetary payments. Experimental subjects will be a
mix of university students and a broader, more demographically rich subject
population recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk. The first study explores the
role of Tax Deferred Accounts (TDA) for savings decisions. The aim of this
project is to understand how TDAs affect savings choices and how "nudges" such
as automatic enrollment in TDAs might improve savings behavior. The second study
explores the annuitization decision that households face at the time of
retirement. The aim of this project is to understand the factors affecting
annuity take-up. The third study explores why retirees don't delay taking social
security benefits. The goal of this project is to understand both the positive
and normative aspects of the retirement benefit redemption
decision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.