* 1918991
* PFI-TT: Rechargeable Batteries with Ultrafast Charging Capability and Long Usage Time per Charge
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Leon Shaw, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 09/30/2024
* USD 414,448.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop silicon-based rechargeable
batteries that can charge fast and can maintain a charge longer. Such batteries
will allow cell phones to be charged to their full capacity in 20 minutes,
compared with current standards of 2 hours; and will extend usage time to 3
days, rather than 2, prior to needing recharging. The ultrafast charging
batteries and high energy batteries would impact other important products,
ranging from cameras and laptops to drones, power tools, electric forklifts,
military devices, and others. Silicon-based high-energy batteries could reduce
the cost and weight of the battery pack by 60% in electric vehicles. The
scientific understanding derived from this project would enable translation of
silicon-based battery technology into consumer electronics applications in the
near term and electric vehicle applications in the longer term.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project employs a novel, simple and low cost
manufacturing method that can synthesize a new type of Si-based anode powder
that exhibits unusual properties with ultrafast charging capability, high
specific capacity and long cycle life simultaneously. The objective of this
research is to overcome technical challenges in translating this new half-cell
technology into full cell rechargeable batteries with unprecedented ultrafast
charging capability, high specific energy and long cycle life. Six research
tasks will be performed to address the challenges of low Coulombic efficiency
and irreversible Li loss in the first formation cycle of full cells, cathode
material design, correct matching of anode and cathode capacities for high
specific energy, proper selection of cutoff voltages of full cells to minimize
capacity decay during cycles, and design of full cells capable of ultrafast
charging without Li plating. Three-electrode pouch cell investigation and post-
mortem analysis of full cells with different active material loadings per unit
area and charge/discharge rates after different cycles will be conducted to
develop fundamental understanding and provide guidance to address the
aforementioned challenges and achieve the research
objective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.