* 1918723
* PFI-RP: Scalable Fabrication of Flexible Electronics and Solar Cells with Improved Environmental Stability
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2023
* USD 691,906.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this Partnerships for
Innovation-Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to enable commercialization
of inexpensive, lightweight, and flexible electronic devices with high
performance and a long lifetime. The materials developed here will improve the
performance of devices across several markets and the process will be compatible
with high-throughput manufacturing. This will impact several types of devices
with high market potential, enabling displays with lower power consumption and
higher brightness, as well as solar cells with extended useful lifetimes. The
devices can be thin and semi-transparent for solar windows or for see-through
displays, and they can be encapsulated in glass to provide an impermeable
hermetic barrier. This PFI will enable the founding of one or more startups in
these market spaces, which will in turn lead to employment opportunities and
economic development. Moreover, this project will train one postdoctoral
researcher and 9 undergraduates with skills in instrumentation development,
material deposition, and characterization methods. Students will also receive
valuable skills in innovation, entrepreneurship and commercialization through
participation in an innovative team-based course. Students from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM fields will be particularly recruited to participate in
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the need for
large grain-size crystalline semiconductor thin films with greatly improved
properties for a wide range of devices. For field-effect transistors, grain size
larger than the transistor channel length leads to improved charge carrier
mobility, which enables brighter displays. In photovoltaic cells based on hybrid
organic-inorganic perovskite materials, large grain size suppresses degradation
mechanisms occurring at grain boundaries. Solution-based thin films deposition
can deliver these advantages, while also being readily compatible with high-
throughput roll-to-roll manufacturing processes. This project takes recent
advances in research on deposition from liquid solutions to the next level by
scaling up the writing heads and adopting roll-to-roll methods. The anticipated
technical results include the construction of a deposition unit that will be
used to demonstrate an array of Organic Field Effect Transistors, which will be
integrated with Organic Light Emitting Diode pixels to form a simple display. A
second unit will be used to demonstrate perovskite photovoltaic cells with
improved properties. Long lifetime and improved environmental stability will be
achieved through control of thin film properties such as grain size, through the
use of thin flexible glass substrates with high hermeticity, and through glass-
to-glass bonding by a laser sealing method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.