* 1918979
* PFI-TT: Prototype Development of Portable Rechargeable Solar Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Fuqiang Liu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to fill the emergent need for solar
energy storage and develop a prototype of portable rechargeable solar battery.
With the rising market penetration of solar energy, there is a growing need for
solar-storage devices. However, currently available products in the market only
offer separate solutions for solar energy generation and storage. They normally
consist of a simple addition of a solar cell to a storage device with required
wiring and power control systems; therefore, they are not only expensive and
bulky, but also missing opportunities to increase performance by being
integrated. This portable rechargeable solar battery technology is important
since it integrates solar power and electricity storage in a single device and
fully eliminates batteries. The proposed technology, if successful, will provide
a cost-effective solar energy storage solution, where solar energy will be
directly stored in the form of chemical energy without the unnecessary
intermediate step such as conversion to electricity. This project can also
create greater value to participants (postdocs, graduate students working on
this project) and generate a pipeline of well-trained workforce with enhanced
practice in the development of entrepreneurship and leadership.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project introduces a new design principle for
solar energy conversion using redox couples and visible-light-sensitive
materials to directly convert and store solar energy into chemical energy at the
liquid junction interface. This proposed technology centers on dual-function
redox couples as both charge transfer materials and energy storage media in a
portable rechargeable solar cell, which simultaneously generates and stores
electricity under light illumination, and discharges when needed. In this
project, the automatic photocharge and discharge that are regulated by the
energetics at the liquid junction interface will be investigated and utilized as
a unique controller-free and switch-free feature which is ideal for portable
devices. Off-the-shelf materials will be studied to achieve an energy
compatibility between the photo-conversion and storage processes in a single
device. The proposed research will result in a prototype with integration of
solar electricity and energy storage that could simplify operation and improve
cell reliability, as compared to the leading products in these market segments
as well as other applications such as off-grid fixed systems in infrastructure-
poor places.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.