* 1918033
* Collecting a Representative Sample of Social Movement Events to Study Change Over Time
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Kraig Beyerlein, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2023
* USD 290,000.00

Social movement events are an integral part of democracy, giving people the
opportunity to come together collectively to voice concerns about elected
officials and governmental policies. Despite longstanding scholarly attention to
these events, until recently no nationally representative sample of them existed
because of methodological limitations. Most significantly, newspapers--prior
research's go-to data source--disproportionally cover larger and more
contentious events, generating a skewed view of their social dynamics. A 2010-11
national survey of these events changed that. With the first-ever nationally
representative sample of these events in hand, researchers made many new
discoveries, such as capturing the average size of events and the most common
causes for which events mobilized across the nation. By collecting another wave
of such events and comparing it to the original one, this project breaks new
ground in the study of social change. The project will analyze two types of
change. First is change in the characteristics of the events. Are event sizes in
the second wave study larger or smaller relative to those in the first wave? Do
today's events focus around certain causes (for example, gun violence,
immigration, or women's issues) more often than they did eight years ago? Second
is explanatory change. Are certain factors stronger or weaker predictors now
than in the first survey? For instance, does the proportion of blacks attending
events generate more or less police presence today compared to eight years ago?
Findings will inform understanding of democratic life and civil society,
allowing elected officials and governmental agencies to have important
information about trajectories for collective action, thus enabling better
planning for citizen safety and participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social movement events reflect attendee
concerns with governmental policies, but tracking changes in these events has
been hampered by lack of reliable data. This project builds on earlier work that
produced a representative sample of these events; this project will conduct a
second such survey. The second survey wave will employ hypernetwork sampling to
draw a nationally representative sample of over 1,000 event attendees to answer
questions about objective features of events they attended, such as turnout,
date, location, tactics used, organizational sponsorship, and police and other
citizen presence. Duplicate events will be removed. Additionally, statistical
weights will be developed and applied to adjust for: (1) the greater probability
of inclusion for larger events given hypernetwork sampling; and (2) the fact
that some citizens attend more than one event in the last 12 months, and thus
not all events have an equal probability of selection. Events will be geocoded
by city and linked to Census-place level codes. Then, Census variables (for
example, population size) will be attached to them, so that contextual variables
can be examined. To analyze change between the two samples, both bivariate
(t-tests) and multivariate (regression) statistical models will be used.
Moreover, data visualization techniques will be implemented to facilitate
interpretation and understanding of changes in events over time. These findings
will advance sociological theories about social movement dynamics, with
implications for greater knowledge regarding the types of social issues most
likely to motivate collective action. Findings will also inform larger
literatures in several fields regarding democratic participation, particularly
regarding contextual differences in event characteristics and trajectories, thus
informing theories of social change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.