* 1918260
* PFI-RP:  Measurement system for high speed and precision manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Neal Brock, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2023
* USD 549,971.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the development and commercialization
of an on-machine measurement (also called metrology) system that can increase
the economic competitiveness of the United States in precision manufacturing, or
the ability to machine complex components and parts with low margins for error.
This project will enhance the ability to efficiently machine highly engineered
parts, solving a common costly and labor-intensive technical hurdle facing many
industries including optics, additive or 3D manufacturing, and other sectors
with highly demanding machining requirements. This project will also create new
and broader collaborations with industry, enhance partnerships between academia
and industry, and build infrastructure for research and education. The proposed
activities will provide next generation leaders in innovation and
entrepreneurship with firsthand experience in technology development,
translation, and commercialization. In addition, this work will expand the
participation of women and students from underrepresented groups in innovation,
technology translation, and entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is expected to advance high-throughput precision manufacturing.
Currently the key technical bottleneck in diamond turning and other high-
precision fabrication is the metrology process used for quality control.
Existing practices to center a tool and to ensure the quality of the fabricated
workpiece are very time-consuming, requiring several iterations to remove the
workpiece from the machine for offline measurements and then to remount
workpiece onto the machine. The removal and remount processes often introduce
additional manufacturing errors. The proposed compact, snapshot, dual-mode,
multi-wavelength interferometric system will incorporate several unique
techniques to significantly improve speed and manufacturing accuracy.
Specifically, a polarization-based multi-wavelength snapshot technique will
enable the real-time measurement of machined surfaces with minimum environmental
impact. A deep-learning-based phase unwrapping technique will eliminate the
time-consuming phase unwrapping problem in interferometric measurement. The
unique configuration ensures a very compact interferometric system that can be
integrated seamlessly into existing equipment for in-situ metrology. The new
fabrication process with real-time, in-situ metrology is estimated to improve
efficiency by 30% or greater in tool alignment, and another 50% or greater in
surface metrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.