* 1918824
* Stress, microbiome, and the physiology of learning: unraveling complex interactions in the development of a learned behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Nicole Creanza, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 01/31/2024
* USD 534,230.00

Acute and chronic stress during childhood can have profoundly detrimental
effects on physical and mental health. Early-life stress can lead to
modifications to the structure of DNA, which changes the way genes are
expressed, potentially leading to negative effects on health and well-being.
There are hints in human studies that stress and trauma in children are
associated with language impairments and achievement gaps in school. However, a
major question remains unresolved: how does developmental stress affect the
learning process, and what changes in the brain underlie these effects? Further,
emerging evidence suggests that bacteria in the gut have major effects on
multiple axes of health, including mental and behavioral health. Antibiotics are
routinely used in medicine, especially during childhood, but often have the side
effect of disrupting the "good" bacteria in the gut. This project aims to
understand 1) whether stress causes lasting changes to learning-related gene
expression in the brain and 2) whether disruptions to gut bacterial communities
can induce stress and impair learning. Understanding how to prevent and mediate
these effects of early-life stress is critical to fostering lifelong educational
achievement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Songbirds and humans share the unique ability
to learn vocalizations, as well as certain genes and neural structures
associated with vocal learning and brain development. In addition, song is a
robust, quantifiable measure of learning, and songbirds exhibit impaired song-
learning ability after early-life stress. This project will examine the effects
of developmental stress on learning, the brain, and the microbiome, using the
zebra finch as a songbird model system. Zebra finch nestlings will be
differentially treated either with orally administered corticosterone, to mimic
the hormonal and physiological effects of chronic stress, or with a vector
control. The investigator will also administer antibiotics to a subset of birds
to test whether perturbations to the microbiome can induce a stress response
that affects learning. After the treatment phase, juvenile zebra finches will be
placed with an adult male zebra finch tutor. The investigator will continuously
record all sounds produced by the juvenile for the 60-day duration of the song-
learning period to quantify and compare the rate and accuracy of song learning
across treatments. The investigator will then collect neural tissue from regions
of the brain known to be involved in song learning, as well as regions unrelated
to song development, to assess gene expression across brain nuclei and
treatments with RNAseq. Fecal samples will be collected at regular time points
for 16S sequencing to analyze microbial composition. Taken together, these
experiments on the effects of early-life stress in songbirds will shed light on
the underlying connections between stress, the microbiome, and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.