* 1918233
* FMitF: Track II: Transitioning Ruby Types to Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Jeffrey Foster, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2020
* USD 99,998.00

Ruby is a popular programming language that is perhaps best known for Ruby on
Rails, a framework for developing web sites. However, unlike some other
programming languages, Ruby does not have a static type system, which helps
detect bugs in programs as they are written. This lack of a static type system
can make developing Ruby programs harder, and it also means certain kinds of
bugs might remain latent until programs are actually run by users. Over the last
ten years, the investigator has been carrying out research on adding static
types to Ruby and similar languages. As a result of this work, very recently two
key things happened: (1) Stripe, a major payment processing company, decided to
develop their own static Ruby type system, and (2) the core Ruby development
team decided to add static types to Ruby 3, the next version of the Ruby
programming language. The goal of this project is to help bring type checking
successfully to Ruby 3 and into practice by transitioning the investigator's
research results, knowledge, and experience with Ruby type systems, in
collaboration with Stripe and the core Ruby development team. The project's
novelties are helping develop a common type annotation language for Ruby,
including source-level annotations; integrating those annotations with Ruby
document-generation tools; and developing extensive support for type checking
Ruby on Rails applications. The project's impacts are that the technology will
make it easier and faster to eliminate bugs in Ruby programs earlier in the
software development cycle. Since Ruby is widely used, these improvements have
the potential to improve the software of many of the websites that millions of
people rely on every day.

The project builds on RDL, a static type system for Ruby previously developed by
the investigator. RDL supports a wide range of type features: nominal types,
structural types, high-order method types, intersection and union types, tuple
and finite hash types, generics, and a self type, among others. RDL's type
language, as well as Stripe's type language, will form the basis of Ruby 3's
type language. RDL also has special support for metaprogramming, in which code
generates classes and methods as it runs, for use later during execution.
Metaprogramming is used extensively in Ruby on Rails. RDL supports
meetaprogramming by storing type information at run-time, thereby allowing
metaprogramming code to also generate type information for any classes and
methods it creates. As part of the project, the PI and his collaborators will
use this metaprogramming support to generate type information for Ruby 3's and
Stripe's type systems. They will also develop a range of type annotations for
popular Ruby libraries and other frameworks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.