* 1918549
* Expeditions: Coherent Ising Machines for Optimization, Machine Learning and Neuromorphic Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2026
* Martin Fejer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 03/31/2026
* USD 7,995,213.00

This Expeditions project seeks to gain a deeper understanding of the fundamental
nature and potential uses of Coherent Ising Machines (CIMs). These machines
exploit unconventional computing architectures to solve crucial optimization
problems for application domains ranging from logistics and robotics to
materials engineering and drug design. Based on the performance of current CIM
prototypes, next-generation CIMs hold great promise to drive substantial
practical advances in artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities in such fields.
CIMs are of significant fundamental research interest as well, as novel
architectures with which we can test transformative ideas for computer
engineering in the post-Mooreâ€™s Law era. CIMs exploit a synergistic combination
of optical and electronic components to achieve both massive data connectivity
and fast programmable logic. They likewise utilize an unconventional optical
memory that represents a stepping stone towards more radical quantum information
technologies. CIM prototypes today achieve substantially greater scale while
leveraging more incremental advances in device physics than do prototype quantum
computers. Work to develop new CIM applications, benchmark CIM prototypes, and
analyze CIM scaling can thus shed new light on poorly understood aspects of the
physics of computation that sit between conventional technology and an idealized
quantum regime. CIMs rely upon data processing primitives with substantial
parallels to those required for deep learning, suggesting that technical
innovations arising from CIM research may have broader impact in hardware
development for AI. The core research of this CIM Expedition will thus serve as
an important complement to ongoing efforts towards quantum and neuromorphic
computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CIM Expedition will support the
development of advanced prototype hardware incorporating recent advances in
nanophotonics, optoelectronics and ultrafast laser sources. In continuing to
explore the complementarity of optics and electronics for specialized
optimization/AI architectures, its researchers will be particularly interested
in assessing tradeoffs between raw speed and energy efficiency that can be made
in new ways in this hybrid design space. The project will investigate
generalizations of CIM architectures utilizing insights from reservoir computing
and message passing algorithms, and establish a general theory of the role of
quantum effects in CIM including strategies to exploit them robustly. The
project will extend recent theoretical analyses of the dynamics of deep learning
neural networks to elucidate subtle connections between the mathematical
structure of hard optimization problems and the solution trajectories of
physical computing machines. The CIM Expedition team will work with industrial
partners and applications-domain specialists to perform extensive benchmarking
of existing CIM prototypes, forecasting feasible CIM performance in comparison
with conventional computing approaches as well as emergent quantum computing.
This work will follow best practices for making comparisons across disparate
hardware platforms and realistic application use cases in combinatorial
optimization and machine learning, established previously by members of the CIM
Expedition team. Overall the project will aim to develop a sharper understanding
of the capabilities and operating principles of current CIM prototypes, as well
as a clearer picture of future possibilities for CIM scaling and fundamental
performance improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.