* 1918065
* Theories of Transport and Optical Phenomena in Topological and Correlated Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Joel Moore, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2023
* USD 449,552.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education towards understanding fundamental electronic and optical properties of
materials. The electronic and optical properties of materials form the basis of
much of modern information technology. Newly discovered materials that go under
the classification "topological materials" respond in unique ways to applied
electric and magnetic fields, and their properties in some cases can be
unusually robust to impurities. The first area of the research portion of this
project involves developing theoretical methods to predict and understand
properties of topological materials, extending previous work in this area. A
particular focus is on improving our understanding of the optical properties
that appear when materials are studied with intense laser light. The electrons
in these materials appear effectively massless, which creates exciting
opportunities for basic science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The other
main area of research involves understanding how interactions between electrons
in a very clean material lead to fluid-like collective motion of electrons, but
with interesting differences compared to the flow of a normal fluid, like water.
Understanding these hydrodynamical flows of electrons, or of atoms in an atomic
gas, could help in the design of future generations of electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational work in this project includes several
activities beyond standard professorial classroom teaching and mentoring of
graduate students. The PI is working on a textbook that will be a broad
introduction to topological materials, building on his previously published
lecture notes. He will pursue outreach activities with local science teachers
and with the general public, to give them a sense of recent developments in
quantum materials. Undergraduates will be involved in introductory research
problems to give them a sense of modern research in the above
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines research in two areas of
quantum condensed matter physics with related education and outreach activities.
One area of research is concerned with gapless topological states of electrons,
building on discoveries of new classes of materials and new phenomena that they
enable. The other area involves transport in interacting electron metals
including hydrodynamic effects that arise in very clean materials. The main
broader impacts of the work to be conducted are on education, primarily of the
PI's graduate students but also of scientists and non-scientists more generally,
and on understanding the physical underpinnings of future quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI seeks to understand new kinds of
electronic behavior in two areas of quantum condensed matter physics. One area
involves topological behavior in metallic or gapless materials. Two recently
discovered examples with a long history as theoretical possibilities are the
topological bulk semimetals of Weyl or Dirac type. These, and more complicated
states such as gapless spin liquids, are subjects of active experimental and
theoretical study, but what unique properties they might have is not well
understood, compared to the insulating case. This research direction builds on
promising recent results on how nonlinear optics and other properties not
usually thought of as having a topological origin can become unexpectedly strong
and even quantized in topological phases. The supported work will advance the
understanding of these kinds of materials more systematically, including
interaction effects, and find new examples of topological behavior beyond linear
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydrodynamics of simple fluids was arguably the
first simplified or "effective" theory of an interacting condensed matter
system. The second area of research involves how the modified forms of
hydrodynamics arising in the long-time, long-distance dynamics of electrons
differ from conventional classical hydrodynamics, which describes a simple fluid
like ordinary water. Theoretical work in recent years has given several examples
of how electron hydrodynamics in materials can differ from ordinary classical
single-component hydrodynamics, whether from extra conserved quantities, the
long-ranged nature of Coulomb repulsion, or broken symmetries such as time-
reversal or inversion. The behavior of quantum fluids is both experimentally
important, for actual transport in practical devices made from very clean
materials at small length scales, and is connected to deep questions about
thermalization and relaxation rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities
include undergraduate and graduate student supervision and classroom teaching,
lecturing at advanced schools and co-authorship of an introductory textbook on
topological matter, and outreach to schools and teachers. One goal of the
educational work is to bring some of the magic of recent discoveries in quantum
condensed matter physics to a broader audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.