* 1918357
* MRI: Acquisition of a Lake Shore Cryotronics High performance Vibrating Sample Magnetometer to enhance the New Mexico Highlands University Paleomagnetic-Rock Magnetism Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Michael Petronis, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 153,915.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program award supports the acquisition
of a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM) to be used for research and research
training at New Mexico Highlands University (NMHU), a non-Ph.D. granting and
Hispanic Serving Institution. The acquisition will support a wide range of
national and international collaborative investigations in the materials and
geosciences. The investigators plan active engagement of underrepresented and
often first-generation college students in experiential learning and maintain
active national and international collaborations using previously NSF-supported
paleomagnetic equipment that complements the requested VSM.

The VSM will allow for faculty and students to make magnetic hysteresis
measurements that are critical for interpreting magnetic mineralogy, domain
state and saturation magnetism. Research that will be enabled or enhanced will
include: materials design, synthesis, and their applications in electronics,
optics, and magnetism properties; theoretical research in the transport behavior
of nanoparticles through porous materials; paleomagnetic and structural analysis
of crustal deformation; rock magnetic properties of Earth materials;
paleoclimate research; growth and deformation of volcanic constructs; shallow
crustal magmatic emplacement; glacial deformation; and Neoproterozoic plate
configurations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.