* 1918187
* FMitF: Track I: Privacy-Preserving Policy Verification of Interdomain Routing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Lixin Gao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,998.00

Nearly all digital communication between entities is now carried by the
Internet. Communications through the Internet include collaborations that enable
scientific progress, transaction of business, and transfer of medical
information that promotes human welfare. Having a secure and predictable
Internet is of great importance. In tension with its importance, the
decentralized nature of the Internet makes it hard to analyze. No single entity
has perfect information about the internet, and there is lack of formal models
for reasoning about the Internet with incomplete information. As a result,
through accident or malice, it is possible for small localized policy changes in
the Internet to have large net effects of traffic being inappropriately routed.
This project seeks to develop tools and techniques to address this limitation,
and will use outreach to publicize these approaches to the academic community
and standardization bodies that govern Internet policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Internet connects thousands of Autonomous Systems
(ASs) operated by Internet Service Providers, companies, and universities. The
ASs interconnect to each other to route traffic and exchange reachability
information using the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). BGP allows each AS to use
its own local policy for making routing decisions, without revealing what policy
it is using. The use of diverse and unknown policies makes it extremely
difficult to analyze whether a network may be susceptible to traffic hijacking,
or whether a policy change in one AS might lead to unintended emergent behaviors
in a network. This project will seek to develop a formal framework for reasoning
about routing policies and their impact. Network operators can pose queries in
this framework to find out whether routing-policy settings may lead to
vulnerabilities or other undesirable behaviors. The queries from network
operators will be posed as SMT formulas, with additional domain-specific
abstractions and invariants to help support scalability. Critically, in
recognition that routing policies are private within BGP, the formal framework
will be privacy-preserving, so that each AS can participate without revealing
their policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.