* 1918459
* Collaborative Research:  Reading lithology from topography: How rock properties influence landscape form and evolution in the Guadalupe Mountains, TX and NM
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nicole Gasparini, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 196,600.00

The shape of landscapes partly depends on the physical properties of the bedrock
that underlies them (e.g., how strong different rock types are in different
places, how fractured the rocks are, and how easily particular rocks break down
to make soil and sediment, also known as weathering). It should be possible to
"read" rock properties from landscape form (topography), but we currently lack a
quantitative relationship that can be used practically. For example, the
likelihood of landslides depends on rock and soil properties. Past tectonic
activity and the potential for future earthquakes along faults can also
potentially be inferred from topography, but the effects of tectonics must be
isolated from rock property controls on landscape form. Predicting land surface
properties would also be beneficial for planning access to remote areas
following natural disasters or during human conflicts. The researchers will
develop teaching modules based on the Guadalupe Mountains to use in a dual
enrollment (i.e., college credit for high school students) geoscience course
taught through UT Austin that provides college credit to high school students
across Texas. High school geoscience and environmental science teachers will be
trained through intensive and fun field workshops to be taught in the Guadalupe
Mountains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the Guadalupe Mountains in
Texas and New Mexico as a natural laboratory to understand how rock properties
can be inferred from topography. In addition to (a) using geographic information
system analysis to relate meter-scale topographic data and digital geology maps,
the researchers will also (b) make extensive field measurements of rock
properties across this landscape, (c) determine long-term bedrock erosion rates
by measuring cosmogenic radionuclide concentrations from rock samples, and (d)
evaluate open-source computer models that predict how landscapes will evolve
through time, and improve these models to better incorporate rock properties
into their equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.