* 1918016
* Middle School Parent Engagement Text Messaging Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kalena Cortes, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will use experimental methods to study the effects of
information on parental involvement in their adolescent child's education and
how this in turn affects the child's education and social outcomes. The
intervention uses weekly text messages to provide low-income parents information
and activities that will help them support their middle school children's socio-
emotional and academic skills. The text messages include tips on how: (i) to
support and guide children's academic trajectory as they transition from middle
to high school; (ii) to support children's social and emotional learning (SEL)
skills; and (ii) knowledge, skills, and abilities of children are grow-able.
Educational and social outcomes of children whose parents receive text messages
will be compared to those of children whose parents do not receive text
messages. The goal of the text messaging is to narrow income-achievement gap of
students before middle school students enter high school. Parental involvement
during middle school years is positively associated with a range of behavioral
and academic outcomes; yet parental involvement declines during the formative
middle school years. This project is intended to demonstrate the value of a
parental texting programs for the middle school years and provide a replication
roadmap for school districts. The results of this research will provide
important inputs into the design and implementation of policies to improve
school outcomes, increase skills, and ultimately increase economic growth in the
U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses a randomized
control trial (RCT) method to study the effects of information on parental
involvement in their child's life and the effect of this involvement on the
child's educational and social outcomes. It involves sending three weekly text
messages to parents of middle school students in the treatment group. Each text
message focuses on an academic topic, skill, or activity for their child. The
text messages include tips on: supporting and guiding children's academic
trajectory as they move from middle school to high school; supporting children's
social and emotional learning (SEL) skills; and how to grow knowledge, skills,
and abilities of children. Texts4Teens is intended to narrow income-achievement
gaps before children enter high school. The results of this research will
provide parents, schools, and school districts with details on how information
on parent-child engagement affects students' academic and social-emotional
outcomes and on how to support parents in their child's educational trajectory
from middle to high school. The results will also establish the U.S. as the
global leader in the use of information to improve education and social outcomes
of teenagers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.