* 1918716
* Collaborative Research:  Role of DNA sequence and deformability on lesion recognition and excision in the base excision repair pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Marcia Levitus, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2024
* USD 473,265.00

Collaborative Research: Role of DNA sequence and deformability on lesion
recognition and excision in the base excision repair
pathway&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA damage occurs often in cells and must be
repaired to ensure the integrity of the genome. This project will test whether
damage that occurs within a rigid region of DNA is repaired more slowly than
damage that occurs within a flexible region. This knowledge will help understand
key aspects of DNA repair, mutation rates, and molecular evolution. The results
of this project will also provide detailed insight into how proteins that repair
DNA damage interact with the DNA substrate, which is critical for maintaining
cellular life. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive
multidisciplinary training in chemical and biophysical techniques, including
advanced spectroscopic and computational methods. A joint course in fluorescence
and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy will also be developed. New online
undergraduate course materials for quantitative approaches in the biosciences
and chemistry will be developed, and a variety of outreach and scientific
literacy projects for school age children and adults are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA flexibilities and repair efficiencies will be
systematically assessed for three common types of damage that are repaired by
three different enzymes of the base excision repair pathway (uracil-DNA
glycosylase, thymine-DNA glycosylate, and O6MeG-DNA methyltransferase). Despite
differences in sequence and structure, these enzymes use a similar base flipping
mechanism to recognize and remove the damaged base. By using enzyme kinetics,
fluorescence, nuclear magnetic resonance and computer simulations, DNA
rigidities and repair efficiencies will be systematically assessed for a large
number of DNA sequences. This data will be used to quantify the link between DNA
rigidity and repair efficiency, and help explain the origins of the observed
sequence-dependent behavior in terms of structure, energetics and
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.