* 1918294
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Flood Infrastructure and Heritage Preservation in the South Carolina Lowcountry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Melissa Caldwell, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 01/31/2021
* USD 25,200.00

Annual flooding in Charleston, South Carolina, and the surrounding Lowcountry
has increased 50% and the region has suffered a major hurricane every year for
the past 4 years. Although the low-lying region has a long history of flooding,
this rapid increase has sparked a crisis discourse, leading the city government
to name flooding "the #1 priority" and begin swift actions to preserve the local
environs. This project, which trains a doctoral student in methods of rigorous
and empirically-grounded data collection and analysis, examines the creation and
maintenance of Charleston's storm drainage systems, seawalls, and networks of
rice dikes and floodgates to map and analyze the preservation of heritage sites.
Project findings will be disseminated in such a way that aids planners explore
more equitable ways to define risk, resistance, and resilience in regards to
specific community needs and desires. Finally, this research project aims to
produce work that will be helpful to local communities fighting the impacts of
flooding in Charleston, South Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brian Walter,
under the supervision of Dr. Melissa Caldwell of the University of California at
Santa Cruz will investigate the relationship between flood water and heritage
discourses and practices by conducting ethnographic fieldwork in the Charleston
Lowcountry. During this period, he will work across stratified locations
suffering the effects of sea-level-rise. At these sites, the researcher will use
interviews, participant observation, and participatory GIS to gain knowledge
about how individuals differentially define heritage in the environment,
experience sea-level rise and fight for the maintenance of flood infrastructure.
This work aims to contribute to debates about environmental change mitigation,
by offering an ethnographic case to better explain how sea-level-rise is
experienced socioeconomically: an essential complement to quantitative data
models that focus on macro-level change and assume an equal amount of flooding
causes equal damage to life. This outcome will help make the intersection
between race and the environment visible in policy conversations and help
promote methodologies to determine alternative definitions of normed policy
concepts such as value, vulnerability, or heritage site employed in current
spatial studies determining the impacts of sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.