* 1918386
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spoken Language Variation in Chanka, an Endangered Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Gregory Guy, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 07/31/2021
* USD 15,120.00

Social and linguistic factors related to standard language ideologies have been
found to affect the patterning of linguistic variables in well-known languages.
However, in indigenous speech communities, it is not well understood whether the
same factors predict variation in the same way, given that social factors
(especially education-related ideologies) can be quite different. This project
investigates which factors constrain variation in an endangered indigenous
language of South America. The documentation will form the core material to be
analyzed in a doctoral dissertation. Broader impacts include a publicly
available deposit of the recordings, transcriptions, and metadata, as well as
community training in data collection and linguistic analysis. Results from this
work thus directly encourage language maintenance by empowering community-driven
documentation and facilitating the creation of accurate pedagogical materials.

Natalie Povilonis de Vilchez, a doctoral candidate at New York University, will
conduct and analyze sociolinguistic interviews in the Chanka variety of Quechua,
spoken in Peru. Studying Chanka offers insight into how sociolinguistic theories
apply to situations where indigenous languages are rarely appropriate for
education or formal domains, and where speakers have varied fluency in the
majority language (Spanish). While endangered, Chanka continues to be a vital
code for many speakers, thus allowing documentation of the language in actual
use. This project will develop a transcribed corpus of approximately 64 hours of
sociolinguistic interviews with speakers in four communities, selected as
proxies for differences in Spanish fluency, ruralness, and education.
Traditional variationist qualitative methods, often involving reading tasks, are
adapted as audiovisual activities to determine how non-literate speakers
evaluate different ways of speaking. The quantitative analysis focuses on rates
of use of both a phonological variable that is the object of conscious
correction (the uvular phoneme), and morphosyntactic variables below the level
of speaker awareness (word order and related determiners and case marking).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.