* 1918637
* STEM at the Poles! Research Experiences for Formal and Informal Educations in the Polar Regions
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Helen Wiggins, Arctic Research Consortium of the U.S.
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,087,374.00

The Arctic Research Consortium (ARCUS) of the U.S. will administer and implement
"STEM at the Poles", a program that provides opportunities for U.S. educators to
participate in cutting-edge field research with polar scientists in various, and
often remote, locations in the Arctic and Antarctica. During this three-year
project, thirty-six participants from the field of education, including eighteen
U.S. middle and high school teachers and eighteen U.S. informal science
educators (e.g. educators who work outside classrooms and who work with the
public or middle and high school students and/or their teachers), will
participate in a research experience with scientists in the Arctic and
Antarctic. Through this unique experience, ARCUS will provide a professional
development opportunity for both formal and informal educators where they will:
(1) connect to the polar regions and the research community; (2) develop
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) resources that help
advance the basic knowledge of polar regions across a variety of learning
environments; and (3) change how they teach STEM in both informal and formal
learning environments. The program will provide numerous opportunities for
students and the public to learn about how polar research is conducted both in
the Arctic and Antarctic and will help polar researchers learn to communicate
more effectively with students and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goals of the program are as
follows: (1) Improve educators' STEM content knowledge of the Polar Regions and
the science conducted in these regions; (2) Increase educators' knowledge and
use of STEM practices with their students in their learning setting; (3) Build
educators' STEM identity; (4) Increase the STEM collaborations between formal
and informal educators; (5) Increase students' understanding and engagement in
the polar regions and interest in polar-related STEM careers; and (6) Develop
long-term professional relationships between the education and research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.