* 1918325
* Understanding Perceptual and Psychological Mechanisms Causing Racial Bias in Pain Care
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Peter Mende-Siedlecki, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2023
* USD 421,377.00

Past research has shown large racial disparities in pain care in the United
States. In particular, the pain of Black patients is consistently under-
diagnosed and under-treated. Black Americans are less likely to be prescribed
pain medication. When they do receive pain medication, they are prescribed lower
doses on average. Beyond the threat this inequality in pain care presents to the
health and well-being of minority individuals, unequal treatment of pain has
consequences for national productivity. As one example, untreated or mistreated
pain is associated with difficulty in returning to work following injury. Theory
and research in social psychology has identified several factors that contribute
to racial bias in pain care, including stereotypes, implicit racial bias, and
gaps in empathy. This project expands on past research by including a separate
and distinct perceptual basis for this bias in pain care. The central premise is
that race shapes the visual perception of painful expressions on others' faces,
triggering a cascade of biased processing and behavioral outcomes. By bringing
together theory and research in social psychology, vision science, cognitive
neuroscience, and health care, this project seeks to develop a social perceptual
model of racial bias in pain care. It will reveal the psychological and
perceptual mechanisms that contribute to racial disparities in pain treatment
and help to develop potential interventions to reduce the
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is organized around a set of eight
behavioral and neuroimaging experiments that examine the psychological roots,
neural bases, and behavioral consequences of racial bias in pain perception. The
studies consider whether race influences the recognition and treatment of pain
by disrupting the visual perception of painful facial expressions. One expected
effect is that perceivers see painful expressions on Black faces earlier than
they do on White faces, and that this difference can account for some of the
known biases in treatment, over and above the influence of explicit stereotypes
or implicit racial bias. The research aims to uncover aspects of the perceiver
and of the person being perceived that make the bias larger or smaller, focusing
on factors such as social status, racial prototypicality, and interracial
contact. The project also considers whether medical health professionals show
the same perceptual bias, and whether the bias is observed when self-report
information about pain experience is available. As a potential focus for
intervention, the research tests whether brain and behavioral responses
associated with visual biases in pain care are reduced by increased familiarity
of and experience with Black faces. The existence of racial disparities in pain
care undermines public health and threatens national productivity. This project
contributes to a foundation of basic knowledge on which future interventions can
be based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.