* 1918585
* PFI-TT: Affordable and High-Quality Polyethylene Glycols for Nanomedicine and Other Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Shiyue Fang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(PFI) project is the development of a new way to make a special class of
chemicals, polyethylene glycols (PEGs). PEGs are neutral, stable, flexible, non-
toxic and dissolve easily, and thus they are used in many applications,
including pharmaceutical products and other biomedical applications. However, it
is difficult to make PEGs with enough purity and consistency for use in more
advanced pharmaceutical applications, and for other uses, the right PEG simply
cannot be made. This PFI project will develop and commercialize novel ways to
synthesize PEGs. The new affordable and highly pure PEGs will generate higher
quality and lower prices for drugs using them; similarly, many biomedical and
related research projects requiring PEGs will be more affordable and will
generate more consistent results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
advance the knowledge needed for the synthesis of highly pure PEGs with
affordable prices. Currently, pure PEGs shorter than those with 64 ethylene
glycol monomer units can be synthesized, but the methods require multiple
expensive reaction workups and chromatography, and the products have limited
purity. In addition, pure PEGs longer than 64 ethylene glycol monomer units with
acceptable purity cannot be synthesized using any known methods. The technical
hurdles that cause these problems of PEG synthesis include the difficulty to
separate PEG products and impurities, slow reaction rates, and depolymerization
side reactions. The research objective of this project is to gain the knowledge
needed to overcome these technical hurdles. The approaches include using solid
phase synthesis instead of traditional solution phase synthesis, innovative
stepwise synthesis monomers, and automated synthesis using a peptide
synthesizer. Using these approaches, the products will be easily isolated
without tedious workup and purified without expensive chromatography, the
reaction rates will be increased, the depolymerization side reaction will be
suppressed, and the process will require minimal labor. It is expected that once
detailed knowledge about using these approaches are obtained, pure PEGs with
unprecedented high quality and low costs will be conveniently
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.