* 1918063
* Workshop: Women of Color in Political Science 2019: August 2019 - Washington, D.C.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Jessica Lavariega Monforti, Menlo College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2021
* USD 49,817.00

Research demonstrates that women of color face barriers such as lack of
mentorship, financial resources, and significant familial responsibilities in
their pursuit of higher education and subsequent careers in political science.
Political science is one of the most male and Anglo dominated fields of study in
the social sciences. Descriptive representation within the academic profession
is important to perceptions of legitimacy, service to students, and development
of knowledge. The goal of the conference is to provide attendees the necessary
skills and networks to enter the academy, successfully achieve tenure and
sustain their careers thereafter. This workshop brings together scholars from
different universities, at different stages in their careers, to deepen
intellectual engagement and to build coalitions that support excellence in
diversifying the political science profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Descriptive
representation within the academic profession is important to perceptions of
legitimacy, service to students, and development of knowledge. The goal of the
conference is to provide attendees the necessary skills and networks to enter
the academy, successfully achieve tenure and sustain their careers thereafter.
This workshop brings together scholars from different universities, at different
stages in their careers, to deepen intellectual engagement and to build
coalitions that support excellence in diversifying the political science
profession. The workshop includes an opening plenary session that focuses on the
development of intersectionality work in the discipline and a discussion of the
discipline and the role of women of color therein. It also includes a series of
breakout sessions that focus on various aspects of academic development. The
workshop will facilitate deep mentoring by pairing graduate students, junior,
and mid-career participants by interest, with structured one-on-one mentoring
time embedded into the schedule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.