* 1918854
* Collaborative Research: New Bayesian Methods for Modeling the Effect of Antiretroviral Drugs on Depressive Symptomatology in HIV Patients
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yanxun Xu, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2024
* USD 598,249.00

Antiretroviral therapy (ART) has transformed HIV infection into a manageable
chronic disease, thereby shifting the focus of the care for people living with
HIV more toward controlling the adverse effects of ART. Depression is the
leading mental health comorbidity of HIV infection and may trigger negative
consequences such as poor adherence to ART, more rapid HIV disease progression,
and engagement in risky behaviors. Since ART is recommended for all HIV patients
and must be continued indefinitely, minimizing the adverse effects of ART has
garnered increasing attention. Due to the rapid generation of drug-resistant
mutations, modern ART typically combines three or four ART drugs of different
mechanisms or against different targets. Understanding the effects of a single
ART drug or combinations of ART drugs can help physicians better manage
patients' depression, guide treatment changes if needed, and facilitate
individualized treatment. This project aims to fill a critical gap in the
availability of appropriate statistical models to systematically investigate the
effects of ART on depression. Recent technological advances in the biomedical
field have led to rapid accumulation of health- and disease-related data, which
provide researchers with an unprecedented opportunity to make reliable and
efficient inference from these complex and heterogeneous datasets using novel
statistical models. This project will use data from the Women's Interagency HIV
Study (WIHS), a prospective, observational, multi-center study which includes
more than 4,000 women living with HIV or at risk for HIV infection in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop novel Bayesian
parametric and nonparametric models to estimate the effects of ART based on
patients' longitudinal medication data and depression outcomes, adjusting for
socio-demographic, behavioral, and clinical factors. Specifically, a new
Bayesian longitudinal graphical model will be developed with nodes representing
drugs and depression items, and weighted edges representing the strength of the
drug-depression relationships, which may vary across different clinical visits
and different patients. In addition, a novel Bayesian framework that
incorporates the similarity between different drug combinations as well as
accounts for patients' treatment histories will be developed to learn arbitrary
drug combination effects. The proposed work will bridge the gap between the
experience/knowledge acquired during basic research and day-to-day practice by
facilitating the understanding of the adverse effects of individual drugs,
guiding more informed and effective treatment regimen selection, and eventually
helping to reduce the healthcare resource burden. The proposed models can be
easily generalized to learn other ART-related complications such as cognitive
impairment, and may also be used in a wide range of applications across multiple
biomedical fields and beyond, such as electronic health record data analysis for
chronic conditions, study of combination therapy for cancer treatment, and
injury prevention in sports medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.