* 1918012
* Collaborative Research: CSL-MultiAD: Assessing Collaborative STEM Learning through Rich Information Flow based on Multi-Sensor Audio Diarization
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Joseph Buzhardt, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The ability to learn concepts, especially for science and math (STEM) based
disciplines, is impacted by educators who inspire, motivate, and create
supportive environments and teaching methodologies which lower the entry barrier
for students learning STEM subjects. Teaching resources nationwide have
historically been constrained as STEM based science content for education
expands with increasing student diversity based on prior science exposure in the
classroom. A key aspect of student learning is to assess the quality of human
communications between student-and-student as well as teacher-and-student. In
STEM learning, students who are able to ask the right questions, know what they
understand as well as what they need help with, allows educators to structure
their teaching methods to help students overcome learning challenges. However,
to date, it has been virtually impossible to collect and measure student-to-
student or student-to-teacher voice communications in the classroom. Also,
current speech technology is not sufficiently effective to overcome multi-
speaker and naturalistic communications in classrooms. This project will develop
classroom audio collection and measurement tools for students working together
to solve problems, as well as teacher involvement with individual/groups of
students. The audio collection solution includes both individual recorders on a
sub-set of classroom students, as well as central smart speaker microphone
collection units within each student group. Computer programs will be developed
to analyze who is speaking and when, as well as spot keywords of interest for
STEM topics and learning assessment. Privacy is maintained, since audio analysis
is focused on high level measures such as individual student word counts,
anonymous tagging of each speaker, and connecting conversational turns between
students and teachers. A teacher driven keyword set will be used to help measure
which students are having problems understanding concepts. These individual
communication measured terms will be integrated into a dashboard display, to
empower teachers with easy to use feedback on student engagement for STEM
learning. The project has the potential to improve the ability to assess
learning through classroom communications, and potentially help teachers better
direct their time/expertise more efficiently to improve STEM learning for
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop ways to
assess learning in classrooms by measuring the quality of human communication
engagement between students-and-peers as well as teachers-and-students. Research
has shown that learning is improved if there is dynamic interaction between
student-to-student and student-to-teacher in voice communications. The project
introduces personal recorders in the classroom to capture voice interactions
during the entire day. Next, these multi-microphone recording streams are pooled
together, where speech and language processing algorithms will be formulated to
perform "audio diarization" - the process of determining "who spoke, what, and
when", with potential keywords of interest based on classroom topics identified.
The diarization output will drive the formulation of metrics to assess
communication engagement. Communication based features derived from individual
audio streams (word count, talk time, turn-taking, keyword profile) will be
extracted on a per student basis through audio diarization. Next, this
information flow will be used to develop class based group dynamics. This
solution represents an approach for teachers to monitor student engagement over
time in science activity areas, helping teachers identify students who are not
verbally engaged in science discourse and quickly assess the impact of changes
in classroom practices to improve learning. A number of technology challenges
will be addressed for automatic audio stream based voice processing of
naturalistic audio data using speech activity detection, speaker diarization
based on machine learning models, and keyword spotting for science topic
identification and tracking. These research aims will be assessed in classroom
settings with teacher feedback on the effectiveness of the resulting solutions.
The resulting speech technology advancements would offer new opportunities for
future smart classrooms for voice assessment for teachers to better assess
student involvement in science vs. infrequent traditional standardized testing.
Ultimately, this effort will equip teachers with tools to identify and
frequently monitor early indicators of disengagement in science learning, and
potentially increase science interest by under-represented student populations
and further diversify the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.