* 1918306
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Incomplete Neutralization: The Loss and Maintenance of Contrast
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Alexandra Pfiffner, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 12/31/2020
* USD 15,612.00

Languages are not always pronounced the way they are written. Over time, the
pronunciation of a language changes, but its orthography remains fixed. This
poses problems for standardized spelling, language teaching and learning, and
even speech recognition technologies, which need to process and convert spoken
language into orthographic representations and vice versa. This dissertation
addresses the problem of pronunciation change over time, looking specifically at
cases where a distinction between two sounds that was previously present and
represented orthographically begins to be lost. Changes like this happen
gradually, where differences in the acoustics ("acoustic cues") slowly
disappear, sometimes without speakers even realizing it. For example, "t" and
"d" are different sounds in Dutch, but over time, the difference between "t" and
"d" was lost at the ends of words; "bot" (bone) and "bod" (offer) are both
pronounced like the English word "bought". This type of sound change, called
"neutralization", is not always complete; small but measurable acoustic
differences may remain between the two sounds, despite sounding identical to the
naked ear. Studies have shown that listeners are able to perceive these
differences subconsciously, as they can tell two seemingly-identical words apart
(e.g. Dutch "bot" and "bod") at a rate better than chance, even without
additional context. It is unknown what causes this incompleteness, how this
process unfolds over time, and what social characteristics affect it.
Additionally, it is unclear how speakers can tell these sounds apart, and what
the necessary acoustics are for distinguishing between them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation will examine two cases of apparently
incomplete neutralization in Dutch and Afrikaans. Both languages are losing the
distinction between "t" and "d" and between "p" and "b", both word-initially and
word-finally, though they are at different stages of the neutralization process.
In four experiments, participants will read words and stories that have these
consonants, and then listen to the sounds with manipulated acoustics and see if
they can tell them apart. As we discover what differences listeners can hear, we
are able to understand more about our cognitive capabilities and how social
characteristics can affect our speech and hearing. This knowledge can be used to
inform speech recognition technologies to better understand variability in
speech production. Additionally, we will have a better understanding of language
pronunciation change over time, which can help us develop curricula for teaching
foreign languages, especially focusing on the link between reading and
pronunciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.