* 1918020
* Religious Exemption Laws and Minority Rights
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Emily Kazyak, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 328,582.00

Public debates over the civil rights of minorities have evoked questions about
whether individuals may be exempt from adhering to nondiscrimination laws based
on the claim that to adhere would violate their religious beliefs. This project
will study the laws related to religious exemption and Americans' reactions to
religious exemption laws related to minority rights. The project will address
the following questions: (1) How and when do state and case laws related to
religious exemption implicate minorities? (2) How do individuals evaluate
religious exemption claims as they relate to minorities? and (3) To what extent
does the language of state and case laws overlap or diverge with individual
interpretations? The project will advance scientific understanding about the
relationship between public opinion and state and federal laws. It will benefit
society by generating empirical knowledge that can inform legislation and
policies related to minority rights and religious exemption, thus contributing
to health and well-being of individuals and our democracy in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The issue of whether individuals may be exempt from
adhering to nondiscrimination laws owing to religious beliefs is a complex
question involving legal institutions as well as individual beliefs. This
project addresses this issue with a mixed-methods study that uses quantitative
and qualitative analysis of legal data and qualitative analysis of in-depth
interviews to understand processes of cultural interpretations at both the
institutional and individual level. In Phase 1 of the project, the project will
create and analyze an original database of all U.S. court cases and state laws
related to religious exemption over a 21-year period. In Phase 2, the project
will conduct and analyze in-depth interviews with 180 participants in four U.S.
cities. In Phase 3, the project will compare legal initiatives with interview
data. Findings from the project will inform the literature in cultural
sociology, the sociology of religion and the sociology of law, with focus on the
intersection of cultural schemas and legal institutions surrounding religious
exemption and minority rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.