* 1918488
* Reevaluation of metamorphic garnet-based P-T paths and their tectonic implications
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Matthew Kohn, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 257,797.00

This project investigates the degree to which natural crystals grow in chemical
equilibrium. This information is central to the study of metamorphic rocks,
especially the pressures and temperatures at which they form. The research
examines rocks from several different mountain belts that have been subjected to
different pressures and temperatures through geologic time. The project supports
the education and training of graduate and undergraduate students, including
students from underserved groups. In addition, samples collected during the
research are the focus of undergraduate in-class mineralogy and petrology
exercises at Boise State University, which serves an unique student demographic
(significant percentages of Hispanic, returning, and veteran
students).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central focus of this project is to
critically evaluate the hypothesis that metamorphic crystals grow substantially
out of chemical equilibrium in a rock. A novel approach using inclusion elastic
thermobarometry is applied to recover temperature and pressure independent of
mineral chemistry. Three main research questions include: (1) Does inclusion
elastic barometry and thermometry yield significantly different P-T paths
compared to thermodynamically-based methods? (2) Does inclusion elastic
barometry and thermometry imply static growth of garnet cores, perhaps even
encompassing entire crystals in low-grade rocks? (3) Do differences either in
matrix strain or in bulk compositions that shift equilibrium garnet growth to
higher temperatures reduce the amount of overstepping, the size of garnet cores,
and the bias to calculated P-T paths? Analyses include measurements of pressure
and temperature for four different orogenic belts: the northern Appalachians,
central Alps, southernmost Chile, and central/eastern Himalaya. Results broadly
evaluate the frequency and magnitude of disequilibrium garnet growth, as well as
the effects of temperature and strain on garnet nucleation. This research
includes a PhD student and undergraduate students to make measurements,
interpret data, present results at international meetings, and write up results
for publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.