* 1918754
* PFI-TT:  Development of a high-precision, rapid curing technology for printed electronics on low-temperature surfaces with off-the-shelf inks
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Kira Barton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 06/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(PFI) project is to introduce ways to prepare printed electronics. The global
market for printed electronics is growing exponentially with new applications
identified daily in the automotive and biomedical fields. The majority of
existing applications undergo long preparation process, known as curing, in
external ovens at high temperatures. This results in significant time and energy
costs, while the high temperature requirement limits the range of materials that
can be used without undergoing melting, warping, or other damage during the
heating process. A fast curing technology that focuses heat can reduce costs,
enabling the manufacturing of electronics on flexible, colder surfaces. The
ultimate goal is to launch a start-up company offering fast curing solutions to
meet market needs in a variety of industries, ranging from automotive to
wearables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will accelerate the design,
development and commercialization of a fast, in-line curing system to address
functionalization of printed electronics on low-temperature surfaces. To realize
this technology advancement, the intellectual merit of the proposed work focuses
on (1) determining performance and testing requirements for a class of
identified printed electrical devices and material combinations (ink/substrate),
(2) deriving new knowledge of in-line curing methods and system design in the
context of key success metrics, (3) determining the correlation between material
properties, device requirements, and curing process parameters, and (4)
developing a prototype in-line curing system that meets critical design and
process specifications. To mitigate the risks associated with the proposed
project, the team aims to provide early proof-of-concept and characterization
tests to demonstrate feasibility, incorporate design redundancy through the
investigation of two curing methods, develop strategic partnerships with
industry experts to discuss technical hurdles and innovative solutions, and
conduct experimental testing to enable statistical analysis of process
throughput, yield, and robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.