* 1918534
* PFI-RP: Intelligent Robot with Hologram-enhanced Virtual Reality for Effective Body Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Fei Hu, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 692,641.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this PFI project is to benefit
millions of post-stroke patients and other disabled people who need effective
body rehabilitation, by developing an intelligent rehabilitation robot with
adaptive upper trunk support and hologram-based virtual reality training scenes.
The existing commercial rehabilitation products cannot efficiently support the
upper torso of the patients with serious trunk disability, and do not have
intelligent, fine-resolution robot control to train two legs with different
impairment levels. An online rehabilitation training without frequent in-person
visits to the office of the physical therapist (PT) would reduce the medical
cost. This commercialization-oriented project will address those market needs.
It will also develop and implement a new customer channel model called "8C +
5F", consisting of 8 communication channels with different types of customers
and offering 5 technical facets of this platform. To enhance the academia-
industry partnership, the team proposes an effective model called nexus
organization (NEO), to achieve transdisciplinary, conflict-free collaborations
between the university and the industry. To train future leaders in innovation
and entrepreneurship, the team proposes a new education model called Innovation
and Marketing-oriented Renaissance Foundry (IMRF) to prepare PhD students and
postdoctoral researchers with strong entrepreneurship and innovation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to build a Holographic
intelligent Rehabilitation robotic technology to train post-stroke patients. It
has 3 marketing-oriented new designs: i) (Upper trunk exoskeleton with 3D
linkage and elastic impedance control): A compact, light-weight and economic
upper trunk exoskeleton will be developed for a robot system to improve the
upper trunk stability control during rehabilitation. ii) (Intelligent platform
control in each phase of intra-gait cycle to handle two-leg impairment
asymmetry): Current treadmill control simply changes the speed/force of the
treadmill in each gait cycle based on the user's speed or measured center of
pressure. However, many patients have different impairment levels between
his/her two legs. This PFI will use low-cost thermal/acoustic sensors with deep-
learning-based 3D leg trajectory analysis to achieve fine-granularity 4-phase
rehabilitation robot control. iii) (Self-engaging mixed reality rehabilitation
environment based on holographic telemedicine): The team will extend their
previously developed virtual reality (VR)-based design to a hologram-based mixed
reality (MR) platform with the advanced telemedicine functions for virtual
patient-to-PT or patient-to-patient co-rehab training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.