* 1918240
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Discourse Analysis of Training Programs
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Gregory Urban, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 22,229.00

The anthropological research supported by this award will study programs that
are trying to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups. Unlike
studies that focus on large-scale social programming, this project will look at
the effectiveness of smaller, less costly undertakings that concentrate their
efforts on training individuals. The overarching research question is whether
this more practical approach, which respects individual choice-making and
agency, is as effective as larger scale approaches. This is an important
question because all societies must sometimes ask their citizens to respond to
changing circumstances. Policy makers need to understand the relationship
between individual acts and larger social processes in order to bring about the
necessary responses.

The research will be undertaken in the United States, using candidate training
programs as research sites. The researcher will assess how these programs
understand, strategize about, and promote leadership by targeted groups. The
researcher will collect data using a combination of ethnographic methods
including: participant observation at training sessions; the collection and
comparative analysis of discourse collected at programs targeted at different
groups; text analysis of training materials; semi-structured interviews with
trainers and trainees; and archival research. Findings from the research will
contribute to better scientific understanding of how individual agents may or
may not produce social transformation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.