* 1918421
* Expeditions: Collaborative Research: Global Pervasive Computational Epidemiology
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Elchanan Mossel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 03/31/2025
* USD 324,841.00

Infectious diseases cause more than 13 million deaths per year worldwide. Rapid
growth in human population and its ability to adapt to a variety of
environmental conditions has resulted in unprecedented levels of interaction
between humans and other species. This rise in interaction combined with
emerging trends in globalization, anti-microbial resistance, urbanization,
climate change, and ecological pressures has increased the risk of a global
pandemic. Computation and data sciences can capture the complexities underlying
these disease determinants and revolutionize real-time epidemiology --- leading
to fundamentally new ways to reduce the global burden of infectious diseases
that has plagued humanity for thousands of years. This Expeditions project will
enable novel implementations of global infectious disease computational
epidemiology by advancing computational foundations, engineering principles,
theoretical understanding, and novel technologies. The innovative tools
developed will provide new analytical capabilities to decision makers and result
in improved science-based decision making for epidemic planning and response.
They will facilitate enhanced inter-agency and inter-government coordination and
outbreak response. The team will work closely with many local, regional,
national, and international public health agencies and universities to apply and
deploy powerful technologies during epidemic outbreaks that can be expected to
occur during the course of the project. International scientific networks linked
to a comprehensive postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate student training
program will be established. Educational programs to foster interest in and
increase understanding of computational science in addressing the complex
societal challenges due to pandemics will also be developed. The team, with
partners in Asia, Africa, Europe, and Latin America, will produce
multidisciplinary scientists with diverse skills related to public health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel implementations of this project will be enabled
by the development of a rigorous computational theory of spreading and control
processes on dynamic multi-scale, multi-layer (MSML) networks, along with tools
from AI, machine learning, and social sciences. New techniques resulting from
this research will make it possible to develop and apply large-scale simulations
of epidemics and social interactions over MSML networks. These simulations, in
turn, will provide fundamentally new insights into how to control epidemics.
Pervasive computing technologies will be developed to support disease
surveillance and real-time response. The computational advances will also be
generalizable; that is, they will be applicable to other areas such as
cybersecurity, ecology, economics and social sciences. The project will take
into account emerging concerns and constraints that include: preserving privacy
of individuals and vulnerable groups, enabling model predictions to be
interpreted and explained, developing effective interventions under uncertain
and unknown network data, understanding strategic and adversarial behaviors of
individual agents, and ensuring fairness of the process across the entire
population. The research team includes experts from multiple disciplines and
will address these societal concerns and constraints in practical, impactful,
and novel ways, including the development of computational tools and techniques
to support sound, ethical science-based policy pertaining to public health
infectious disease epidemiology. Center for Computational Research in
Epidemiology (CoRE) at the University of Virginia will be established as a part
of the project. CoRE will develop transformative ways to support real-time
epidemiology and facilitate improved outbreak response to benefit the
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.