* 1919026
* Student Travel Grant for 2019 Conference on Computational Complexity (CCC)
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Rocco Servedio, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 03/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support student attendance at the 34th Annual Computational
Complexity Conference (CCC), in New Brunswick, NJ July 18 to 20, 2019. The field
of computational complexity forms the backbone of theoretical computer science.
The conference aims to foster research in all areas of computational complexity
theory, studying the absolute and relative power of computational models under
resource constraints. The search for efficient algorithms has important
ramifications in many areas of business, technology, and science. Complexity
theory has helped with our understanding of fundamental difficulty underlying
algorithmic issues and in turn has been able to motivate algorithm design for
some of the most challenging computational problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will provide partial support to approximately 11 students to attend this
top conference in the area of complexity theory. Efforts will be made to support
students from under-represented groups and geographic diversity among students
will be taken into account. The award will encourage and facilitate the student
participation in this top-tier computer science conference. It will contribute
towards attracting more under-represented groups to computer science research
giving students an opportunity to engage in the important technical,
professional, and social exchanges that CCC fosters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.