* 1919589
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) to Enhance Surface Science and Nanochemistry at Saint Francis University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Rose Clark, Saint Francis University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 83,181.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Edward Zovinka from Saint Francis
University and colleague Rose Clark are acquiring an atomic force microscope
(AFM). The microscope is a powerful tool for studying the surface of a material.
It uses a very small probe which scans across a surface to measure the forces
between the probe and the surface. This produces an image of the surface with
information on the structure of the surface, its properties and on materials
adsorbed on the surface. The AFM data provides basic understanding of
complicated surface phenomenon at the atomic level. The research projects
supported by this award are interdisciplinary involving analytical chemistry
(surface science), biophysical chemistry (protein electrochemistry), and
inorganic/environmental analysis. The acquisition supports the educational goals
of the faculty to train undergraduates to use major research instrumentation and
to develop skills in data collection and interpretation. The instrument is also
used in an outreach program to high school students to encourage them to pursue
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several collaborators are involved in the
research projects using this atomic force microscope. One project involves the
use of the microscope to characterize surfaces in acid mine drainage (AMD)
processes. The goal is to better understand armoring of calcite and aluminum
removal from AMD effluent. Another project uses the AFM to better understand new
peptide self-assembled monolayers. In this project peptide self-assembled
monolayers (SAMS) are employed to bind to cytochrome c. The researchers are
working to develop new insights into the surface microenvironment and how it
influences formal potential and kinetic mechanisms of proteins, paving the way
for development of more advanced electrochemical
biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.