* 1919645
* MRI: Acquisition of a Gaze-Contingent Eye-Tracking System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Michi Matsukura, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 38,300.00

With the support from Major Research Instrumentation, the eye-tracking system
(SR Research EyeLink 1000 Plus) will be acquired. The project is built upon the
interdisciplinary team of one visual cognition researcher and six decision
science researchers at Drake University (Des Moines, Iowa). By integrating the
well-established techniques in the visual cognition field, the system enables
decision science researchers in the team (economics, marketing, accounting,
actuarial science, information management) to examine cognitive mechanisms
involved in decision-making processes with a finer resolution than eye-tracking
methods typically employed in the fields of decision science research. The
system allows researchers to investigate information-processing mechanisms that
operate prior to conscious response. The project is designed not only to make
real-world application of visual cognition research more accessible to students,
but also to introduce students in the decision science field to a scientific
approach of dealing with novel data acquired through systematic empirical
investigations. Because decision science is uniquely concerned with how
individuals make optimal choices based on available information, some decision
scientists work exclusively with pre-existing data. The research team also
recognizes that popular methods of recruiting students to the research lab
through a single department has its limitation to reach out to underrepresented
student populations. To promote diversity, equity and inclusion, multiple
mechanisms to recruit and support a wide range of students are built
in.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions pursued in the present project range
across (1) how much attentional control one can exert during memory maintenance
(visual cognition), (2) how different ways of presenting the nutrition
information shapes one's decision-making process of food choice (marketing), (3)
how the lack of opportunities affects one's cognitive mechanisms differently
from resource scarcity (economics: psychology of poverty), (4) how a popular
survey method (i.e., the choice experiment) can be optimized with powerful
perceptual and cognitive manipulations (environmental economics), (5) how visual
features of the voluntarily disclosed financial information can minimize the
chance that the investors can be misled (accounting), (6) when individuals tend
to stop processing the massive amount of disclosure information, and how
visualization of the difficult-to-understand section would ease one's
comprehension of the product (actuarial science), and (7) how search efficiency
of the crucial information can be enhanced in the e-commerce context
(information management).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.