* 1919177
* PFI-TT: Development of Next Generation Sulfur-based Batteries for Enhanced Run Time and Reduced Weight
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Vibha Kalra, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to help all market sectors where
lithium ion (Li-ion) batteries are currently used, such as aerospace &amp;
defense, transportation, medical, oil &amp; gas, and consumer electronics. Li-
ion, the highest-performing commercially available battery technology, currently
accounts for 37% of the $23.5 billion battery market. However, it has currently
reached the maximum performance that physics and chemistry allow. For the
electric vehicle market, these performance limits would require a 1200 lb,
$15,000 battery pack in an all-electric sedan, and therefore broad deployment in
SUVs, pickup trucks or heavy-duty military or commercial vehicles would be
commercially and economically impractical. The envisioned battery technology
uses a different chemistry that potentially offers four times better storage
capability than Li-ion batteries and is much lighter, leading to new
economically feasible electric cars. Through unique partnerships with industry
and technology commercialization, this PFI-TT project will enable testing,
evaluation &amp; refinement of the proposed technology, production scale-up and
a battery prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on
development of Li-S batteries using a commercially-viable carbonate electrolyte,
the liquid responsible for transporting Li+ ions between electrodes. The past
R&amp;D efforts for Li-S use ether electrolytes that have low boiling point (~42
degrees C) making them extremely flammable and commercially non-viable.
Fundamental investigations on the role of the sulfur phase in altering the
reaction mechanism have led to the development of sulfur cathodes that
successfully function in carbonate electrolytes - like those used in commercial
Li-ion batteries for three decades - with a stable four-fold higher capacity at
the material level for 1000+ cycles. This PFI-TT project will undertake
development activities to reduce battery weight and increase sulfur loading
based on success metrics provided by potential partners during preliminary
customer discovery, with the objective to achieve four-fold improvement in the
"device-level" specific capacity. The proposed technology will also eliminate
dead weight (up to 25% of electrode weight) of binders and current collectors'
passive components used in current devices and consequently eliminate slurry
processing, a necessary processing step needed for current powder-based
electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.