* 1919817
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid-Chromatograph Mass Spectrometer (LC-MS) for Research and Training at Grand Valley State University
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Shannon Biros, Grand Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 143,847.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Laura Hawk from Grand Valley State
University and colleagues Shannon Biros, Andrew Lantz, Paul Cook and Dalila
Kovacs are acquiring a compact a liquid-chromatograph mass-spectrometer (LCMS)
having a single quadrupole mass analyzer. The mass spectrometer is equipped with
a series of ionization sources such as electrospray ionization (ESI), an
atmospheric pressure chemical ionization/atmospheric solid analysis probe
(APCI/ASAP), as well as a thin layer chromatography (TLC) plate reader. In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components are heated and flow
into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized. The ions' masses are measured
very accurately. This highly sensitive technique allows the structure of
molecules in complex mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a liquid
chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass
spectrometer. The various ionization sources provide added flexibility with
regard to the types of samples that are analyzed. The acquisition strengthens
the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The instrument
broadens participation by involving diverse groups of students in research and
research training using this modern analytical technique. This instrument
acquisition supports many female and underrepresented investigators. It also
provides training opportunities to undergraduate students, many of whom are
first-generation students. The instrument gives students experience using vital
instrumentation that they carry with them into their careers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The award of this mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies of beneficial
amyloids which are aggregates of proteins that become folded into various
shapes. The instrument is used to evaluate the role of intrinsically-disordered
regions in protein structure and function as well as the development of ligands
for the separation of critical elements such as rare earth (f) elements. The
mass spectrometer is employed in studies of enzymes that inactivate antibiotics
in bacteria and for the development of organic flow cell electrolytes for
batteries. The instrument also serves researchers investigating the conversion
of biomass into commodity chemicals and those looking for targets of the protein
focal adhesion kinase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.