* 1919834
* MRI: Development of a Microelectromagnetic, Laser Ablation  Instrument for Biomechanics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 785,707.00

An award is made to Harvard University to do research to develop a novel
instrument for studying the mechanics of cells, tissues, and biological
materials. Forces ultimately drive the motions that underlie biological
functions, but very little is known about them because of the lack of relevant
experimental techniques. The instrument that will be developed will help to
remedy this situation. The project will result in undergraduate students,
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows being trained to create novel
technologies that combine approaches from nanofabrication, optics, and biology.
Students and fellows will be recruited to take part in the development effort
through a research exchange program. Participants will also be coached in
professional skills and learn how to work at the interface between biology,
engineering, physics, and math. Middle school students will be introduced to
microscopy and will learn about the excitement of developing cutting edge
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will make use of
nanofabricated wires to manipulate magnetic fields. These magnetic fields will
be used to control forces simultaneously exerted on multiple magnetic beads,
allowing them to exert complex patterns of forces on cells and tissues. At the
same time, the instrument will also employ femtosecond laser ablation to rapidly
cut three-dimensional patterns with submicron resolution. The combination of
applying forces with magnetic beads and cutting with laser ablation will provide
a means to dissect internal forces, how they are generated, and the responses
they produce. Research projects enabled by this instrument include the
characterization of forces involved in chromosome segregation, nuclear envelope
rupture and repair, and DNA breaks, as well as the mechanics of gastrulation and
limb development. Creating the instrument will require the optimization of
nanofabrication procedures and optical controls, and their integration. The
results from this development activity will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
publications and at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.