* 1919019
* PFI-TT: Cold plasma technology to enable a future cancer treatment device to reduce surgical margins
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Michael Keidar, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project addresses the important need of treating
the surgical margins, or edges, identified in cancer operations. The proposed
activity will be to develop innovative technology known as "cold atmospheric
plasma" to treat the edges of tumors and other areas involved in cancer
surgeries. The technology will be advanced closer to market readiness,
potentially impacting several sectors of the national economy, including medical
equipment and scientific devices. Also, the careers of the involved researchers,
which include graduate students and postdoctoral scientists, will be benefited
by increasing their networks in the emerging field of plasma medicine and
enhancing their leadership skills. In particular, one of the postdocs will be
promoted as technology commercialization expert in this project. In addition,
the successful implementation of the proposed project is ensured by the
cooperation among the research partners, which constitute a highly qualified
consortium with world-leading experts in plasma-material science and biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project merges novel engineering
efforts towards a versatile plasma source and outstanding advances in surface
treatment of biomaterials aiming to cancer therapy. The proposed project has an
interdisciplinary nature and it has both fundamental and technological
significances. The fundamental significance resides in exploring medical action
of cold atmospheric plasmas, in particular plasma interaction with tumor and
surgical margins. For this, a flexible, morphing plasma device adaptable to any
surface topography will be fabricated. Also, a wide spectrum of diagnostic
instrumentations, and chemical and biological sensors for in vitro tests will be
employed, which basically constitutes the technological significance of the
project. Plasma state will be characterized basically by optical plasma
diagnostics. The monitoring of topographies by electron microscopy, as well as
evaluation of the chemical composition and biological properties, will assess
the end state of the treated surfaces. The main goal consists in uniform
treatment of non-planar and delicate materials with the aim of biomedical
applications, especially plasma treatment of organic tissues with focus on
cancer therapy applications. In summary, this project will pioneer the treatment
of complex geometry surfaces by means of an extended morphing plasma source,
with emphasis on treatment of tumors and of surgical
margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.