* 1919259
* PFI-TT:  High-Performance Perovskite Solar Cells Enabled by Layer-Specific Photonic Treatment and Incorporation of a Functional Polymer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Daniel Daly, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 488,136.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to greatly advance photovoltaics
(materials for solar cells) made with special materials called perovskites, and
enable high-speed printing of these solar cells on flexible underlying
structures, known as substrates. This would enable large-volume manufacturing of
these flexible solar cells for many applications. For instance, a freight truck
trailer or refrigerated van covered by high-efficiency, lightweight and flexible
solar panels would generate sufficient electricity to power all units on board,
significantly reducing diesel fuel consumption and avoiding idle run during rest
stops. Another potential use is retrofitting shading fabrics, such as those used
on carports; this would not only effectively block sunlight and thus minimize
car heating, but could also supply additional power for lighting and/or charging
electric vehicles. This could also be used for forward operating bases or other
remote military operations if integrated with tents, reducing diesel fuel demand
and the associated risk to the supplying troops, as well as associated costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a technology to enable
large-scale manufacturing of high-performance fully-flexible perovskite solar
cells. In spite of rapid progress in efficiency and low-cost potential from
solution processing capability, perovskite solar cells still have to overcome a
few obstacles before becoming economically competitive in the photovoltaic
market. In particular, life span and the lengthy annealing time limit the
capability for high-speed printing. The proposed technology innovation will
address these two main issues through a novel process and material engineering.
In this PFI-TT project, photonic irradiation will be utilized to achieve rapid
layer-specific annealing for the metal oxide charge transport layers without
damaging the underlying flexible substrate and perovskite absorber layer. The
high-quality metal oxide films will not only improve solar cell stability by
providing physical protection to the perovskite active layer, but also maintain
the efficient charge transport and efficiency, achieving the best of both
worlds. In addition, a particular polymer will be added into the perovskite
precursor solution to form ultra-smooth and stable perovskite films. With the
proposed rapid and layer-specific annealing and incorporation of a particular
dendrimer in the perovskite absorber layer, highly-stable perovskite solar cells
with efficiency above 20% on flexible substrates will be
accomplished.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.