* 1919764
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Functional Morphology and Macroevolution of the Mammalian Cervical Vertebral Column
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Gabrielle Russo, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 31,200.00

Bipedal locomotion is a hallmark trait of the human evolutionary lineage,
representing a major transition away from the apes and other primates. This
pivotal shift can be investigated through studies of the neck, as the human neck
is adapted to balance and stabilize the head during bipedal movements. This
doctoral research project will test how the shape of the bones of the neck
relate to locomotion and posture in a diverse sample of mammals. The findings
will be used to interpret fossilized neck bones from extinct human relatives to
learn about their early forms of bipedalism, as well as potentially informing
clinical research. This project will also support the sharing of three-
dimensional scan data through digital repositories and the training and
mentorship of student researchers, including those from groups underrepresented
in scientific fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cervical vertebrae in the hominin
fossil record can provide insight into the interplay between the head, neck and
trunk during key locomotor and postural transitions. Currently, however,
functional interpretations of these fossils are limited to broad categories such
as "human-like" neck mobility or "ape-like" neck posture. The goal of this
dissertation is to improve hominin neck reconstructions by experimentally
testing how cervical vertebral shape relates to neck function, locomotor mode,
and trunk posture. This goal will be addressed in three objectives: 1) quantify
the relationship between vertebral shape and neck mobility using bending
mechanics experiments, 2) develop neck posture models in living species using
virtual reconstruction methods, and 3) evaluate patterns of vertebral shape
change across diverse mammalian groups using phylogenetic comparative methods.
The objectives will be tested in a broad sample of primates, rodents, and
marsupials. These groups contain species with independently-evolved forms of
bipedal locomotion and upright trunk posture, allowing for independent
verification of form-function relationships. This project will provide the
foundational data necessary to quantitatively interpret functional information
from cervical vertebral fossils, furthering our understanding of the nature and
biomechanical demands of bipedalism in early hominins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.