* 1919594
* MRI: Acquisition of High Resolution Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometer with Electron Ionization/Chemical Ionization and Multi-mode Injection Capability
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Luis Colon, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 325,881.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Valerie Frerichs from SUNY at Buffalo and
colleagues Luis Colon, Diana Aga and David Lacy are acquiring a high-resolution
gas-chromatograph tandem mass spectrometer (Orbitrap). In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex samples.
In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they
are ionized into ions and the ions' masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows the structure of molecules in complex mixtures to be studied.
An instrument with a gas chromatograph can separate mixtures of gaseous
compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. The tandem mass spectrometry
capabilities increase the ability to identify molecules. The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by involving diverse groups of students in
research and research training using this modern analytical technique. The
number and range of enabled research projects generate and disseminate
knowledge. Proficiency using contemporary instrumentation is pivotal to the
training of future generations of researchers and students choosing non-
scientific which is important in science policy and governance. Increasing early
exposure to the process of scientific research is based on models from the NSF
funded Center for Authentic Science Practice in Education (based at Purdue
University) and from the NSF funded National Center for Case Study Teaching in
Science (based at U. Buffalo). Advancement of scientific knowledge in
environmental and other areas contributes to the achievement of societally-
relevant outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels. It especially impacts investigations on the fate,
transport, effects, and mitigation of contaminants in the environment and the
exploration of enzyme active site modeling, molecular energy science, and
catalyst design The mass spectrometer is also used for the identification of
synthetic di-oxygenase enzymes and for the study of small molecule activation
and generation. The instrument is employed in other projects related to
environmental toxins, metabolomics, and mechanistic synthetic
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.