* 1919560
* MRI: Acquisition of Flow Cytometer Instrument at University of Michigan-Dearborn
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Gargi Ghosh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 198,401.00

Flow cytometry/cell sorting is a high-throughput technique for doing high level
qualitative and quantitative analysis on a per cell basis for large cell
populations. The acquisition of new flow cytometry equipment at the University
of Michigan-Dearborn will facilitate research on tumor dynamics, glaucoma,
pancreatic islets microfluidics, therapeutics to combat cancer, and brain injury
and infection. A strategy for wide sharing of the instrument among neighboring
universities is included as part of this project. The new instrument will help
in developing the multidisciplinary undergraduate and graduate curriculum in
bioengineering and the natural sciences. Furthermore, the instrument will
provide opportunities to develop interesting science and engineering outreach
activities that introduce bioengineering to high school students and teachers
from the greater Detroit area. Undergraduate summer research programs, such as
the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program, will be built around the
techniques of flow cytometry, which most undergraduate students can readily
learn. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a flow cytometer will
substantially improve the quality and scope of bioengineering research at The
University of Michigan-Dearborn. Bioengineering research at the university spans
diverse areas, including protein aggregation, engineering tumor models,
biophysical characterization of cellular functions, mechanobiological pathways
in the eye, transport mechanisms across the brain, nanoengineering, and islet
microfluidics. The flow cytometer will enhance these research programs by
furnishing information on the physical and chemical characteristics of
particles/cell suspensions, cell populations, expression of cellular biomarkers,
protein aggregation, and nanoparticle toxicity effects. The flow cytometer will
provide the team of users, which includes six junior faculty, with a cutting-
edge tool necessary to establish new research programs and to broaden
collaborations with researchers at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.