* 1919229
* PFI-TT: Developing a Configurable Real-time High-speed Wireless Communication Platform for Large-scale Industrial Control Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Carolyn Lin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 08/31/2022
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable the process industries to
fully embrace the concept of Industry 4.0 and revamp their manufacturing plants
as smart factories, where intelligent sensing and field devices are pervasively
deployed and wirelessly connected in the field to provide real-time high-speed
process monitoring, diagnosis and control. This paves the way for a better
understanding of the manufacturing process, thereby enabling efficient and
sustainable production. The commercial availability of low-cost, real-time and
high-speed wireless technology will enable a wide range of new applications
benefiting society in many ways. Just as ordinary WiFi technology has
transformed the landscape of wireless communication for business use, our new
real-time version of WiFi will enable industrial applications such as advanced
process control and manufacturing, assistive tele-robotics, high-bandwidth
health monitoring, autonomous vehicle safety assurance, and others. This PFI-TT
project will also enable a comprehensive training program for future leaders in
innovation and entrepreneurship to develop their ability to conduct innovative
research projects as well as effective communication and entrepreneurial skills,
and thus have significant educational and societal
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address the drawbacks of
existing wireless communication networks, which are not equipped with providing
either deterministic or high-speed real-time communication for large-scale
industrial sensing and control systems. The proposed RT-WiFi protocol will 1)
support up to 6kHz sampling rates that is sufficient for most industrial
wireless applications, which require highly predictable performance; 2) offer
the capability for extending to multi-cluster settings to cover large factories;
3) provide extremely high reliability through dynamic and distributed packet
scheduling for autonomous adaptation to the noisy factory environment; and 4)
tolerate any single point hardware/software failures with robust gateway design.
It is envisioned that upon the successful completion of this project, a full-
blown RT-WiFi communication system can be developed to support a large number of
reliable and dynamic real-time flows in large-scale high-speed industrial
wireless control networks. These unique features will make RT-WiFi an ideal
communication infrastructure to support not only advanced process control
systems, but also other fast growing industry segments in robotics, autonomous
vehicles and high-speed mechanical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.