* 1919438
* Mechanobiology of Myofibroblast Behavior in Health and Disease
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bruce Murray, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 585,663.00

The heart is made up of different types of cells. Myofibroblasts develop through
a transformation from normally occurring fibroblasts. Myofibroblasts play a
critical role in physiological and pathophysiological events such as heart valve
development, the generation of fibrotic heart tissue, and the formation of
calcified aortic valve nodules. These activated cells are able to proliferate,
secrete inflammatory and tissue-degrading chemical factors, and remodel the
surrounding environment such as the extracellular matrix (ECM). Endothelial to
mesenchymal transformation (EndMT), which is the transition of endothelial cells
to mesenchymal-like cells, is one source of myofibroblasts. EndMT was first
observed in embryonic heart valve development, but more recent studies have
shown that EndMT is also observed in tissue-level repair processes -- such as
wound healing -- and in adult disease development -- including cancer, cardiac
fibrosis, and calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD). Changes in the endothelial
cell mechanical and chemical environment can promote EndMT, but less is known
about why these transformed cells can promote tissue regeneration or progression
of disease. A primary research goal of this project, which combines experimental
and computational modeling methods, is to determine if and how combined
mechanical and chemical forces seen in the normal physiological environment
direct mesenchymally transformed aortic valve endothelial cells toward disease.
The research results will be incorporated into workshops that are designed to
enhance K-12 scientific and technological understanding, and this award will
also provide graduate and undergraduate educational and professional development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test how the composition of
the extracellular environment and shear stresses, which occur in vivo due to
blood flow, affect mesenchymally-transformed cell behavior in laboratory
experiments (in vitro). Additionally, the project will use mathematical modeling
and computer simulation to study the ability of EndMT-derived myofibroblasts to
restructure the surrounding tissue, their interaction with resident valve
interstitial cells, the molecular mechanisms directing these behaviors, and the
potential feedback loop of these multiscale mechanisms. This research combines
experiments using microfluidic cell culture models of the aortic valve with
computational simulation of the transformation, interaction, and migration of
cells under different mechanical and chemical environmental conditions. Both the
experimental and computational models will mimic cell-cell and cell-ECM
interactions in the body, including cell growth, migration, proliferation, and
interaction in both healthy and diseased aortic valves. The computational model
simulations will enable a more detailed examination of the mechanical and
chemical factors most critical to disease progression and provide a means to
probe the feedback loop of EndMT and tissue modification, which can only be
performed in a limited manner experimentally. Together, the in vitro experiments
and computational simulations will provide new insight into the molecular
mechanisms of CAVD, illuminate the mechanical conditions that lead to
regenerative or pathological tissue remodeling, and provide a test-bed for new
therapeutic strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.