* 1919452
* MRI Acquisition of a High Performance Large Memory Computing Cluster for Large Scale Data-Driven Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Prateek Mittal, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,000.00

This project will acquire a state-of-the-art High Performance Computing (HPC)
cluster to support large scale, data-driven research. The instrument will
support a variety of projects from computer science, electrical engineering,
ecology, evolutionary biology, neuroscience and genomics. In neuroscience, the
cluster will allow the use of advanced statistical techniques at scale to
identify and connect anatomical and functional brain-imaging features of
diseased and healthy subjects with specific underlying genetic profiles. In
computer science, using machine learning algorithms deployed on the instrument,
researchers will to seek new ways to protect the security and privacy of users
in large-scale networked systems. Finally, the cluster will also enable research
that will improve our understanding of evolutionary history and the molecular
complexities of traits through the analysis of multi-animal, large-scale genomic
datasets. In addition, through short courses and multiday boot-camps, the
instrument will provide valuable opportunities for training postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students, and advanced undergraduates in large-scale
computational data science. The instrument will also be a valuable asset for
certificate programs in statistics and machine learning (one for undergraduate
students, the other for graduate students) and for a certificate program in
computational science, all of which will support broadening participation of
groups underrepresented in STEM. The research and training enabled by the
instrument is expected to help improve our understanding of human health and
well-being, help create new knowledge that will aid economic competitiveness,
and help maintain the country's leadership in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computing cluster will be formed of by nodes with very
large memory. The system complements the institution's investments in research
cyberinfrastructure and will be managed by the Princeton Institute for
Computational Science and Engineering (PICSciE) and the Office of Information
Technology (OIT). The instrument would initially be used by five research
groups, part of the Center for Statistics and Machine Learning (CSML), which
will leverage existing programs and partnerships to increase participation in
data science. The initial five specific projects are united under a common
theme: machine learning will be used for analyzing big data sets that may not be
easily broken into smaller pieces for processing. Specifically, they will
examine the following: 1) the use of probabilistic models for large-scale
scientific analysis and de novo design in applications areas such as mechanical
metamaterials and mixed-signal circuit development; 2) statistical machine
learning in genomics, biomedicine, and health biostatistics including the
analysis of hospital records to aid doctors in taking early action to improve
patient outcomes, the heritability of neuropsychiatric diseases and drug
responses, and statistical and experimental examination of cardiovascular
disease risk; 3) security and privacy challenges in networked systems using
machine learning techniques to detect and isolate attackers in networked systems
such as social media; 4) large-scale machine learning for neuroscience such as
joint analysis of many large-scale, multi-subject fMRI datasets where the size
and number of the datasets; 5) evolutionary genomic and epigenome analyses
through collection and analysis of large datasets to investigate the
evolutionary history and molecular complexities of traits. Collectively, these
research groups are composed of forty graduate students, ten postdocs, and
include, on average, thirteen undergrad research projects per year. The
instrument will also be used by other researchers engaged in large-scale, data-
driven research across a wide variety of disciplines. Hence both the capacity
and the capability aspects of the proposed instrument will be highly utilized
and will enable the continued advancement of research at the
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.