* 1919437
* Collaborative research: Emirical Evidence of the Tax Administration Production Function
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Olken, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 236,186.00

Many countries, especially low income countries, have low tax revenue which
limits their budgets and ability to provide critical infrastructure and public
services. While there have been several studies on the impacts of tax rate
changes, there has been little research on how changes in tax administration
affect tax revenue and tax compliance, which may be far more important for
increasing tax revenues. This research project will use four related studies to
investigate whether changes in tax administration?adding more labor, capital, or
technology to tax offices, or changing how they are organized?can generate
increases in tax revenue and increase tax compliance and whether these increased
revenues and compliance outweigh their costs. The results will provide policy
guidance on increasing tax revenues to a large audience of policymakers in the
US around worldwide. Increasing tax revenues will lead to the provision of
infrastructure and public services, which in turn could spur economic growth.
The results of this research will result in increasing tax revenues, improved
provision of public services, and faster economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been extensive research on setting
optimal tax rates but there is little research on the impacts of: improving tax
administration. This project investigates the effects of tax administration on
tax collection through four related studies. The first study uses quasi-
experimental methods to measure the impact of a large-scale tax office
reorganization on tax revenue and compare the gains to those from a tax rate
change. The project will then conduct three related randomized controlled trials
to estimate the ?Tax Administration Production Function?. The first experimental
study will measure the impact of additional capital on tax revenues by providing
a randomly assigned subset of tax offices with an increase in their budget for
enforcement activities. The second measures the impact of additional labor on
tax revenues by adding more staff responsible for tax collection and compliance
to randomly assigned tax offices. The last study measures the impact of a
productivity-enhancing technology on tax revenues by randomly rolling out a
software program that uses historical data to automatically prioritize taxpayers
for enforcement activities. The studies will be conducted in close partnership
with the tax department, which will implement the three interventions as part of
their regular operations. Increasing efficiency of tax collection could lead to
better provision of public services and faster economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.