* 1919506
* MRI: Acquisition of equipment for an integrated gas analysis and labeling radiocarbon system with a focus on Arctic carbon and geochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 486,652.00

This award supports the acquisition of a radiocarbon system at Northern Arizona
University. This system will be used to study modern changes in the carbon cycle
and past changes in climate. Radiocarbon (Carbon-14 or 14C) is an isotope of
carbon, with six protons and electrons, with two additional neutrons.
Radiocarbon acts as a clock due to the constant radioactive decay that occurs as
a result of the extra neutrons. Radiocarbon dating is the most widely used
scientific tool for determining the timing of events and the rates of changes of
Earth, environment and human processes extending back tens of thousands of
years. This grant supports purchase of instruments to complete a gas and
labeling radiocarbon system that will allow the investigators to gain novel
insights into environmental issues in the Arctic. These instruments will be
integrated with educational activities that promote training scientists in the
application of radiocarbon to ecology and Earth system
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the outstanding potential for
transformative research, Northern Arizona University (NAU) recently contracted
IonPlus for the purchase of a mini accelerator mass spectrometer (Mini Carbon
Dating System; MICADAS). This award funds the acquisition of a gas and labeling
radiocarbon system including a gas ion source (GIS), which is needed for rapid
analysis of very small samples in CO2 gas form, and automated graphite equipment
(AGE), which combines sample combustion, purification, and graphitization steps
and will be used to isolate samples from low-level labeling experiments and
complete an integrated analytical facility. The proposed instrumentation will
link novel and developmental applications of radiocarbon to grand challenges in
Earth and environmental sciences, with a particular focus on the Arctic.
Radiocarbon provides a unique and sensitive fingerprint for tracking changes in
the permafrost carbon pool, for understanding feedbacks in the Arctic climate
system, and for understanding past climate change. Technological breakthroughs
for measuring radiocarbon and the scientific expertise at NAU together are
poised to catalyze novel insight into these issues. The NAU PIs, along with a
broad suite of collaborators, will explore two major themes of understanding (1)
past changes in Arctic climate, and (2) modern changes in Arctic carbon that may
feedback to future climate. In addition to this Arctic-focused theme, the
instrumentation will facilitate ongoing research across a broad range of
sciences including soil carbon dynamics, plant and microbial ecology, fire
history, geologic hazards, archaeology, historical ecology and conservation
paleobiology. This instrument acquisition will be integrated with educational
and knowledge transfer activities that promote training scientists in the
application of radiocarbon to ecology and Earth system science. Technological
advances such as represented by the integrated radiocarbon system in this grant
could help spread the use of radiocarbon, with increases in the variety of
applications and in options for preparing samples, and decreases in cost. This
requires an expanding pool of educated users, which will be generated by a short
course, Radiocarbon in Ecology and Earth System Science, open to graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers nationwide. In addition, NAU has a strong
commitment to serving rural Arizona, including Native American and Hispanic
populations. Existing programs will be leveraged to engage these students,
providing lab tours, demonstrations, and opportunities to work in the
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.