* 1919390
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Bayesian Persuasion in the Lab?
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Dan Levin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2021
* USD 16,380.00

Bayesian Persuasion describes the phenomena where a sender of information
intends to sway a receiver to take his/her desired action by choosing what
information the receiver can access. This occurs in many economic and social
settings, for example a prosecutor persuading a judge to convict a suspect or a
politician persuading voters that he/she is the best candidate and therefore
deserve their vote. While Bayesian Persuasion has been studied in theory, there
has been little real world study of its implications. Given the prevalence and
complexity of the use of Bayesian Persuasion, it is important to investigate
whether the sender can find the best information to induce his/her desired
action with the maximum frequency, and if not, what makes it so difficult. This
proposed research will use a series of experiments to study the Bayesian
Persuasion phenomenon. Such an investigation helps to build an understanding
about several situations that involve Bayesian Persuasion, such as how a
prosecutor chooses to investigate a criminal case and how politicians design
their promotion campaigns. The results of this research will improve the
efficiency of advertising, public policy campaigns, and general policy
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a series of lab experiments
to test the theory of Bayesian Persuasion. The researchers will design
laboratory experiments where the process of Bayesian Persuasion is maximally
simplified for the sender. The experimental design will eliminate the need for
the sender to perform any Bayesian updating. Because people are in general not
capable of Bayesian updating, such simplification allows researchers to focus
solely on the key parts of the Bayesian Persuasion reasoning. The experiment
will then introduce some realistic difficulties to the problem to check the
robustness of the results. The research goal is to shed light on the empirical
soundness of the theory of Bayesian Persuasion---to what extent is the
theoretical prediction correct and how should economists revise their
understanding of the theory if necessary. The results of this research project
will not only (in)validate the theory of Bayesian Persuasion but also show its
practical application. This will improve discourse on important issues in
business, public policy, and governance generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.