* 1919036
* PFI-TT:  A robotic device for the physical therapy of wrist/hand function
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Juergen Konczak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 399,817.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to advance and commercialize a
robotic medical device designed for the physical rehabilitation of impaired
wrist/hand function. This technology addresses an unmet medical need for
patients with stroke or spinal cord injury who frequently have impaired hand
function that interferes with many activities of daily life such as feeding, but
also negatively affects their professional work (e.g. inability to use a
computer keyboard). It provides objective diagnostic markers on motor function
that can guide therapy. In addition, the device promotes a patient-centered,
customized physical therapy that allows tailoring physical exercises to the
current state of the patient, and subsequently to adjust these exercises to the
patient's therapeutic progress, potentially enabling patients to train longer
and more rigorously. Extra practice will either lead to higher levels of
functional independence or faster recovery within the reimbursable care time
leading to reduced total health care costs per patient. At present, there is no
mature competing technology on the market. A preliminary market analysis shows a
high commercial potential in the market for medical rehabilitation devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project takes the necessary steps to advance
the commercialization of this robotic technology. Its aims respond directly to
identified customer needs. Development addresses the following key technological
hurdles: 1) Reduce the footprint of the device and make it mobile. The team will
redesign the encasement and build a system that can be moved easily within and
between care environments. 2) The team will simplify the user interface of the
control software to enable easy access and operation for therapists without an
extensive technical training. 3) Therapists and rehabilitation managers desire
automated outcome reports to reduce the reimbursement documentation burden for
therapists. The team will design software that records and analyzes the signals
from the robotic sensors to generate objective markers of motor performance that
can be included in a digital report of therapeutic progress. 4) Most of the
rehabilitation exercises currently implemented in rehabilitation robots are
largely monotonous, repetitive exercises that often lead to disengagement. In
response, the team will design new gamified physical rehabilitation exercises
based on the Unity programming language, which is the standard in the computer
gaming industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.