* 1919771
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Occidental College
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Janet Scheel, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 493,878.00

This award is made to Occidental College to purchase a high-performance computer
cluster to support faculty research and teaching across the scientific
disciplines. Computation has played an increasingly important role in almost all
academic disciplines, and Occidental recognizes its centrality to modern
research. This cluster will be used by faculty and students to advance research
across biology, chemistry, computer science, physics, and economics. The cluster
will support on-going research projects that include improving how computers use
big data, studying chemical reactivity, and understanding heat transfer in
fluids. Other faculty in math, cognitive science, sociology, and the media arts
will also use the cluster for interdisciplinary research in numerical
simulations and data analysis and visualization, as well as in emerging areas in
the digital humanities and interactive media. Additionally, the cluster will
prepare undergraduates in 20+ courses for future careers in the sciences. With
Occidental's track record of attracting a gifted and diverse student body, the
cluster provides an opportunity to engage a broader population in cutting-edge
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide infrastructure
to support the rapidly growing use and need for computational resources across
the Occidental College campus. To accommodate the broad range of scientific
applications of the co-PIs and the collaborators, the proposed 456-core cluster
will consist of a master node, a storage node, and 17 compute nodes. The
emphasis on a high number of simultaneous jobs supports the research of faculty
while leaving available cores for undergraduate training and classroom use. One
of the compute nodes is further equipped with two GPUs, for efficient matrix and
vector operations required by many research applications. An uneven distribution
of RAM across the compute nodes, ranging from 64GB to 512GB per node, allows
differential use of the nodes between memory-intensive and computation-intensive
users. The cluster will also include 297TB of storage, 272TB of which are
located on dedicated storage nodes, to host the large datasets produced in
biology, chemistry, cognitive science, computer science, physics, and economics.
In addition to the physical equipment, this proposal requests funding for
research software licenses as well as an administrator who will deploy,
maintain, and manage the instrument. The administrator will provide technical
support and create maintenance documentation and training materials,
accelerating the use of the cluster by faculty and students in all areas of the
natural and social sciences and the arts and
humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.