* 1919897
* MRI: Acquisition of Gas Analyzers to Strengthen Multidisciplinary Research and Education at Tennessee State University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Dafeng Hui, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,460.00

An award is made to Tennessee State University (TSU) to acquire a state-of-the-
art portable photosynthesis system and soil gas analyzer that will enhance
multidisciplinary research and student training at TSU, a Historically Black
College and University. The new equipment will be integrated into the curriculum
at both undergraduate and graduate levels to enrich the research training and
learning. The acquisition of the instrument will increase the ability of the
faculty to attract and mentor under-represented minority students in the fields
of ecology, agriculture, and environmental sciences, provide hands-on research
experience to students conducting independent research projects, and prepare a
diverse and competent workforce. The project will also help improve agricultural
practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and protect the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photosynthetic carbon fixation by plants plays a vital
role for plant growth and crop yield while the releases of greenhouse gases from
soils significantly influence global climate and environment. The equipment of
photosynthesis system and greenhouse gas analyzer acquired will support research
and teaching to address research questions in the areas of plant ecology,
ecosystem ecology, crop molecular genetics and breeding, organic agriculture,
and biogeochemistry. Specifically, the instrument will be used to investigate
plant responses to drought and wet conditions, soil greenhouse gas emissions in
grasslands and croplands, organic farming practices on crop physiology and
production, and biochar and nitrogen applications on bioenergy crop and other
crops? growth, yield, and soil greenhouse gas emissions. The acquisition of
instrumentation will allow faculty and students to carry out the important
research projects that would otherwise be significantly impeded at TSU. The
requested instrument will greatly improve the research infrastructure for
ecology, agriculture and environmental science research, enhance the faculty
research capability, and improve their research
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.