* 1919662
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tracing the origin of infectious disease: A comparative paleogenomics study of Treponema pallidum
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* George Perry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 31,972.00

Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by Treponema pallidum
subp. pallidum bacteria. It has recently reemerged as an urgent worldwide health
crisis. The origin of the disease has been a mystery since its sudden appearance
in Europe at the end of the 15th century and its subsequent rapid global spread.
It has long been debated whether syphilis was introduced to Europe, perhaps from
the Americas, or evolved from a form of treponemal infection that had been in
Europe all along. Graduate student Ziyu Wang and collaborators at The
Pennsylvania State University will take a multi-faceted approach to investigate
the pathogen's genetic diversity over the past 500 years in Europe to explore
several possibilities to explain syphilis' origin in Europe. The current T.
pallidum pathogens - associated with several related diseases - likely represent
only the most successful or recently emerged genetic variants. Examined through
an anthropological lens, ancient genomes when considered within the context of
human sociocultural systems yield clues about the processes through which
pathogens have achieved their evolutionary success. Ultimately a more informed
understanding of the factors that contribute to the complex and dynamic
interactions between humans and their pathogens provides a deep-time foundation
for predicting the evolutionary trajectories of modern infectious pathogens and
human responses. Today, as in the past, STI-related stigma has done much to
interfere with the development and implementation of effective intervention
programs. Lessons learned from historic epidemics and the public response will
provide valuable tools for training healthcare professionals, STI high-risk
groups, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To untangle syphilis' origin, its
evolution, and its worldwide spread, the research team will sequence T. pallidum
genomes from representative specimens sampled from temporally and socially well-
characterized European skeletal assemblages dating to the 16th to 19th
centuries. Ancient T. pallidum has previously not been well studied because of
the limited ability of conventional genetic techniques (e.g., polymerase chain
reaction) to recover highly-degraded ancient pathogen DNA. Here a sensitive
targeted hybridization capture technique will be used to recover complete, or
near-complete, ancient T. pallidum genomes. By comparing temporally known
ancient pathogen genomes with their modern equivalents, the research team can
track the sequential changes that occurred in the pathogen's genetic history.
Doing so will narrow the possible evolutionary scenarios for the origin of
syphilis and point to when the pathogen variant that causes syphilis first
emerged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.