* 1919583
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Advanced Microscopy System for the Multidisciplinary Research Track at Molloy College
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jodi Evans, Molloy College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 190,596.00

An award is made to Molloy College to acquire a microscopy system with time-
lapse, Z-stack and multichannel acquisition capability. The instrument will be a
vital part of several research projects investigating a broad cross section of
topics including molecular genetics, immunology, molecular biology, cell cycle
biology, cellular physiology and developmental biology. Biology students
participate in these research projects as part of their education and training
at Molloy. High school students are incorporated into the research groups
through a high school internship program allowing for undergraduates to gain
valuable mentoring experience. The high school students enter local, regional
and national science competitions in line with Molloy's mission-directed goal of
assisting high school districts in promoting a keen interest in science among
their student body. In addition to research activities, the equipment will be
incorporated into several courses in the Biology, Chemistry and Environmental
Studies Department which will expose a majority of the biology and environmental
studies majors as well as the biology education majors of the College to the
many cutting-edge imaging techniques it supports. The use of this equipment in
these research and training activities directly addresses the NSF goal of
increasing the use of modern state-of-the-art research equipment by scientists
and undergraduate students. The STEM initiatives currently in place at Molloy
such as the New York State Collegiate Science and Technology Entry Program
(CSTEP), ASPIRE to Careers in Science project funded through the NSF S-STEM
mechanism and the NSF-sponsored Molloy College Noyce Ambassadors program will be
strengthened. Students will receive advanced training in science that will
ultimately make them more competitive for summer positions, research
internships, civic engagement opportunities and careers in the biological
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this equipment will improve
the efficiency and productivity of ongoing and planned research projects that
will further understanding of 1) mesenchymal stem cell function during immune
responses 2) maintenance of genomic stability in multicellular organisms 3)
epigenetic mechanisms in neuron formation 4) cytoskeletal organization during
microglial phagocytosis 5) hepatocyte triglyceride storage 6) yeast models of
neurodegeneration and, 7) morphological and molecular dynamics of stem cell
differentiation into normal vertebrate tissues during development. Results of
these projects will be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and through
presentations at regional and national scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.