* 1919040
* Demand for Advertising and its Impact on Media Content
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Julie Mortimer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 452,000.00

The project will address two questions: "How does advertising impact the
development of media content?" and "What impact does the structure of the
advertising market have on competition between content producers, and between
advertisers themselves?" The project will analyze the national television
market. Although demand for television is declining as digital forms of
distribution ascend, new digital distribution markets are adopting similar
practices to those used in national television. Press reports suggest this is
impacting competition between tech platforms, as well as the nature of content
in digital markets. Thus, the lessons learned by studying the television market
are important for understanding newer digital markets too. An example of the
impact that the advertising market has on competition between television
networks, and between advertisers themselves, comes from the 'upfront' market,
which sells national ads each spring for the upcoming television season. Among
broadcast networks, 'legacy' advertisers with long histories of consistent
purchases in this market receive substantial price discounts, resulting in
unequal access. Such legacy discounts may lead to lower prices for consumers but
may also make entry into consumer product markets more difficult for new
competitors, possibly weakening competition. Answering the project's research
questions will advance policy-makers' understanding of advertising's impact in
product markets and its effect on ad-supported content. In doing so, the project
will provide crucial guidance for antitrust and other public policy measures in
the media and advertising sectors of the economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advertiser preferences may influence the quality and
nature of programming, as well as the degree of competition between content
producers and between advertisers in their respective product markets. Research
on these effects is often stymied by a lack of detailed, advertiser-level data
on prices and ad-placement choices. The proposed research will address this gap
in the literature in three steps. The first step will be the development and
integration of several new detailed data sources on national television
programming, viewership, and advertising. The second step will describe and
empirically verify the unusual and consequential features of the television
advertising industry. Some of the key patterns the project will analyze include
prices that vary across advertisers for the same ad slot, heterogeneous
advertising strategies by firms, and variation in the degree of content
differentiation by networks. In the third step, the network, viewer, and
advertising sides of the market will be modeled to incorporate heterogeneous
advertiser demand, advertiser-specific pricing, and the supply of differentiated
media content. A thorough understanding of content supply for this market will
require an empirical approach that endogenizes product characteristics. Although
empirical models of endogenous product characteristics have been previously
developed in the literature, these typically focus on product entry, rather than
an allocation of resources across multiple products (e.g., programming time),
and they omit the feature of legacy pricing. Thus, the proposed work will
require and develop a new and expanded modeling approach, to contribute policy-
relevant advice related to practices in the advertising and media
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.