* 1919581
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Circular Dichroism Spectrometer for Research and Training  at St. Mary's College of Maryland
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Jessica Malisch, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2021
* USD 121,819.00

An award is made to St. Mary's College of Maryland to purchase a circular
dichroism (CD) spectrometer for collaborative research. This instrument monitors
rotational change in circular polarized light as it passes through a sample with
chirality, which a common property of biological, inorganic and organic
materials. Faculty and students will use the CD spectrometer to probe
macromolecular structural characteristics of soil organic matter, polymers and
biomolecular interactions, and to examine changes to chemical properties under
specific experimental conditions. This instrument will facilitate scholarly and
instructional collaborations across disciplines and significantly enhance the
college's infrastructure by providing new technology for quantitative analysis.
It also will contribute towards the college's curricular transformations
associated with participation in the multi-year Council for Undergraduate
Research Transformations Project (NSF-DUE #1625354), which aims to integrate
research activities into the undergraduate STEM curriculum to enhance student
learning and better position students for success in the professional and
academic arenas. The research projects facilitated with the CD spectrometer will
address important societal issues including carbon cycling, pollutant fate and
transport in the environment, the impact of emerging contaminants like endocrine
disruptors on marine invertebrates, development of clean tight-gas extraction
methods, and heavy metal exposure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CD spectroscopic
studies at the college will augment and enhance current and future work by
allowing faculty and student researchers to use the instrument to provide the
following: (a) direct evidence of molecular interactions within DNA damage
tolerance and repair systems; (b) improvement of molecular design of small
molecule inhibitors for biological targets; (c) elucidation of structural
thermodynamics of proteins in an avian endocrine system; (d) exploration of
protein conformations and metal ion coordination geometry of metal-organic
complexes; and (e) examination of ion behavior, structural changes and
interactions of clay during uptake of fluid species in different thermochemical
environments. Results from experiments using the CD spectrometer will benefit a
broad range of research fields, from geochemical processes to molecular
mechanisms of DNA repair in biological systems to whole organism physiology in
oysters and birds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.