* 1919667
* MRI: Development of ACCORD, a Community Cyberinstrument for Broadening Access to Research on Sensitive Data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Deborah Crawford, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,770,656.00

This 11 public university collaboration in Virginia develops ACCORD, an
innovative research computing cyberinstrument to support the storage, access,
and usage of sensitive data for researchers at participating institutions across
the State. Beyond simply securing research data, the ACCORD cyberinstrument
provides customizable secured research environments that can be integrated into
each institution's workflows and security models to assure compliance with
relevant laws and regulations applicable to specific data types. Through ACCORD,
researchers across the State of Virginia have access to new research computing
capabilities not previously possible (or not easily accessible), enabling them
to undertake projects that require complex protection of sensitive data. In
addition to enabling new research, ACCORD advances important dimensions of
research such as reproducibility and data accountability. ACCORD is also a new
model for collaboration, providing a common platform for researchers at multiple
institutions and in different disciplines to securely share data and
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to driving exciting scientific
discoveries with strong societal impact, the Virginia ACCORD program prioritizes
research training and education in data security and privacy for students and
researchers across the State. The Virginia ACCORD Consortium comprises
universities of different sizes and missions, including minority-serving and
non-PhD granting institutions, and is an effective platform for outreach and
broadening participation to underrepresented and underserved communities.
Lessons learned from the ACCORD's new model of collaboration and sharing compute
resources are also being disseminated to other research computing consortia and
communities across the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.