* 1919375
* WORKSHOP: Graduate Student Symposium at the 2019 ACM Conference on Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (TEI)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Yi-Luen Do, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2020
* USD 19,996.00

This award supports the participation of promising United States graduate
students and distinguished research faculty in a Graduate Student Consortium.
The full-day event will take place on Sunday, March 17, immediately preceding
and in conjunction with the 13th Association of Computing Machinery
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and Embodied Interaction (TEI),
to be held in Tempe, Arizona. Launched in 2007, the annual TEI conference is
about creating compelling experiences that bridge bits and atoms through
research in human-computer interaction, design, interactive arts, tools and
technologies. TEI brings together researchers, designers, engineers, and artists
who provide an innovative and cross-disciplinary perspective on physical/digital
interaction design and technological innovation. The intimate size of this
single-track conference (about 250 participants in recent years) provides a
unique forum for exchanging ideas through talks, interactive exhibits, demos,
posters, art installations and performances. The theme of this year's conference
is Hybrid Materials in light of the fact that over the past few years TEI
research has increasingly embraced hybridity, whether through material
explorations of composites such as bioelectronic, on-body, or active materials,
or theoretical inquiries into socio-technical systems as hybrid assemblies.

The 2019 TEI Graduate Student Consortium will immediately precede the
conference, with follow-up activities during the conference's main technical
program. Students will present their early stage research to their peers and the
faculty mentors, who will constructively critique the students' work from
diverse viewpoints. The students will also get to show their work in posters at
the conference, and their short papers will be included in the conference
proceedings. The day will end with general discussion, reflection, and career
advice. The organizing committee has made a special effort to recruit a diverse
set of student participants, particularly seeking persons with disabilities and
members of underrepresented groups, or at institutions not historically
represented at the TEI conferences. The GSC will sharpen the research skills of
a new generation of scientists, engineers, and designers who will shape human-
centered computing as it takes place in physical things and places. Already we
are observing the impact of this field in our daily lives, as computing becomes
embedded in our phones, our bus stops, and soon even our clothing. Now is a
critical moment in the field, as a wave of early exploratory prototypes gives
way to disciplined investigations, the development of toolkits, and more
rigorous evaluation methods. Mentoring the next generation of TEI researchers is
crucial if the field is to retain its vigor and openness in the future.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.