* 1919312
* RCN-UBE: Ethics Network for Course-based Opportunities in Undergraduate Research: Phase II
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Laura Diaz-Martinez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 497,588.00

Scientific advancement is reliant upon individuals conducting research in an
ethical and responsible manner. Beyond the importance of ethics/Responsible
Conduct of Research (E/RCR) education within the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines themselves, the rigor of
scientific outcomes often has direct implications for the level of public trust
in and engagement with science. Thus, it is imperative that emergent scholars at
all levels receive formal preparation in E/RCR in an effort to promote the
aforementioned goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More acutely, recent efforts to
reform STEM laboratory education at the postsecondary level have resulted in the
genesis of course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs), which are
designed to augment student access to and engagement in authentic scientific
inquiry. Current evidence within the literature demonstrates that student
participation in CUREs results in increases in their science process skills
development, affect, and persistence in the domain. Yet, few studies have
examined the integration of E/RCR in CUREs as well as mechanisms to effectively
sustain such integration. The Ethics Network for Course-based Opportunities in
Undergraduate Research (ENCOUR) seeks to address this concern through several
structured activities, including: (a) expansion of a community of practice that
includes individuals from diverse institutions with diverse educational
backgrounds who are collectively interested in E/RCR in CUREs; (b) creation,
implementation, and evaluation of a year-long ENCOUR fellowship program, which
will provide structured professional development for CURE designers and
instructors interested in developing and field-testing E/RCR resources; (c)
curation and public dissemination of the resources; and (d) organization and
facilitation of an E/RCR in CUREs conference. Collectively, these activities
will enhance the community?s knowledge of the role and impact of E/RCR education
in laboratory contexts through collaborative discussion as well as the creation
of a national E/RCR in CUREs professional development framework and compendium
of E/RCR resources. These latter outcomes will be of especial interest to
individuals in STEM and non-STEM disciplines who seek to prepare an ethically-
responsible citizenry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.