* 1919646
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Fully-Motorized Research Microscope at Fairfield University Project Description
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Anita Fernandez, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 175,350.00

An award is made to Fairfield University to fund an automated research
microscope. This instrument enables projects that require detailed observations
of subcellular structures, real-time imaging, and three-dimensional
reconstructions of thick tissues. These sophisticated imaging techniques will be
incorporated into the biology lab coursework for undergraduate science majors at
Fairfield University. In addition science majors that do independent research
with faculty will have access to state-of-the-art technology that both empowers
their research and serves as a crucial training tool. Fairfield University has a
long-standing commitment to promote science education for high school students
from underserved communities through BASE Camp, a program that brings high
school girls to the Fairfield University campus for summer research experiences.
BASE camp students will also use this microscope in their research projects. The
ability to capture detailed images of otherwise invisible subjects is awe-
inspiring to students of all ages, and increases the impact of research
experience on education and on attitudes toward science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
staggering breadth of research on the Fairfield campus will benefit from this
instrument. It will be used to study how Candida albicans, a pathogenic fungus,
constructs a biofilm and will enable researchers to visualize real-time
responses to agents that disrupt biofilms. In addition it will be used to
observe the subcellular localization of engineered enzymes that fluoresce upon
activation. The microscope is a versatile instrument that is capable of
capturing three-dimensional images of large complex organs such as the gonad in
live C. elegans nematode worms. Researchers will use the C. elegans gonad to
study how the regulation of microtubule motors impacts architecture of an
intricate tissue. The microscope will also be used to study human cells. For
example in one study users will examine how lipid raft distribution responds to
dietary intervention in ex vivo peripheral blood mononuclear cells. In a
different study, researchers will monitor a human cancer cell line's response to
potential anti-cancer agents. These inquiries traverse the fields of genetics,
development, biochemistry, metabolism, microbiology, and cancer biology, and
will lead to exciting discoveries and new research
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.