* 1919290
* The Long-run Relationship Between Trade and the Growth of Cities
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Bruce Blonigen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 394,536.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Historically, cities arise and grow at important
points along trade routes, and thus many of today's major cities are natural
seaports or are located where their geography makes them obvious centers for
trade. In contrast, there are many recent examples where new modern seaports are
constructed outside of cities. This project collects a new and unique database
on international trade, population, wages, and prices for ocean port cities
across the world that spans back into the early 1800s. The project then examines
the impact of international trade on the local population and income growth for
these port cities. The project also considers if this effect varies for
different areas of the world and over time. There is a critical need to
understand whether the handling of major trade flows leads to improved growth of
ports local economy to inform effective public policy, as many local and
regional governments direct local tax dollars into improving and maintaining
port infrastructure. Also, the project helps in understanding the implications
of recent changes in the Arctic region that creates potentials for seaports and
trade routes on the economic growth in this region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will examine and characterize the relationship between international
trade activity and regional growth and welfare over the past two centuries. The
analysis will determine not only the strength of this relationship, but the
extent to which spatial or temporal factors influence this relationship.
Existing datasets are at an aggregate national level and have not collected the
essential data required to look at this important issue. This project undertakes
a substantial collection of historical data on population, international trade,
wages, and prices at the city level from a variety of historical records, such
as the British and French colonial reports, covering a broad set of cities
across the world back well into the 19thcentury. These data are generally not
available electronically online and will be gathered through archival research.
To examine the causal impact of international trade on port-city growth, the
project introduces a new strategy that adapts a Bartik-type shift-share
procedure that also instruments the initial share variable with interactions of
shocks to international transport with geographic heterogeneity across port
cities. This novel data combined with the identification strategy allow
exploration of the causal relationship between trade activity and regional
growth over time for both port and nearby inland cities, as well as the impact
of globalization on real wages across worker types during the first era of
globalization. The project, thus, has broader impacts on issues that relate to
international trade, infrastructure investment and economic growth, which has
implications for recent developments in the world such as how potential trade
routes in the new Arctic may affect regional growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.