* 1919637
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual-Source Single-Crystal X-ray Diffractomter
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Andrew Sykes, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 229,992.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemical
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Andrew Sykes from the University of South
Dakota (USD) and colleagues Haoran Sun and Zhenqiang Wang are acquiring a dual-
source single-crystal diffractometer. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information
about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules.
The studies described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and
graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this and other collaborating
institutions. Because this is the only diffraction facility in the state it
serves as a regional resource. The diffractometer also enables training of
undergraduates at regional colleges and tribal schools with whom the home
institution has long-established relationships through Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) programs. The instrument is also used extensively in the
education and training of underrepresented students such as Native American
students from Nebraska Indian Community College (NICC, in South Sioux City, Macy
and Santee, NE) who participate in summer research at
USD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels. It is especially useful for studying the absolute structure of
steroids and for analyzing inorganic near-infrared active dyes with potential
biomedical applications. The diffractometer is also employed to determine the
structure of amphiphilic (detergent-like) molecules used in carbon-fluorine
catalysis. The instrument is utilized in studies of anion sensors, fluorescent
pressure sensors and anthraquinone-imine cation fluorescent sensors. It is also
employed to characterize perfluoroalkylated transition metal complexes and
metal-organic supercontainers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.