* 1919493
* Collaborative Research: Targeting Privacy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Simon Anderson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 161,000.00

The project will advance three crucial themes on markets for targeted
advertising and consumer privacy. The first will address whether consumers
benefit or are harmed when a firm they do business with can sell their data on
to other firms they might deal with. It will study whether giving individuals
the right to opt out of such data sales is an effective means of protecting
consumer interests. The second theme will study the consequences of giving
consumers ownership over their own data with the right to sell it themselves, if
they choose. The third theme will study whether the increasing precision of
targeted advertising leads to excessively specialized choices for consumers in
media markets supported by advertising. Regulators including the US Congress and
the European Union (with the adoption of the General Data Privacy Regulation)
have underscored the urgent need to understand these issues to draft appropriate
policies to protect consumers and their data without stifling innovative
business practices. The project will provide guidance on the merits of policies
that restrict targeting, give consumers opt-out rights, and give consumers the
right to sell their own data. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will be
primarily theoretical in its methodology, although the themes are inspired from
actual current (and expanding) practices and policy debates. The first part will
innovate a joint equilibrium analysis of the market where data is harvested and
the market where it is deployed. The analysis will begin with a monopoly
information-harvesting firm collecting data from its market to sell it on to
firms in a second market. While the first firm will want to render its market
attractive to consumers (through low prices, say), consumers are wary about
participating, for they will rationally anticipate that their data might be used
against them (in the form of high prices, say) in the secondary market. Data-
sharing may benefit consumers because markets where data are used operate more
efficiently and consumers can command part of this gain by exacting discounts in
the first market. Perversely, letting individual consumers choose whether to opt
out of data sharing may hurt them collectively, as consumers with "something to
hide" are penalized with higher prices. This is a stepping stone for analyzing
competition in data collection and how data harvesters parcel out data for sale.
The second part will examine who should be able to sell consumer data. It will
compare when firms collect and sell on the data with when consumers can sell
their own data. When data are used to craft discount offers, consumers may
engineer greater discount competition by pricing their data below the cost of
lost privacy. Individuals eager to be targeted might inflict negative
externalities on others who are revealed to have strong product preferences and
may face higher prices. Equilibrium consequences of consumer pricing have not
been previously addressed and are quite intricate. Furthermore, firms should
anticipate that consumers may strategically manipulate the information they sell
on. This analysis will be a springboard for studying how savvy consumers will
make the most of their data by selectively curating what they sell into one or
more digital personas. The third part will draw on different modeling approaches
of product differentiation and will meld these to an advertising-financed
business model of media economics. Advertisers and content consumers (who are
prospective consumers of the advertised goods) constitute the two sides of the
market, and they are intermediated by media platforms which choose advertising
prices (and consumer subscription fees when relevant). Competing platforms
connect advertisers with viewers: a platform's content is most appealing to
viewers with "nearby" tastes, and the bundle of viewers at a platform is most
attractive to "nearby" advertisers. Before internet-enabled tracking and
targeting, bucketing of advertisers to consumers was crudely enabled through
specialized media content. Now that individuals are tracked and targeted, market
performance might be enhanced through better matching but worsened through too
many platforms. Advertisers with broad appeal may crowd out narrow ones under
the old business model, and foster insufficiently few specialized, but the new
business model may go too far in the other direction. These topics have not been
broached in media economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.