* 1919803
* MRI:Development of an Instrument for Synthesis of Polymer Thin Films by Initiated Chemical Vapor Deposition with Capability of in Situ Structural Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* James Abulencia, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 293,474.00

Polymeric coatings have been part of the fabric of human life for decades. As we
move forward, the coatings will need to be functional yet minimal, safe and
environmentally responsible. To meet these challenges, we need to understand the
fundamental principles behind any deposition process so that it could be
harnessed to develop new coatings and to improve upon existing ones. It is this
idea that is the driving force behind the conception of the instrument with all
its unique capabilities. Manhattan College is a primarily undergraduate
institution with an emphasis on providing a well-rounded education. Therefore, a
core objective of the project will be to use the instrument as a vehicle to its
students the scientific and engineering concepts underlying the deposition
process, to train them and give them the opportunity to work with professors and
scientists on cutting-edge research projects, and to put them on the path of
discovery so that they may be prepared to solve technological problems of the
future. Another key objective of the project is to leverage the instrument to
create meaningful opportunities for outreach to the public at large.
Specifically, our goal is to educate parents and school teachers from the Bronx
and surrounding communities about the operation and applications of the
instrument so that they may use it as a platform to inspire greater numbers of
students to pursue careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on the development of an instrument at Manhattan College to study the
application of polymer thin films on substrates by the technique of initiated
Chemical Vapor Deposition (iCVD). The instrument will contain the following
novel capabilities that are not currently available in an off-the-shelf iCVD
instrument a) in situ characterization of the polymer films by infrared
spectroscopy during the deposition process, by embedding an Attenuated Total
Reflectance (ATR) crystal in the stage of the chamber b) polymer deposition by
thermal as well as photo-initiation, by providing a slot for illumination inside
the deposition chamber c) feeding monomers using a carrier gas, which would be
an important step in the scale-up of the iCVD technique for commercial
applications d) polymer deposition under a wide range of pressures, from vacuum
to positive pressure, which would enable polymerization of monomers that have
thus far been outside the scope of the technique. Finally, the instrument will
be designed so as to be used in conjunction with a gas analyzer to study low-
temperature, photocatalytic properties of materials. The proposed instrument
would be capable of simultaneously supporting a variety of interdisciplinary
research projects, which would make it a valuable addition to the research
infrastructure of a primarily undergraduate institution like Manhattan
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.