* 1919647
* MRI: Track-1: Acquisition of marine multirobot systems for underwater monitoring and construction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jesse Casana, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Underwater surveys provide critical information to federal, state, and local
agencies charged with protecting unique underwater archeological and cultural
heritage sites. The research enabled by the instruments to be acquired with this
award is focused on an exploration of techniques and principles that guide the
development of algorithms and computational systems for control and design of
water robots to study: Underwater robotic construction or scaffolding to protect
delicate ecologies; multirobot communication and coordination for monitoring;
and underwater exploration and mapping. This project fosters collaboration among
researchers in diverse disciplines (engineering, environmental studies,
biological science, and anthropology). The instrumentation acquired will provide
opportunities to students at all levels with hands-on experience in research,
programming, and experiential learning, and public outreach communicate the
challenges and insights derived from field experiments. The findings from
experimental monitoring will most likely augment public awareness of the
environmental challenges for the area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation
will enable investigators to study principles, algorithms, and systems needed to
enable autonomous locomotion and manipulation in water, including gathering data
about physical changes and pollutants, aiding in search-and-rescue, constructing
underwater structures, and documenting underwater and cultural heritage. New
challenges such as global positioning, high speed communication between robots
or with a remote computer, and human access for repair pose new challenges. The
investigators aim to establish a versatile computational framework to enable the
precise simulation, design, optimization and planning of various physical
processes related to the construction activities immersed in a fluid
environment. Using more complex models, they expect to create a real-time
decision framework that includes constraints and optimization criteria and can
adapt to changing contexts reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.