* 1919351
* Collaborative Research: Financial Network Reactions to Regulations and Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Selman Erol, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 198,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of government interventions and
regulations in the operation of the financial sector has important implications
for the economy. This project explores how banking regulations and government
interventions affect the interaction of banks. The project uses historical and
modern data sources to analyze the changes in interbank relations in changing
regulatory policy environments. The project considers that a banking network
adjusts to the anticipation of government support in ways that makes the banking
system more reliant on government support and more prone to less likely
catastrophic events. Second, the project looks at the effects of opacity versus
transparency by considering that banks operating with opacity support each other
at times of distress without disturbing the broader economy and creating panics.
Finally, the research looks at the implications of central clearing
counterparties. Central clearing counterparties (CCP) are institutions that take
counterparty risk to transactions and provide clearing and settlement services
for them. This research explores how central clearing of derivatives enhances
coordination among banks and prevents crises which can arise as coordination
failures on clearing obligations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
several research questions on the banking system and central clearing policies.
First question explores how public liquidity provision affects the way banks
relate to each other. The project constructs a theory on the effects of the
public liquidity provisions by the Federal Reserve System (FED) and test the
predictions of this theory utilizing historical data on the establishment of the
FED in 1913. This research indicates that public liquidity provision by the FED
indirectly creates the first shadow banking sector in the U.S., so that an
unexpected contraction in public liquidity can induce systemic risk. Second
research question explores recent regulations that mandate central clearing of
derivatives and how these regulations affect the exposure and interconnections
of different banks. This research constructs a theoretical model of derivatives
which highlights a tradeoff. On the one hand, CCPs have the benefit of enhancing
coordination across banks. On the other hand, CCPs operate partly as an exchange
that improves market transparency, reducing bank insurance. Using detailed data
that includes exposures of all banks in the U.S. to all other financial and non-
financial institutions, this research explores how these tradeoffs interact in
different layers of the banking network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.