* 1919713
* MRI:  Acquisition of High-Throughput Fluorescence Imaging System for Undergraduate Research and Teaching at Pace University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Nancy Krucher, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 372,304.00

An award is made to Pace University to acquire an automated high-resolution
imaging system for screening large numbers of fluorescent zebrafish larvae and
cancer cells. This automated imaging system will dramatically enhance scientific
research at Pace University. Beyond being used by researchers at Pace
University, the imaging system will also be integrated into the scientific
training of undergraduate students enrolled in upper-division Biology and
Chemistry courses. Students in these courses will gain hands-on research
experiences and improve their quantitative and analytical skills as they work
through the large datasets that they will collect. The use of the system in
teaching laboratories will allow us to pursue inquiry-based projects within
upper-level biology classes, exposing many more students to authentic scientific
experimentation and discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The automated high-
resolution fluorescence imaging system will be used to tackle a broad range of
important questions from the fields of neuroscience, developmental biology,
cancer biology, and biophysical chemistry. Furthermore, this imaging system will
facilitate and promote interdepartmental research collaborations between the
Biology and Chemistry departments, and engage undergraduates in publishable
research. This imaging system will allow faculty and students to determine how
various genes impact neural circuits, to identify key genes governing sensory
organ development and regeneration, to examine cell proliferations, and to work
on other topics. The results from the research obtained with this imaging system
will be shared via scientific meetings and published in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.