* 1919416
* MRI: Acquisition of a Linear Impactor System to Study Injury Mechanisms and Severity at University of Michigan, Dearborn
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Krim Lacey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 265,097.00

Severe impacts on the human body, particularly to the head and chest, caused by
sports or motor vehicle accidents can be fatal. Understanding the injury
mechanisms and the severity of injury caused by such events is, therefore, of
great importance. Such information will help engineers to better design
protective materials and equipment. Obviously, this type of information cannot
be gathered during actual events and therefore artificial models are utilized.
To simulate impacts, an artificial model of the head and eyes are subjected to
forces in a controlled and measurable manner in laboratory settings. Valuable
information is therefore gained about injury mechanisms and the severity of
injury caused by bodily collisions. This award provides funding to obtain a
Linear Impactor System to study injury mechanisms and severity. The equipment
will be used to study the response of an artificial body to various impacts. It
will also help in designing protective materials and devices and formulating
revised safety measures. Partnerships between engineering, social sciences,
medicine, and external collaborators will lead to high-impact and novel
research. Acquisition of this system will enhance the education of both
undergraduate and graduate students. It will be also used in outreach activities
to attract high school and middle school students to STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrumentation will be used on various
research programs spanning a wide breadth. These programs include: (i) the
relationship between neck strength and head acceleration (ii) biomechanics of
injuries due to intimate partner violence (iii) examination of sensors to
monitor head acceleration (iv) the efficacy and mechanical behavior of personal
protective equipment such as helmets, soft headgear and face masks (v)
characterization of the mechanobiological response of the eye to impact (vi) and
the understanding of mechanical changes in the heart during an impact to the
thorax. The knowledge generated will help to develop a more accurate forensic
analysis of injury and to increase understanding of the fundamental behavior of
hard and soft tissue injury. Researchers also will study the relation of injury
to loading rate and body acceleration, and the optimum methods to reduce the
likelihood of injury for incidents related to sports, falls, violence and
transportation crash.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.