* 1919127
* PFI-TT:  Autonomous Robotic Systems for Bridge Inspection and Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Hung La, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 447,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to significantly improve the
structural health inspection and monitoring of civil infrastructures (bridges,
tunnels, dams, etc.) by using automated and non-destructive inspection robots.
More than 35% of the 600,000 bridges in the U.S. have been subject to extreme
deterioration due to aging, various mechanical and weather conditions,
inadequate maintenance, and deficiencies in inspection and evaluation. The cost
of inspecting and repairing deteriorating highway bridges in the U.S. alone is
estimated at more than $140 billion. Currently, bridges are inspected manually
by using visual inspection, chain drag, and non-destructive evaluation (NDE)
techniques. However, manual inspection techniques are too slow, labor intensive,
and create traffic congestion, leading to demand for efficient, cost-effective,
and safe inspection and evaluation. The proposed innovation through new NDE
robotic development will bridge the gap between these approaches, allowing
inspectors to assess bridge conditions in a timely manner. The project is
expected to, for the first time, enable widespread use of advanced robotic
technologies across more than 600,000 bridges in the U.S. and will also expand
to the international civil infrastructure inspection market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the development of
bridge inspection robots to automate the NDE data collection process and filter
NDE data to enable accurate and reliable assessment of a bridge's condition.
Research objectives include: development of hardware and software for NDE
sensor-robot integration, non-contact acoustic array for fast inspections, NDE
data processing algorithms for automated inspection and evaluation, and three-
dimensional data visualization for seamless assessment of a bridge deck's
condition. Extensive tests and deployment of the robotic platforms on bridges
and other civil infrastructures will be conducted. If successful, the resulting
integrated prototype will allow fast, accurate detection and evaluation of
bridge conditions and will create a standard tool to enable wide and efficient
use of NDE technologies to inspect other infrastructure. The project is expected
to represent a major advancement within civil engineering and infrastructure
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.