* 1919866
* MRI: Acquisition of a Large-Scale, High-Throughput, Electron Beam Lithography System for Multi-Scale Patterning
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Kenneth Shepard, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 630,000.00

The NanoFabrication Facility at the Advanced Science Research Center at the City
University of New York is an interdisciplinary research space which is home to a
diverse community of researchers who conduct work in the fields of nano-
electronics, photonics, nano-bio interfaces, and several other fields enabled by
nanofabrication. A key challenge, which is addressed by the purchase of a high
throughput, large area electron beam lithography system is the ability to
quickly and reliably generate patterns across multiple length scales: from tens
of nanometers to several centimeters in size. In doing so, the system will
accelerate research and enable the researchers to rapidly and cost effectively
prototype electronic, photonic, and other devices which will serve as the basis
of future technologies. Furthermore, the laboratory is a NYC based hub for
mentoring high school, undergraduate, graduate students, and early career
researchers. This system will be used to prepare students to tackle the complex
problems facing the U.S., the STEM research community, and the world. In the
long term, significant societal impact is anticipated in the development of
fundamentally new technologies for health technologies, environmental science
and energy generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron beam lithography
is a direct write / maskless lithographic technique used to rapidly generate
patterns with nanometer resolution. In the past decade a large number of new
material systems, such as two and three dimensional topological insulators,
graphene, and transition metal dichalcogenides and many others emerged with the
promise of revolutionizing the fields of photonics, nanoelectronics, and nano-
bio interfaces. If successfully implemented, devices made from these materials
include high mobility field effect transistors, topological and gate-controlled
superconducting circuits, and high efficiency optical and optospintronic
architectures, and fault-tolerant quantum computers. During the past decade a
lot of fundamental research was done to understand the scientific principles
that underpin the operation of these devices. The next challenge that must be
overcome in order to realize the potential promise offered by these materials is
the ability to build large scale prototype devices to show that these materials
systems are viable candidates for 21st century technology. The acquisition of a
high throughput electron beam lithography system is a key step in solving these
challenges by enabling the rapid prototyping of novel
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.