* 1919055
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Developing and Validating a Method of Coherence-Based Judgment Aggregation
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Emily Ho, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 19,870.00

High quality forecasting is essential to any area where people make decisions
based on uncertain information, such as in geopolitics, the environment, and
medical and financial domains. Subjective judgements of probabilities that
quantify uncertainty are often used to produce such predictions. Previous
research has differentiated two qualities of forecasts: accuracy, and coherence,
or the extent of logical and probabilistic consistency in judgments. Recent work
has suggested that coherent judgments tend to also be more accurate. Yet there
exists no measure of coherence that might be used to identify a "select crowd"
of judges who are more accurate than the average. The purpose of this research
is to develop a psychological measure of coherence and determine how it predicts
accuracy. Specifically, the research will compare the relative accuracy of
judgments that are weighed by this new measure with judgments weighed by
existing methods of judgment aggregation. Results of this work can help improve
judgment quality in highly consequential fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer
this question, the researchers will create items that measure various aspects of
probabilistic coherence. For example, items would test whether the probabilities
assigned to all possible outcomes add to 1, as expected. Researchers will assess
the psychometric properties - reliability, convergent and divergent validity -
of the newly devised measure. To test the hypothesis that individuals with
higher coherence scores are also more accurate, the researchers will weigh
judgments from an incentivized forecasting tournament with this newly devised
coherence measure. They will compare the accuracy of judgments weighed by this
new method with other existing methods, such as linear and logarithmic
averaging. The coherence measure may also produce a new, out-of-sample way of
identifying the experts without additional knowledge of forecast performance,
which will further our understanding of the role that individual-level coherence
plays in maximizing judgment quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.