* 1919515
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Inequalities and Respiratory Mortality in Newfoundland during the 1918 Influenza Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Taylor van Doren, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2022
* USD 13,583.00

The 1918 influenza pandemic has been studied from the perspectives of
epidemiologists, historians, virologists, and social scientists, providing
increasingly more insight on how biology and culture interact to result in
unequal mortality outcomes. This doctoral dissertation project will investigate
population health and social inequalities that contributed to the 1918 pandemic
outcomes, taking into account both influenza and other respiratory illnesses
that were circulating during the pandemic. Advancing knowledge about how past
behaviors and population structure affected previous pandemic outcomes can
contribute to contemporary knowledge of human behaviors, population structure,
and potential infectious threats. This project will also support science
outreach and education activities at the research location and home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will analyze the impact of
population heterogeneity, specifically in terms of social inequalities, on
mortality associated with four respiratory diseases (influenza, pneumonia,
tuberculosis, and bronchitis) during the 1918 influenza pandemic on the island
of Newfoundland. Newfoundland represents a unique opportunity for the use of
historical archival data to reconstruct the political economy, population, and
social structure of a pre-industrial society in a way that is directly
comparable to its Western neighbors. Early 20th century Newfoundland's urban and
rural regions varied greatly in their demographic and socioeconomic
characteristics; therefore, research questions will address how age, sex,
gendered divisions of labor, crowding, income, and education facilitate social
inequality that leads to differential disease mortality. The data used will be
collected from the Provincial Archives of Newfoundland &amp; Labrador, and will
include yearly vital statistics, death records, newspapers, diaries, photograph
collections, and literature. Survival analysis and seasonal regression models
will be used to quantify differential mortality across the island, but
qualitative data are also critical to understanding the cultural norms of men,
women, and children during the early 20th century, and an anthropological
perspective on 1918 pandemic mortality. This project is jointly supported by the
NSF's Biological Anthropology and Cultural Anthropology
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.