* 1919147
* PFI-RP: Next-Generation Microcontroller for the Era of Internet of Smart Things
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mingoo Seok, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to develop and commercialize the
technologies to create the next generation hardware for microcontrollers (a type
of computer chip). The market of the microcontroller-based devices has been
rapidly growing and expected to continue, thanks to recent trends such as the
Internet of Things (IoT), wearables, smart buildings, mobile robots, drones,
etc. This market has been seeking microcontroller hardware that consumes very
little power to extend the battery life. This market also has been seeking to
increase computing capability to meet the growing need of complex workloads,
such as a neural network algorithm, without much-increasing power consumption.
However, since they were first developed multiple decades ago, microcontrollers
have undergone rather incremental improvements and cannot support those emerging
needs. The proposed technology, if successful, will create next-generation
microcontroller hardware to achieve significantly higher performance, power-
efficiency, and robustness, thereby supporting this critical market demand and
posing a strong value proposition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will further develop several recent NSF-funded research results. The near- and
sub-threshold voltage (NTV, STV) techniques, where the supply voltage is scaled
down to a half to a quarter of the nominal level, has been considered one of the
most effective ways to reduce power consumption. However, this approach has not
been widely accepted because the hardware quickly loses robustness across
operating conditions (temperature), manufacturing process variations, and long-
term device aging. This problem becomes even worse with non-Von-Neumann hardware
accelerators and analog-mixed-signal building blocks in the microcontroller
system-on-chip. This project's objective is to create and commercialize the
technologies that can effectively address the robustness challenge and thus
achieve one to two orders of magnitude better power-efficiency and performance.
The proposed effort in this project will be centered on creating power/area-
efficient in-situ error detection and correction circuits (EDAC) and on-chip
integrated digital voltage regulators and DC-DC converters that are applicable
for commercial microcontrollers, non-Von-Neumann neural-network accelerators,
and analog-mixed-signal building blocks. The anticipated result of the project
is the silicon prototype of the next-generation microcontroller hardware
integrating the developed technologies, demonstrating largely improved
performance, power, and robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.