* 1919501
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Yongming Deng, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 304,487.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Kevin Williams from Western
Kentucky University and colleagues Lester Pesterfield, Rui Zhang, Lawrence Hill
and Yongming Deng have acquired a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with an
automatic sampler. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such
as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance,
as well as facilitating studies of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The NMR studies improve understanding of synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research. This broadly accessible instrumentation
strengthens the regional NMR analytical infrastructure. Local high school
students and teachers are participating in research activities. Training
research students to operate a state-of-the-art NMR spectrometer is an integral
part of institutional mission to perform student-centered, engaged
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the NMR spectrometer is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
exploration of the synthesis, reactivity, and biological activity of
platinum(II) compounds that may be used as anticancer drugs and the development
of methodologies for the synthesis of photocatalyzed alkynes reactions and
biocompatible iron catalysts for carbene transfers. The NMR spectrometer is also
used in studies that involve preparation of degradable polymers with antioxidant
pendant groups and those using ionic liquid ligands for the synthesis of
nanoparticle catalysts. In addition, it benefits the analysis and production of
highly reactive metal-oxo species with molecular oxygen and visible light as
oxidative catalysts. The spectrometer also serves researchers investigating
hydrogen-deuterium exchange in cobalt(III) ammine complexes and correlating
cobalt(III) chemical shifts with electronic transition
energies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.