* 1919329
* Models of Complex Experimentation: Attribute Discovery, Contextual Experimentation, and Experimentation on Causal Graphs
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Arjada Bardhi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 277,988.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The goal to analyze learning and
strategic experimentation in complex environments where information is important
but is also not always easily discovered. Experimentation is key to innovation
and progress in technology, public policy, markets, and science. The growing
availability of big data and wide spread use of experimental methods mean that
businesses and governments conduct trial or experimental efforts to quickly
evaluate everything from marketing plans to government outreach efforts. Yet
such data abundance and complexity also leaves room for selective and distorted
learning. This research will develop a framework to study such distortions in
three complex environments: multi-site evaluation of social programs; small-
scale experimentation and policy diffusion in across states in a federal system
of government; and dynamic learning of causal
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research seeks to contribute to existing
work in optimal attribute learning, causal experimentation, and strategic
experimentation with correlated outcomes. The PI will introduce and analyze
optimal experimentation in three distinct environments in which the object of
experimentation is complex. The first project studies a principal-agent model of
experimentation and persuasion through selective discovery of attributes of a
multi-attribute object of common interest. Conceptually, the study draws an
analogy between optimal attribute sampling and small-scale multi-site evaluation
of social programs. Methodologically, it offers a novel theoretical framework
based on Gaussian processes. The second project will employ this Gaussian
framework to build a dynamic model of experimentation in federal systems.
Experimentation performed by individual states within a federal union is a
striking example of the interplay between small-scale context-based
experimentation and large-scale policy adoption. The analysis seeks to explain
empirical patterns of horizontal and vertical policy diffusion. Motivated by the
debate on mechanism experiments as an alternative to traditional policy
experiments in empirical work, the third project studies strategic
experimentation on a causal graph of random variables. The analysis will seek to
identify formal conditions under which mechanism experiments dominate policy
experiments, by marrying tools of causal graph theory with classic multi-armed
bandit problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.