* 1919498
* Alabama's Biodiversity Heritage:  Expanding and Promoting Access and Use of a Regional Important Botanical Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Alvin Diamond, Troy University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 195,359.00

The Troy University Herbarium houses more than 46,000 plant specimens, making it
one of the largest and more diverse collections in Alabama. It is especially
rich in specimens from the East Gulf Coastal Plain ecoregion, a top biodiversity
hotspot in the United States and considered endangered. The herbarium is an
irreplaceable repository of botanical diversity that documents the occurrence of
plants both past and present. This project will secure and alleviate
overcrowding of specimens. It will improve and modernize access to specimens and
allow for wider dissemination of the information they convey to researchers,
educators, students, and the general public. The outcomes will facilitate
research in basic and applied sciences, such as conservation biology,
agriculture, and resource management. Educational programs will benefit students
and educators through workshops focused on how the new resources can be used to
increase interest in biodiversity research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-
funded project will provide a mobile storage system and herbarium cabinets,
which will allow for expansion and growth of the TROY Herbarium. Specific
activities include (1) installation of new herbarium cases and a mobile storage
system; (2) acquisition of new digitization equipment; (3) curation of over
10,000 legacy specimens; and (4) engaging teachers and students in southeast
Alabama through workshops and digital resources. New imaging equipment will be
used to digitize and improve accessibility for 46,000 vouchered specimens and
more than 10,000 legacy specimens that will be available via the Alabama Plant
Atlas and shared with national and international resources including iDigBio
(idigbio.org) and the Global Biodiversity Information Faciilty (GBIF). Non-
vascular plant specimens will be made available through the North American
Bryophyte Herbarium portal and the North American Lichen Herbarium portal. As
part of the project, reorganization and nomenclatural updates will be made to
facilitate access and secure the collection for future use. Summer workshops on
plant identification, classification and herbarium procedures for Alabama
Science in Motion (ASIM) and the Alabama Math, Science and Technology Initiative
(AMSTI) will provide needed training for elementary and secondary teachers.
Curators, serving as mentors for teachers and students using iNaturalist, will
provide lasting outreach to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.