* 1919752
* MRI: Acquisition of Heterogeneous Computer System for Machine Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Arie Kaufman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 571,975.00

This award supports the purchase, deployment, and operation of a heterogeneous
computer system to advance the research interests of many faculty in the Stony
Brook University's Artificial Intelligence research community. The shared
research instrument will enable discovery in a multitude of areas. For example:
in Geosciences, the cluster will be used to process satellite imagery to map
remote parts of the Arctic and Antarctic; in Biosciences it will be employed to
build neural networks that will advance cardiac imagery and fMRI research; in
Social Sciences it will help produce methods and tools that can illuminate
social and psychological determinants of population health. The provisioning of
the instrument in the Stony Brook University campus will greatly benefit
hundreds of graduate and undergraduate students taking courses in machine
learning and artificial intelligence each year. The proposed cluster will offer
professionally-managed resources providing a standardized environment with
adequate technical support. Further, student demand is anticipated to continue
to grow through several ongoing initiatives including an undergraduate CS
concentration in artificial intelligence, with new courses in NLP and data
science, a recently approved graduate CS concentration in Data Science, and a
proposed "Data Science+X" undergraduate sequence integrating with several majors
in the College of Arts and Sciences (CAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster will
comprise of three categories of nodes: (1) a large Graphics Processing Unit
(GPU) machine, (2) GPU server machines with large amounts of memory and (3)
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) machines thus providing a forward-looking
computing environment focused on supporting research on and enabled by AI. It
will constitute the research instrumentation catalyst for the Institute for AI-
Driven Discovery and Innovation (AI Institute) and significantly overhaul the
compute capability of the institution. This system?s heterogeneity will allow
for a more versatile shared environment with excellent performance. will support
research in three directions: 1) Artificial Intelligence (AI) including Natural
Language Processing, Computer Vision, and Machine Learning (ML) 2) applications
of AI and ML on a variety of scientific disciplines including Biomedical
Informatics, Chemistry, Ecology, and Linguistics, 3) Computer Science (CS)
research on HPC such as visualization, neural network compilation, and process
scheduling. Furthermore, the strong educational and outreach activities that
engage high school students and teachers, as well as undergraduate and graduate
students have the potential to support the building of a skilled workforce of
developers, researchers, staff and users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.