* 1919204
* PFI-RP:  Materials and surgical characterization for minimally invasive additive manufacturing of synthetic tissues inside the body
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* David Hoelzle, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 596,351.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to enable the future use of tissue
engineering during minimally invasive surgical procedures deep within the human
body. Currently, tissue engineering is limited by the complications associated
with invasive surgeries required for implantation of these structures, called
constructs. If successful, this technology is expected to enable surgeons to
seamlessly integrate tissue engineering materials in their current robotic
surgery practice by developing a tool that prints tissue engineering constructs
using existing robotic surgery instrumentation. The tool will integrate with
current robotic surgery infrastructure already installed at hundreds of research
hospitals in the United States. The commercial potential for the technology will
be substantial. The commercial impacts of the project are augmented by an
educational outreach plan that will engage students and undergraduate
researchers in engineering design problems that integrate business-relevant
constraints and customer needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
characterize the physical and biological properties of tissue engineering
constructs printed inside of a surgical simulator using minimally invasive
practices. With this new type of surgical tool and delivery method for tissue
engineering materials comes the need to fully characterize the materials that
are specifically tailored for printing inside the body. The objective of the
research plan is to characterize the physical and biological properties of the
material and redesign the technology platform based on feedback from a customer
discovery study and input from project partners. The expected results are that
printed tissue engineering materials will have a modulus that approximates
natural tissue modulus, the degradation rate meets tissue engineering standards,
and that cells embedded in the material will have greater than 70% viability.
Coupled with the platform redesign, the results from the characterization study
provide a basis for commercialization of the technology. The commercialization
plan consists of a set of guided technology assessments and staged milestones
where we will receive critical evaluations by our partners on commercial
potential and business plan iteration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.