* 1919644
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer for a  Cluster of Primarily Undergraduate Institutions in Rhode Island
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Chin Hin Leung, Providence College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 288,300.00

This award is jointly funded by the Chemical Instrumentation (CRIF) program, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program. Professor Seann Mulcahy from Providence
College and colleagues Christopher Laperle, Christopher Reid (Bryant
University), Maria Carroll and Chin Hin Leung (Rhode Island College) are
acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer to replace an
older one. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. A
typical use by a chemist is to analyze the mixture from a reaction to determine
the products. This instrument is an integral element of teaching as well as
research performed by undergraduate students at Providence College and
neighboring Rhode Island College and Bryant College. It is also used in lecture
and laboratory courses to prepare students for their careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels. A variety of research projects are being investigated. One project
involves studying the organic synthesis of nitrogen-containing heterocycles and
the stereosymmetric preparation of beta-carboline atropisomers (stereoisomers
arising because of hindered rotation about a single bond) for chemical catalysis
and medicinal chemistry applications. Electrocatalytic reduction of carbon
dioxide is studied for possible remediation of the compounds. Another project is
investigating solvation effects on prototypical iron pentacarbonyl-catalyzed
photoassisted reactions to improve this procedure in organic synthesis.
Functionalizable and degradable polymers for possible medicinal use and
environmental applications are being investigated. Small molecule inhibitors of
bacterial N-acetylglucosaminidases are being synthesized to foster understanding
of cell wall metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.