* 1919829
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Leica SP8 WLL SuperResolution and Light Sheet Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Diana Bratu, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 656,856.00

An award is made to Hunter College of the City University of New York (CUNY) to
sponsor the acquisition of a new laser scanning confocal microscope with super-
resolution and digital light sheet capabilities (LSM-DLS), which will be housed
in the open-access, multi-user Bio-Imaging Core Facility. The requested
microscope will assist the growing research and teaching needs of faculty from
multiple departments, as well as the training needs of the next generation of
scientists across several disciplines at Hunter College, other CUNY campuses,
and at other regional institutions. High school, undergraduate and graduate
students will benefit from hands- on training in innovative, leading-edge
fluorescence imaging techniques through course work and research, which will
enhance their education and mentorship important for their future careers in
biological sciences. Hunter College has continued commitment to increase the
opportunities for under-represented minority researchers to pursue scientific
careers by providing an environment of excellence and active research. Already
in-place College sponsored programs encourage broader participation in
scientific research that will be strengthen by the acquisition of this state-of-
the-art microscope system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new LSM-DLS will
not only meet the needs of current faculty, but will also meet future needs of
several departments within both the College and University. It will transform
and advance the research capabilities for collecting quantitative, highly
spatial and temporal resolution images in order to answer critical questions in
cell biology, developmental biology, neuroscience, and nanofabrication of
biomaterials. It will support NSF- and other funded research in a broad range of
areas including: (a) transcriptional switches, (b) sub-cellular molecular
localization, (c) cytoskeleton organization, (d) exosome function, (e) myelin
formation, and (f) dendritic spine morphology dynamics in the brain. This
technology allows for the visualization of a wide range of samples, and
detection from single molecules to whole organism development in real time at
high resolution. To perform these projects, investigators will utilize the full
range of capabilities of the LSM-DLS setup, including 3D reconstruction, live
imaging, spectral unmixing and light-sheet illumination, providing them with
unprecedented abilities to visualize structures at a sub-diffraction scale from
invertebrate oocytes to the vertebrate brain. The results of these studies will
be published in scientific peer-reviewed journals, presented at scientific
meetings and used in both teaching and public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.