* 1919737
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Building a framework for the River-based ImmersiVe Education &amp; Research (RIVER) Field Studies Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Denielle Perry, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2022
* USD 74,968.00

Field studies combine active learning practices in an immersive environmental
context to create experiences that inspire students and catalyze their
transition from student to scientist. Despite this formative role, field study
opportunities in undergraduate biology education are declining due to real and
perceived student, faculty, and institutional barriers. This project, using
river ecosystems as the immersive context, will identify and overcome these
barriers by establishing the "River-based ImmersiVe Education &amp; Research
(RIVER) Field Studies Network." This network focuses on undergraduate education
in and around rivers for three reasons. (1) Rivers are natural classrooms for
interdisciplinary STEM learning; their processes integrate across biology,
hydrology, geology, and coupled human and natural systems. (2) Rivers offer
unique logistical solutions for many barriers to immersive field studies. (3)
Rivers provide essential services to society but are among the most imperiled
ecosystems. Addressing current and emerging challenges facing river ecosystems
requires scientists and professionals trained to work across disciplines,
technologies, and landscapes. Creating capacity within undergraduate biology
education for immersive field studies in these critical ecosystems will advance
STEM training and inspire future problem-solvers to address the challenges
facing river ecosystems in the twenty first century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RIVER Field Studies Network Incubator project will build human and institutional
capacity for active learning pedagogy and comparative river biology. It will
enhance the quality and capacity of current programs by supporting communication
and coordination of educational and research activities across disciplinary,
institutional, and geographic boundaries to advance undergraduate biology
education at multiple scales. It will work to overcome barriers of entry for
underrepresented populations and students with differing abilities while
developing tools to support the creation of river field studies at new
institutions. It will leverage the resources of individual academic programs and
professional partners to begin building the foundation for transformative
network-scale capacity for active learning in river field studies. Examples of
transformative network-scale capacity include: establishing cooperative
agreements for student exchange across the network; creating a national
comparative river field studies curriculum; and developing a plan to transition
the network into a self-sustaining national organization supporting
interdisciplinary river field studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.