* 1919114
* PFI-TT: Evaluation of a Pilot Process to Convert Waste Oil and Grease from Waste Water Treatment Plants into Yellow Grease, Water and Solids for Reuse
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Mingming Lu, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 05/31/2024
* USD 376,118.00

The commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation - Technology
Translation (PFI-TT) project resides in the innovative, low cost and
environmentally friendly approach developed to reuse fats, oils and greases
(FOG) obtained from wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). The broader impacts
include benefits to the society, academic-industry collaboration, and
entrepreneurship training to students. FOGs are the number one cause of sewer
pipe blockage worldwide and are usually landfilled as a nonhazardous waste. The
cleanup is costly and the cost of landfill is also increasing. An estimated 1
million tons of FOG from WWTPs is currently being landfilled at a cost of
$50-100 million per year. Therefore, FOG reuse is critical to municipalities
worldwide, which can also recover useful resources and lower carbon footprints
of municipalities. This project will promote the adaptation of this
environmentally friendly technology to reduce landfill waste disposal and
sustainable energy generation. Landfill diversion is a need in most communities,
and repurposed energy/materials will promote resource conservation. This project
will develop the knowledge and experience of the graduate student leader and
four undergraduate students in the area of technology commercialization. This
project will encourage participation of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will scale up the FOG separation
process by demonstrating performance of a pilot system, which is a significantly
stride to commercialization. The resulting performance data will be then used to
design and construct a commercial size system. The objectives of this
demonstration are to (1) establish the variability in composition of WWTP grease
over time, (2) to produce sufficient separated yellow grease to test for
usability in the production of biofuel, and (3) determine if byproduct solids
and water can be reused as solid fuel/digester gas and industrial water. The
intellectual merit of this technology is that the solvent-free extraction
approach can overcome the challenges of FOG emulsion, impurities and high
moisture content of the sewer grease, and can result in a low sulfur product
that can be sold to downstream biofuel producers for biodiesel production. Other
by-products derived from the process, such as water and solids, can also be
marketable and offset the process cost. This process is low cost and
environmentally friendly. This applied research can reduce start-up risk and
facilitate subsequent commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.