* 1919083
* PFI-TT:  A High-Throughput Instrument for Measuring the Stability of Liquid Formulations of Therapeutic Proteins
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Paul Cremer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2022
* USD 293,234.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of an instrument that
will reduce the time required to screen the stability of therapeutic proteins,
which have revolutionized the ability to fight diseases like cancer, Alzheimer's
disease, and arthritis. The stability of these protein-based drugs is a major
concern for ensuring a 2-year shelf-life for liquid formulations under
refrigerated temperatures. Currently, the industry assessment standard involves
1-month long stability tests under stressed storage conditions. Improving the
efficiency and accuracy of alternative pre-formulation and formulation screening
tools should reduce the time required for phase 1 of drug development and make
it possible to explore more proteins and more solution conditions. It is
expected that the incorporation of this technology into the formulation workflow
should help increase the number of therapeutic proteins that can be brought to
market and reduce the cost of the products being sold. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project involves the construction of a device designed to measure the
susceptibility of a therapeutic protein to phase separation. Like oil and water,
concentrated therapeutic protein solutions can separate into two distinct phases
below a phase separation temperature, where the solution becomes cloudy. The
phase separation temperature and the kinetics of the phase separation provide
valuable metrics for instability and can be monitored by simple light scattering
measurements via dark-field microscopy. Herein, we outline the development of
hardware and software for a temperature gradient microfluidics device that can
induce phase separation and extract parameters describing the underlying
protein-protein interactions of the phase transition. The goals of this project
are to engineer an automated system for controlling the temperature gradient,
optical instrumentation, and data analysis. Ultimately, these research and
development efforts will provide a prototype version of the temperature gradient
microfluidics technology that can be implemented for measuring the stability of
a variety of therapeutic proteins. Such high-throughput measurements will enable
the exploration of pH, salt, buffers, and protein chemistries that contribute to
formulation instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.