* 1919387
* Collaborative Research: Skills, Majors, and Jobs: Does Higher Education Respond?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Steven Hemelt, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2023
* USD 125,912.00

Rapid technical progress leads to skill obsolescence, yet educational
institutions and students are slow to respond to these changes in the labor
market. This research project will use a large data set on changes in skill
demand and college enrolments by major and the content of majors to investigate
two interrelated questions: (i) what skills are associated with each college
major and how does skill demand vary over time and space? (ii) how do higher
education course-offerings and student course-taking respond to changes in
demand for skills? The research will be based on data on all job postings over a
time matched with data on all course offering (and their content) in a state.
The results can help institutions respond to skill demand by rapidly changing
the content of their curricula and educational policy makers plan better. The
results will also help guide students not only in their choice of majors but
also the courses and skills they choose to acquire in their chosen majors. By
providing inputs into policies that align skill needs and skill training in a
rapidly changing technological work place, this research will help US
educational institutions provide the skills the economy needs, hence lead to
rapid economic growth and improved well-being of Americans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use merged data from the Burning Glass
project and the Delaware Cost Project which has department level panel data on
credits, courses and faculty as well as individual level data on student course
taking, quasi-experimental methods and machine learning techniques to
investigate how college students and college administration respond to changes
in labor skill demand. Specifically, it investigates what skills are associated
with each college major, how within major cross-major skills demand differ
across space and through time, and how skill investment responds to changes in
skill demand in the labor market. Previous studies have focused on the demand
side of skill acquisition; this project will however look at how skill supply
(by university providers and students) respond to changes in skill demand by
exploring several aspects university curriculum that makes these supply
responses possible. The quasi-experimental methods permit causal identification
of the effect of changes in skill demand on human capital investment. The
project will explore differential responses at lower-division, upper-division,
and graduate levels. The results of this research will provide guidance on
policies to align skill investment to changes in skill demand and in so doing
will provide the needed skills and lead to faster economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.