* 1919873
* MRI: Acquisition of a 3T  SIEMENS PRISMA at RUBIC:  The Evolution to a Regional Center
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Stephen Hanson, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,484,000.00

This award provides a state of the art MRI scanners, such as the SIEMENS PRISMA
magnetic resonance imager to the Rutgers University Newark. This model has
ultra-fast collection times in 100s of milliseconds and sharp detail in (0.1mm)
spatial resolution. The combination of these features and many other recent
innovations in MRI will provide for novel research and fundamental breakthroughs
in brain research, impacting on the characterization and basic understanding of
mental health disease (e.g. Schziophrenia, Depression, Autism) as well as
furthering more general understanding of areal connectivity within the human
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RUBIC is a core research center for all Rutgers
campuses and a regional resource for institutions and research groups throughout
the northeast corridor. Specific areas of research are immediately enabled by
the PRISMA and other core areas are strengthened. These research areas include
(1) Human connectome research and network neuroscience, (2) Decision science and
reward learning (3). Basic research on Alzheimer's and characterization of
various types of dementia. RUBIC has 25-30 PI researchers in any given research
cycle, and has an active growing community of researchers at RUTGERS and in
nearby institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.