* 1919565
* MRI: Acquisition of a Duo Source Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for the Center for X-ray Crystallographic Research
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Milton Smith, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 277,765.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemical
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Aaron Odom from Michigan State University
and colleagues Milton Smith, Babak Borhan, Robert LaDuca and Richard Lunt are
acquiring a dual source single crystal diffractometer. In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research and research
training of undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at
this institution. The facility serves as a regional XRD resource benefitting
students and faculty from primarily undergraduate institutions within the state
of Michigan as well as those from other colleges and universities around the
U.S., including University of Idaho, Alabama A&amp;M University, Binghamton
University, Georgia State University and Dartmouth
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. The diffractometer is especially used in developing
processes using titanium to generate pharmacologically-active heterocycles and
for studying cobalt-catalyzed carbon-hydrogen borylation reactions. It is also
employed for studying brittle, high-melting intermetallic compounds commonly
referred to as Zintl species used for thermoelectrics for which either a
temperature difference creates an electrical potential or vice versa as well as
materials for photovoltaics. The instrument aids investigations of lichen
metabolites with antibacterial, antifungal and antioxidant activities. In
collaboration with Oakland and Dartmouth Universities, the diffractometer is
used in studies of bioinorganic models and studies of photoactive
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.