* 1919326
* Uprooting children: The risks and rewards of mobility for vulnerable students in California's public schools
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Robert Ream, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 694,964.00

This EHR Core Research project will investigate K-12 learning in mathematics
within the broader context of the impact of student mobility on an interrelated
set of student outcomes. The researchers will focus specifically on how student
mobility influences and interacts with the following student outcomes -
mathematics achievement, behavior, social-emotional learning and other forms of
development, such as language acquisition and disability status ? for vulnerable
populations in California. Student mobility is defined as students changing
schools either midyear or from one year to the next (i.e., during the summer) in
grades that do not correspond to the terminal grade of the school. Vulnerable
populations are defined as economically disadvantaged students, English learners
(ELs), students with disabilities (SWDs), homeless (HL), and foster youth (FY).
Student mobility, unlike residential mobility, occurs in the public realm, so
that its potentially negative effects are more malleable and amenable to policy
solutions. Mobility is disproportionately high for poor and vulnerable students.
Such students often face profound challenges associated with family instability,
and schools often struggle to recognize and accommodate mobile students' social,
developmental, and intellectual needs. Knowing how vulnerable students rebound
after a move, how long it takes, and how responses to moves differ by the grade
level in which moves occur is key to shaping supports for these students.
Findings from this project have the potential to aid districts and schools in
understanding and grappling with the incidence and consequences of non-
promotional student mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will focus on all
K-12 students in six large California school districts that are part of the
Project CORE initiative - a group of districts that collaborate on data
collection and analysis for continuous improvement. These include Los Angeles,
Oakland, Fresno, Long Beach, Garden Grove, and Santa Ana. These districts have
embraced systematic measurement of social-emotional learning and school culture
and climate for school accountability. These CORE districts serve more than
900,000 - the longitudinal sample includes several million student-level
observations over the 2010/11-2016/17 period. Using a careful framework designed
to account for the incidence and consequences of student mobility and using
statistical regression techniques, the researchers will comprehensively assess
(1) the incidence of mid-year and summer mobility among vulnerable students in
California and (2) the impact of mobility on these students' mathematical,
behavioral, and social-emotional outcomes, as well as how these outcomes
interact with one another. The researchers will track student outcomes before
and after moves, distinguishing among moves of different types - structural,
non-structural, voluntary, involuntary - comparing school changers to stayers.
Since mobility could have positive effects in some situations and negative
effects in others, the research will account for the timing and reasons why
students change schools and identify variation in the incidence and consequences
of mobility across vulnerable and other demographic groups. Moreover, the study
will use information on school characteristics, culture and climate that
students leave and enter and the degree to which mobile students "match" or fit
in with their environments to determine the effect of school features on the
outcomes of vulnerable students who are mobile. Too often STEM outcomes are
investigated in isolation - in this study, the focus is on understanding how
mathematics achievement interacts with emotional development and behavior for
vulnerable students grappling with the challenge of changing schools. The
holistic approach taken in this study will ensure the intertwined academic and
social-emotional responses of students to changing schools is fully
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.