* 1919201
* PFI-TT: Biomimetic Aramid Separators for Long-Lifetime Lithium-Sulfur Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Nicholas Kotov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be to address the key technological
challenges of commercialization of lithium sulfur batteries, a promising
solution for a new generation of electric vehicles (EVs). Improving the extended
battery capacity would increase driving range and reduce the cost. We will
develop a material that is an important element of the battery, using methods
derived from studying materials like Kevlar(TM). The material design process
will include both new experimental techniques and novel computational methods
that can be used to test batteries made by various manufacturers for many
different EVs. An important part of this project will be the education of a new
generation of entrepreneurs among graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address major issues in
lithium sulfur batteries, a potential solution for high-capacity, high-discharge
rate charge storage devices but currently limited by short cycle life due to the
growth of dendrites and undesirable anode-to-cathode transport of lithium
polysulfides. Resolution of these problems requires a new material combining
ion-selective properties with exceptional robustness. This project will utilize
the structural design of cartilage known for an exceptional combination of
mechanical and transport properties to engineer new ion-conducting membranes
with the required properties. The team shall computationally recreate cartilage-
like nanofiber networks and synthesize them with the desired parameters based on
aramid nanofibers derived from Kevlar(TM) fabric. These aramid nanofiber
composites can potentially serve as separators in batteries, enabling up to 80%
extension of their charge-discharge cycles. The new type of separators will be
tested for prevention of dendrite growth and spontaneous diffusion of the
polysulfides. Special attention will be given to the development of scalable
roll-to-roll processing of the aramid nanofibers separators and their
implementation in high-capacity batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.