* 1919650
* Full waveform modeling and inversion of seismic attenuation and application to characterizing near-surface fractures at Susquehanna Shale Hills Critical Zone Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Andrew Nyblade, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 125,000.00

Seismologists often use seismic waves to study the Earth's interior. This is
because seismic wave properties are very sensitive to the physical and chemical
state of the Earth, from the shallow to the deep Earth. This project explores
one such property, seismic attenuation, which is considered to be a direct
indicator for temperature of the Earth with depth, as well as the presence of
fluids. Because of its multi-purpose use, a map of this property in Earth
structure can improve our understanding of how the Earth's interior works. The
main goal of this project is to develop a method to image seismic attenuation
using seismic waves. Broader impacts include the mentoring of a postdoctoral
researcher at Penn State University and the development of new methods for the
scientific community to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of seismic wave
attenuation potentially provide valuable source of information about the
physical and chemical state of the Earth's interior. Seismic full waveform
inversion (FWI) as a promising measurement tool for inverting Q still has
several key issues to be investigated: 1) whether or not the existing fractional
anelastic wave equation, that separates amplitude absorption and phase
dispersion, can facilitate the development of FWI; 2) explicit Q embedded in
fractional anelastic wave equations will simplify the computations of gradient;
3) how cross-talks between velocity and Q in FWI could be alleviated. To address
these issues, this project will conduct three main tasks. First, starting from
the newly developed fractional anelastic wave equation that parameterize an
explicit Q, a Q-FWI method will be developed using adjoint-state approaches.
Second, a suitable inversion strategy for multi-parameters (velocity and Q) will
be sought. Third, the Q-FWI will be validated using synthetic near-surface
geological models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.