* 1919126
* SPX: Collaborative Research: NG4S: A Next-generation Geo-distributed Scalable Stateful Stream Processing System
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Liting Hu, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2022
* USD 315,266.00

Our society increasingly relies on applications that process streaming data
across geo-distributed sites, such as making business decisions from marketing
data, identifying spam campaigns in social network streams, and analyzing genome
datasets in different labs and countries to track the sources of potential
epidemics. State-of-art solutions for these needs are centered around stateless
stream processing. This project advances stream processing to enable next-
generation streaming applications to store and update state along with
computation, therefore processing live data streams in a timely fashion from
massive and geo-distributed datasets. Existing systems are mainly designed for
stateless stream processing in intra-datacenter settings and do not scale well
for running stream applications that contain large distributed states. This
project breaks the traditional abstractions of a centralized architecture and
hashtable-based stateless operators, redefining them with a new decentralized
architecture and new memory-efficient stateful operators, which enables novel
approaches to improve overall system performance and scalability. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project builds a next-generation geo-distributed scalable
stateful stream processing system that will significantly improve the
scalability of stream processing systems. This work includes three primary
research directions. (1) At the architecture level, a new decentralized 'many
masters/many workers' architecture will be proposed, which provides each master
with maximum independence. (2) At the operator level, a new in-memory data
structure will be designed and implemented to store application state and
minimize the memory overhead so as to handle 'big data' requirements. (3) A new
shard-based parallel recovery mechanism will be proposed to handle failures and
stragglers in a scalable way. All three parts of the project will be prototyped
and implemented on a widely adopted stream processing system (Apache
Storm).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.