* 1919109
* PFI-RP: Partnership to develop next-generation memory chips for intelligent computing systems.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Nicholas Kioussis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 564,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is in providing a new hardware platform
for energy-efficient and high-performance computing systems. The rise of big
data has enabled the emergence of artificial intelligence (AI) in the cloud and
on edge devices, and is fundamentally transforming the computing, networking and
data storage industries. However, existing hardware cannot sustain the rapid
growth of data-centric computing. In particular, fast and energy-efficient AI
requires better embedded memory technologies (i.e. data storage devices inside
computer chips) that are simultaneously fast to read and write, while delivering
high capacities with low cost, along with low power consumption. This project
will address this challenge by developing a novel type of on-chip magnetic
memory device, focusing on its commercialization in the data storage, AI,
communications and networking markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will develop a new type of magnetic random access memory (MRAM),
referred to as voltage-controlled spin-orbit (VCSO) memory. MRAM is the leading
contender for emerging AI systems due to its low power consumption and high
endurance, and is entering volume manufacturing across the semiconductor
industry after more than a decade of research and development. However, its
current version suffers from density and speed limitations that limit its
ultimate addressable market. This project will develop devices and memory arrays
based on new physical principles and materials, which will allow the devices to
overcome the physical limitations of existing MRAM, and achieve higher speeds
with better scalability to smaller bit dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.