* 1919184
* PFI-TT:  Advancing the Technology Readiness of Pylon Fairings for Tidal Turbines
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Arindam Banerjee, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2024
* USD 297,455.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to redesign and test a key component
(the pylon) of a tidal turbine to generate energy. A pylon that doesn't affect
the flow would increase energy production and would require less energy to run.
This would also increase the operational lifetime of the turbine. This project
will conduct laboratory experiments to mimic the conditions of a marine energy
deployment site in order to evaluate the best design. The knowledge acquired
from these tests under a variety of flow conditions could be applied to numerous
structures in the marine renewable energy industry and beyond. In addition to
the scientific discoveries, the educational goal underlines the PI's commitment
to developing the entrepreneurial and leadership skills of graduate students and
post-docs. Planned educational initiatives include active engagement with
mentors from the marine energy industry and a highly immersive week-long
entrepreneurship experience through an in-house
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will evaluate modified pylons
that would include fairings composed of straight, convex, and concave plates
behind the pylon. The fairings affect the downstream flow by altering separation
lines as well as the shear layer and the entrainment layer in the wake of the
pylon. This leads to a clean flow to the downstream rotor, minimizing the
velocity reduction at the rotor disk and inflow angular variations. We propose
synergistic experimental and computational studies to evaluate pylon fairings at
three different turbulence intensity levels that mimic the characteristic of
potential tidal energy deployment sites. An active grid turbulence generator
developed by the PI will be used to create elevated turbulence conditions in
laboratory experiments. In addition, computational fluid dynamics studies would
also be conducted to address the scaling issue - i.e., how the laboratory
experiments would map to the full-scale pylon at the developer's site. The
entire database will be made available to the marine renewable energy industry
and other marine-related industries that contend with the consequences of vortex
shedding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.