* 1919091
* PFI-RP: Developing Light-Controlled Mixing to Advance Energy Efficient Wastewater Treatment by Oxygenic Photogranules
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* John Tobiason, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 675,988.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project includes significantly decreased costs
for energy, decreased negative environmental impacts, and improved public health
due to a new method for treating wastewater, known as oxygenic photogranule
(OPG) technology, using microbes and natural processes. This process requires
less electricity to provide oxygen for treatment ordinarily used in treating
wastewater, as well as using atmospheric carbon dioxide. This could be
retrofitted in the infrastructure in developed countries and could be included
in new wastewater treatment facilities. For regions where wastewater treatment
is absent or inadequate, sanitation via the OPG technology improves public
health and the environment at a lower cost than conventional technology. This
process has been demonstrated successfully at small scales, but scale-up and
implementation requires the scientific and technical advancements of the
proposed PFI-RP project. This project will include significant advanced training
of future engineers and scientists, including underrepresented groups. Outreach
to students, increased graduate study opportunities for women and minorities,
and technology transfer are also benefits to society at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is critical for developing commercial
implementation of the new self-aerating OPG process for sustainable wastewater
treatment. The OPG process has the potential to solve wastewater treatment
challenges in both developing and developed countries. Despite prior
advancements in photogranulation knowledge, and success of bench-scale OPG
systems, process scale-up in a natural light setting recently failed after
initial success. The PIs hypothesize that this outcome was due to
photoinhibition of photogranulation, which has not been studied in previous OPG
research. Objectives of the proposed research are to a) investigate the
photoinhibition phenomenon by studying the photochemical capacity and the
photosynthesis range of the OPG process, and b) to develop a fluid mixing and
irradiance-based method to limit photoinhibition of OPG reactors. Integrating
these critical new knowledge sets is expected to yield an innovative irradiance-
based mixing scheme to control photoinhibition and support adequate oxygenic
photosynthesis. Research methods include operation of batch and continuous flow
reactors under different irradiance and mixing conditions and modeling of
reactor hydrodynamics and OPG transport. These activities will significantly
improve knowledge of photogranulation and enhance the translation of a new
wastewater treatment technology to a commercial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.