* 1919453
* Attitude towards information in multi-agent settings: Understanding and mitigating Avoidance and Over-Evaluation
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Maria-Florina Balcan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

New technologies in sensing, data communication and processing allow for
extensive instrumentation of the built environment, and the massive flow of
information collectable by sensors can transform the operation and the
functionality of urban systems. However, this development depends also on the
attitude of citizens and stakeholders toward information. This project
investigates how interacting agents take decisions about collecting information,
with focus on users and managers of urban systems interacting with public
policies. For rational and isolated agents acting without external constraints,
"information never hurts" and data with low impact on the agents' belief have a
small value. This implies, for example, that these agents are always willing to
install free (or cheap) sensors, and to install expensive ones only if they
provide high-impact information. However, these intuitive properties do not hold
true in multi-agent settings, when agents compete one against each other, nor
for agents acting under external constraints as those imposed by regulations.
Integrating analysis in social science, engineering and computer science, the
project will develop a framework for modeling the attitude towards information
in these contexts, depending on the agents' preference and the external
regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are: 1) To develop a
framework for assessing the Value of Information in multi-agent settings,
modeling the interaction between policy makers and decision makers following
external regulations, 2) to gather and analyze empirical data about the attitude
toward information, using surveys and interviews among users, and calibrate the
models developed in (1), 3) to design mechanisms alleviating Information
Avoidance and Over Evaluation, and assess their effectiveness. The project
integrates probabilistic models of quantities to be measured and of sensor
performance, agents' utility functions and external constraints, optimization
methods and behavior modeling, to assess the Value or Information via Bayesian
pre-posterior analysis. Such approach will allow understanding how Information
Avoidance and Over Evaluation arise, and how appropriate mechanisms of
incentives and regulations can mitigate them. The project's outcomes will be key
for a better empirical understanding of the attitude towards information, for
developing effective large-scale monitor of the built environment and public
policies promoting effective information collection, integrating societal and
agents' utilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.