* 1919071
* Family Friendly: How Are Firms and Establishments Affected by State Paid Family Leave Programs?
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kristin Butcher, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2023
* USD 353,314.00

Most workers experience parenthood at some point during their work careers.
Studies show that gender gaps in career outcomes increase particularly rapidly
during the years of family formation. Provision of paid parental leave to help
employees meet both work and family responsibilities is usually advocated as the
policy response. However, little is known about how paid parental leave affects
employers particularly how these impacts differ by firm type. This project
studies the effects of state-level paid family leave on U.S. firms and
establishments using a unique and novel large-scale employer-household data set.
The results will show how family decision-making interacts with state-level
policy, and how this process affects the operation and success of companies.
These findings which informs the ongoing policy debate on paid leave in the
United States more broadly and how public policies affect business decisions.
The research will therefore improve the bell-being of firms and households,
hence improve the living standards of Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will construct a complex, large-scale database to analyze the impact of
state-level paid leave on U.S. firms and establishments. We utilize the fact
that paid leave policies have been implemented in some states (CA, NJ, and RI),
but not others, while large firms have establishments in both paid-leave states
and non-paid leave states. This ?natural experiment? facilitates a causal
analysis using a differences-in-differences approach. The analyses are based on
the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) database that will be linked
to other firm- and establishment level data sources. Together, the data contain
rich information on establishment and firm level outcomes such as employee
turnover, workforce composition, establishment survival and growth, labor
productivity, and sales revenue. Obtaining causal estimates for the impact of
paid leave policies on these firm outcomes can significantly contribute to the
social and policy debate around the paid leave issues. The results show how
public policy interacts with business decisions to improve the livings standards
of U.S. citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.