* 1919851
* Collaborative Research: Measuring and Enhancing Scientific Creative Thinking for STEM Education and Research: Classroom-Aligned Assessment and Network Neuroscience-Based Mechanisms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Mariale Hardiman, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2022
* USD 86,720.00

This collaborative award to research teams at Pennsylvania State University,
Georgetown University, and Johns Hopkins University will focus on creative
thinking in STEM education and research. Creative thinking is critical for
success in STEM fields, which often require generating novel hypotheses,
flexibly connecting diverse information, and envisioning solutions to ill-
defined problems. Creative innovation is a valuable attribute of the U.S.
workforce in the global economy, and the ability to maximize the nation's
creative potential is projected to become even more essential for opportunity as
creativity emerges as the human ability least achievable by artificial
intelligence. The increasing value of creative thinking for STEM coincides with
new applications of neuroscience methods that have the potential to predict, and
perhaps even to enhance, creativity. Yet creativity is an under-researched
contributor to STEM success. Indeed, there is not currently a measure of
scientific creative thinking that educators can use to reliably determine what
works (and what does not) in STEM education to foster creative thinking. This
project will bring together a research team that represents an uncommon bridging
of neuroscience and classroom-focused expertise. They will work with middle
school and university educators to develop a new measure of scientific creative
thinking and to use new neuroscientific tools to test whether a brain network
that predicts an individual's general capacity for creative thinking can also
predict their ability to think creatively with scientific content beyond what
can be explained by their baseline cognitive ability. By testing whether neural
data add value to traditional academic measures in predicting students' future
creative thinking and STEM performance, this project will inform timely debates
on the value of neuroscience for education. This work will also bridge the
laboratory and the classroom in novel ways by longitudinally measuring change in
brain network strength associated with of real-world STEM learning. By providing
foundational knowledge on the nature and measurement of scientific creative
thinking, the project will inform educational efforts to promote creative
thinking in the classroom. This project will have additional impacts for
broadening participation in STEM Fields by working with teachers of minority
student populations underrepresented in STEM fields to optimize classroom
usability for a test of scientific creative thinking. The project is funded by
the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the
fundamental research literature on STEM learning. The project directly fits the
intent of ECR to facilitate the development, refinement, and testing of new
education research, measurement, and evaluation
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide
foundational knowledge on the cognitive and neural basis of scientific creative
thinking. To this end, we will collaborate with educators to develop and
psychometrically validate a new test of scientific creative thinking, assessing
students' ability to generate novel hypotheses, research questions, and
experimental designs. We will also leverage developments in the network
neuroscience of domain-general creativity, including the recent discovery of a
specific network of brain regions in which functional connectivity strength can
predict an individual's creative performance. Specifically, the project will 1)
construct a new assessment of scientific creative thinking, incorporating
classroom-usability (working with STEM teachers in urban Baltimore) and expanded
psychometric scale development, and 2) use functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) to extend our recent findings on the functional brain networks that
support domain-general creativity to identify neural overlap/distinctness
between domain-general and scientific creativity, and longitudinally to test
whether strength of neural networks adds value to standard academic measures
(e.g., grades) in predicting future creative thinking and STEM performance. This
study will also provide the first large-scale analysis of cognitive and
affective traits that support scientific creative thinking in STEM
undergraduates, as well as preliminary data on whether network neuroscience
methods developed in the lab can be used to measure neural strengthening of
creative thinking ability through real-world STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.