* 1919879
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Network for an Open and Accessible Biology Education: The promise of equity and the challenge of sustainability
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Carrie Diaz Eaton, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 07/31/2021
* USD 74,290.00

This RCN-UBE-Incubator network examines the current landscape and future growth
of open educational resources (OER) in undergraduate biology education.
Instructional resources that are freely accessible to students and faculty to
use and modify in the classroom present the opportunity to enhance and
democratize education by improving access to information and high-quality
curriculum resources. The digital tools for accessing and implementing OER
resources in the classroom have improved dramatically in the last decade.
However, many challenges remain for making OER widespread and sustainable for
undergraduate biology education. These include technological infrastructure, the
finances of publishing, and developing stakeholder communities. This network
will examine the unique challenges for digital resources and OER publishing and
develop a framework for increasing the sustainability of OER projects. The open
education philosophy is critical for meeting the goals outlined by the American
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) in the Call to Action for
Transforming Undergraduate Education in Biology and addressing inequity access
to educational resources. This work contributes to closing the gap in
educational disparities between marginalized and resourced communities of
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses a research coordination
network approach to build a collaborative framework to develop innovative
solutions for Open Education Research (OER) in undergraduate biology education.
This network will build relationships across current OER communities and
stakeholders. The steering committee represents a broad set of disciplines from
information science and computing to biology at private and public institutions,
with a broad national geographic spread. These members will leverage their
geographic and disciplinary networks to build a diverse community of network
participants. The participants will specifically address issues in OER
sustainability by examining, cyberinfrastructure and business models for
technological enterprises; organizational leadership and best practices for
social infrastructure; and partnerships with libraries and foundations to build
institutional support. The network will approach these goals through convened
conversations to share best practices, creative solutions, and resources among
stakeholders. Working groups will report on these outcomes and identify future
sources of support for broadening the conversations and projects of the group.
This new network will catalyze additional growth of OER resources for teaching
biology and further build the broader community addressing diversity, inclusion,
and equity in education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.