* 1919233
* PFI-TT: Intelligent Flight Planning of Multiple Drones for Power Line Inspection
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Srinivas Akella, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2023
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable automated and simultaneous
inspection by multiple drones. Potential customers include electric utility
companies, public safety organizations, and drone operators. The benefits of
efficient drone-based inspection of electric power lines include greater safety
for linemen, cost savings for maintenance inspections (e.g., to detect
vegetation near power lines), and substantial time savings. The ability to
utilize multiple drones to reduce the inspection time can be critical when
assessing damage and recovering from outages due to storms and hurricanes. The
advantage of using a team of drones is that multiple power lines can be
simultaneously inspected, thus parallelizing the inspection process and
substantially reducing the mission time for the human operators. The team will
partner with drone operators and electric utilities to perform a proof-of-
concept distribution line inspection and to evaluate the effectiveness of the
approach. There is also potential for applying the proposed software to the
transportation and energy industries for inspection of highways, railroads, and
oil and gas pipelines. The project team will work with the technology
commercialization arm of the university and will discover additional potential
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop, implement, and
validate flight planning algorithms and software for a team of drones to
efficiently inspect power lines. Given the geographic locations of the power
transmission and distribution lines, and the number and model of the drones, the
drone routing algorithms will automatically generate flight plans for each of
the drones from their home locations. A key research challenge that will be
addressed is the development of efficient algorithms capable of scaling up to
handle dense power line networks over large areas. The ability to automatically
assign and coordinate multiple drones, with battery constraints and potentially
even of different types, to different sections of the power lines in a resource-
optimal manner will be a significant advance over the current state of the art
in both manual and drone based inspection. To enable ease of use for
commercialization, the software will run in the cloud, enabling workers in the
field to obtain automatically generated flight plans from their
smartphones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.