* 1919074
* 2019 Oceanographic Instrumentation R/V Atlantic Explorer
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2020
* USD 107,428.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation on the R/V Atlantic
Explorer, a 168? general purpose research vessel owned and operated by Bermuda
Institute of Ocean Science (BIOS) as part of the United States Academic Research
Fleet (ARF). BIOS is a U.S. 501 (c) 3 and 509 (a) not-for-profit research and
educational institution incorporated in the state of New York, and
geographically located on the Island of Bermuda. The mission of the ship is to
support funded science research throughout the Central Atlantic but specifically
work in support of the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series (BATS) program. RV Atlantic
Explorer had 188 days funded in 2018, all but 9 of which were for NSF. In 2019,
the vessel is scheduled to sail 1943 days with 1818 (94%) of them funded by NSF.
With this proposal, BIOS provides technical descriptions and rationale for the
acquisition of the following Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific
Seawater System Major Upgrade $62,392 &lt;br/&gt;Serial Data System Upgrades
$16,978 &lt;br/&gt;Campbell DataLogger Install $11,442 &lt;br/&gt;DataLogging
Computers w/ DC Power $16,616 &lt;br/&gt;Wire Health/Event Logger Software
$25,838 &lt;br/&gt;Profiling WetLabs Fluorometers $14,455 &lt;br/&gt;Teledyne
ADCP Deckbox $23,412 &lt;br/&gt;Knudsen Chirp 3260 Deckbox $36,441 &lt;br/&gt;
$207,574 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.