* 1919316
* CAREER: Precision control for sustainable carbon nanotube manufacturing: Enabling next generation materials and defining the next generation engineer
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Desiree Plata, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2021
* USD 226,338.00

1552993 Plata

This CAREER proposal seeks to change the approach to chemical and material
innovation globally through an integrated research and education program that
incorporates environmental objectives and traditional performance and cost
metrics in engineering innovation strategies. To achieve this goal, the PI
proposed an educational program that trains next generation engineers to work in
collaborative teams of experts, preserving academic rigor in each discipline
while simultaneously attaining the broad goals of the technical and
environmental design requirements. This is an ideal platform to demonstrate that
co-optimization of environmental and performance objectives will not slow
progress to market, but instead supply a novel toolset that can provide
transformative advances and accelerate discovery.

Novel advanced materials are required to meet several of the NAE Grand
Challenges. Carbon nanotubes are particularly well-suited to address two of the
primary environmental engineering directives of water access and viable
renewable energy. To enable these important applications, the principle
investigator (PI) proposes a research program to surmount limitations in carbon
nanotube manufacture via: (1) uncovering the chemical mechanisms associated with
carbon-carbon bond building during carbon nanotube synthesis, (2) leveraging
this mechanistic understanding to exert precision control on nanotube morphology
and bond placement, enhancing the atom economy while minimizing unwanted
byproduct formation, and, (3) as a consequence, maximizing the material
performance while minimizing the environmental impacts at a reduced fabrication
cost for a sustained benefit to the national economy. If successful, the
proposed work will contribute a fundamental understanding to the fields of
heterogeneous catalysis and nanofabrication and unlock the unattained,
transformative materials needed to address the world's water, climate, and
energy storage needs. Last, because of the intellectual value of the
demonstrated simultaneous-optimization platform for all future technologies,
this work could have far-reaching and unimagined benefits in the engineering
innovation space. Using a novel Mango Tango chemistry/reactor system, the PI
proposes that the carbon precursor controls the reaction product, allowing one
to tailor the chirality of SWCNT as well as the surface chemistry. This will
allow the production of surfaces that can be used in a variety of applications.
In this system, the carbon nanotubes are generated on a fixed substrate rather
than in a flowing gas reactor. By using alkynes with different side R groups,
the PI can produce a variety of different surface chemistries and dictate the
chirality of the product. Student colloquia will address a critical gap in
professional preparation trainings and in public communication skills for
engineering students.