* 1919928
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Using Citizen Science to Promote Research Experiences in Undergraduate Courses
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Heather Vance-Chalcraft, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 06/30/2022
* USD 74,788.00

Citizen science is increasingly popular across a wide spectrum of organizations,
including community groups, schools, and informal educational settings. Citizen
science includes the public in the use of scientific practices to investigate
phenomena. Involvement in citizen science projects has been shown to improve
understanding of the scientific method and belief that one can do science, as
well as demonstrate the relevance of science to peoples' homes, communities, and
lives. Thus, it provides a valuable opportunity to bring authentic scientific
discovery into undergraduate classrooms to produce students who are job ready in
the 21st century. A lack of coordination among citizen science developers,
scientists, and instructors, however, is impeding progress in the use of citizen
science in higher education classrooms to a high capacity. This project will
create a network of individuals involved in the development, implementation, and
data end-users of citizen science projects to determine the best practices
associated with using citizen science projects in higher education. The
increased dialogue created through this network will improve not only
undergraduate biology education, but also the generation of scientific data. The
project has far reaching impacts from diversity and inclusion, professional
development, higher education pedagogy, curriculum development, and even citizen
science project creation/management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN-Incubator
will increase collaboration among diverse individuals involved with the
development and use of citizen science, compile prior research showing the
learning benefits of citizen science in higher education, examine known examples
of how citizen science has been used in courses, and compile a list of tools
needed to ease implementation of citizen science in higher education. These
objectives will be met through two in-person meetings and four virtual meetings,
as well as the regular use of digital communication. Final databases and
syntheses will be made publicly available on websites and through a final peer-
reviewed publication. The results of this Incubator grant will provide a
launching point for a full RCN proposal to produce the tools necessary to ease
implementation and better understand the contextual subtleties associated with
the use of diverse citizen science projects in diverse courses and institution
types. Having a formalized network of ambassadors for the use of citizen science
in higher education should increase the number of undergraduates participating
in citizen science, resulting in increased self-efficacy, content knowledge, and
development of a scientific mindset. These gains will facilitate the persistence
of students in STEM fields and perhaps even increased engagement of their
communities in the generation of novel scientific
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.