* 1919691
* MRI: Proteus++: Enabling Data-Intensive Computing at Drexel University
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Brigita Urbanc, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 566,740.00

This grant will acquire, install, and maintain Proteus++, which is composed of
Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) nodes and a high memory node. This project
brings data-intensive computing (computing requiring large memory and high-
throughput) hardware to Drexel University. The computing will strengthen
research requiring large datasets in precision medicine (genomics, mapping the
brain, and simulating molecules), advancing manufacturing, environmental
modeling, and many other applications. The computing will also help train
students in data-intensive computing through classes and co-operative work
experiences and broaden participation in computing by engaging students in
computing research as well as undergraduate institutions (including Historically
Black Colleges and Universities and women's colleges) throughout the region to
use the resources and enhance computing education. The research and training
that results will not only advance fundamental research but enable innovation
that will benefit the tech, health, and biology-enabled industries in the
Philadelphia region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteus++ will enable computational
discovery that is data-intensive (needing large memory and high-throughput) and
impact over 200 users by offering hybrid architectures that provide new
scientific capabilities and enable faster computations. The intellectual merit
of this project derives from a large collection of research topics that will be
greatly enhanced by the sheer computational power and large-data processing that
Proteus++ provides. Thanks to hybrid and large-memory computing, high-throughput
genomics can finally enter the regime of searching simultaneously tens of
thousands of microbial genomes from a large volume and diversity of queries, not
least which involves discovery of currently unknown microorganisms in a variety
of environments. Enhanced-sampling molecular simulations and hybrid molecular-
dynamics/docking methods will significantly increase in speed under the hybrid
architecture of Proteus++, enabling precise views of rare biomolecular event
processes and investigation of an unprecedentedly large number of complex
protein targets. Also, the prediction and simulation of material behavior and
impurity benefits from co-processor architectures improving materials design for
textiles, medicine, and energy. Finally, understanding brain activity is now
within reach through GPU-accelerated Monte Carlo simulations, which will improve
technologies that exploit light tissue interaction in the brain. Besides its
direct impact on Drexel, the enhancement of URCF capabilities enables the
creation of the Philadelphia High Performance Computing Consortium (PHPCC), a
partnership among Drexel and a number of local/regional undergraduate-only
institutions, for the purposes of exposing larger numbers of Consortium members,
including Drexel, faculty, postdocs and students to the power and possibilities
of computational discovery techniques. Capacity-building training in the form of
workshops and courses will help new and existing PHPCC users learn not only
about local University Research Computing Facility resources but also about
advanced computational resources available at other institutions within the US.
Furthermore, up to 2 million core-hours will be made available for use by non-
Drexel PHPCC faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.