* 1919063
* PFI-TT: Novel mobile platform technology to both prevent and respond to teen dating violence
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Sharyn Potter, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) PFI project is to develop a smartphone
app/platform technology to prevent and respond to dating violence incidences, a
significant public health problem affecting over 35% of high school students
with long-term health, social and economic consequences. Despite the magnitude
of this problem, 68% of high school principals reported lacking formal training
on how to assist teen dating violence victims. The proposed technology offers an
economically viable dating violence prevention strategy for high schools. The
existing mobile apps are not designed for high school students to assist
themselves (or a friend) who is a victim of teen dating violence and do not have
a have a simple mechanism enabling high school administrators to coordinate and
customize the prevention and response messaging their students are accessing. If
successful, the proposed technology will fill a gap not addressed by currently
available solutions, which are not designed to help the students enrolled in the
35,163 US high schools discretely extricate themselves from situations with the
potential to become dangerous. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
consist of three elements that, combined, represent a highly innovative
technology solution to a prevalent public health problem. First is the use of
existing smartphone capabilities in new ways (e.g., enabling users to appear to
receive urgent texts or phone calls, which are, in reality, simulated, to
provide a socially sensitive reason for a student to leave a risky situation).
Second is the application of extensive evidence-based research to both
prevention and response technology features within the app. Third is a simple-
to-use dashboard, through which high school administrators can easily customize
data in the back-end database, to make it specific to their students and
institution, and monitor its use among their students.&lt;br/&gt;The specific
feature requirements needed for this interactive mobile platform will be
informed by institutional review board (IRB)-reviewed interviews, focus groups
and online surveys with students, parents/guardians and school administrators.
The proposed hybrid smartphone app will run on Apple iOS and Android operating
systems, using Google's Firebase SDK for analytics and accessing data from a
back-end SQL database. The app platform will include a simple-to-use dashboard
interface to the database, enabling schools to easily customize content to adapt
to school and state policies and to monitor anonymous statistics about app use
within their institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.