* 1919649
* Adaptive age-dependent learning in a wild primate population and its effects on cultural evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Susan Perry, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2023
* USD 223,421.00

Compared to other animals, humans have evolved far more complex cultures and
much greater reliance on teaching as a means of transmitting information.
Scientists debate competing evolutionary explanations for these divergences, and
a promising theoretical avenue emphasizes links between these traits and human
life history traits: long juvenile periods and lifespans, cooperative childcare,
and large relative brain size. In this project, researchers will study age-
related changes in how a non-human primate species (capuchins) invents new
behaviors and acquires behaviors from others in the wild. Because capuchins have
independently evolved a less extreme version of the human life history pattern
(e.g., slow development, long lifespans, large brains for body size, and
prolonged co-residence with a variety of caregiving relatives), they can
generate insights into the role of life history traits in promoting particular
types of social learning. This research project will also include a number of
training and science education activities. The research team will provide
fieldwork opportunities and mentoring, and consequently enhanced prospects for
admission to graduate school, to approximately 12 young scientists; involve high
school students in data analysis; and make presentations about scientific
methods and tropical forest conservation to schools near the research site.
Researchers will also collaborate with videographers and with local
environmental educators to produce materials to inspire students to study,
appreciate, and conserve the highly endangered tropical dry
forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans uniquely exhibit cumulative cultural
evolution proposed to stem from factors including long juvenile periods that
enable learning, intergenerational transmission of knowledge, cooperate care of
offspring that further facilitates learning, and theory of mind. Theoretical
models, and empirical work in developmental psychology, suggest that the
tradeoff between trial-and-error learning and social learning, as well as the
tradeoff between creativity and sticking to tried-and-true solutions, shift over
the life course. However, in order to test theoretical models used to explain
these findings in humans, researchers need non-human primate comparative data
about the emergence and spread of new behavioral variants and the effects of
population age structure on the social transmission of new ideas. Data will be
collected in the Lomas Barbudal Monkey Project, now in its 30th consecutive
year. Data on genetic kinship, including grandparent-grandoffspring
relationships, are available for ten social groups. Focal animal behavioral
sampling will focus on the oldest and youngest animals and will include (besides
routine recording of social interactions and object handling) gaze monitoring,
infant-alloparent communication, and instances of joint attention to objects.
Group scans will document the social network structure. Data from all group
members will be used to document flexibility in solving two of the most
difficult foraging tasks in the behavioral repertoire, and any behavioral
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.