* 1919232
* PFI-TT:  Proof of concept of a wearable device to monitor safe sun exposure
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sushma Kotru, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnership for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create awareness about and provide
some solutions to the risks associated with overexposure to ultraviolet (UV)
radiations from sunlight that lead to a negative impact on human health. The
technology developed will enable users to enjoy outdoor activities by developing
a wearable sensor that detects high levels of exposure to sunlight. By taking
preventive measures, the number of people affected by melanoma or other diseases
related to over exposure of UV radiation is expected to decrease, thus reducing
the financial burden faced with health care. The research will have applications
beyond medicine to other industries, such as athletics and cosmetics. The
project will provide a means for faculty and students to transition their
innovative technologies into the marketplace. Additional impacts are creation of
a knowledgeable and creative workforce in the areas of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The experiential learning and
entrepreneurial training that the PI and graduate students will gain will lead
to an enhanced understanding of innovation, technology commercialization, and
entrepreneurship. This will create opportunities for collaborating with small
businesses/industry with the potential of launching a new startup.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a prototype of a
wearable device which will enable users to monitor exposure to UV radiation when
exposed to sunlight and provide prevention messages. It is estimated that one in
five Americans will have skin cancer at some point in their life and 90% of the
most widely diagnosed skin cancers are from excessive exposure to sunlight. The
lack of available gadgets in the market that can keep an eye on UV exposure and
remind a person to use protection while vacationing or enjoying outdoor
activities is clear. The intellectual merit of the proposed technology is
creating a wearable device using a unique ferroelectric material as a sensor
that responds to UVA and UVB radiations. The research objectives include
developing a thin film-based UV sensor, testing the sensor and integration with
other components to create a wearable device, creating and implementing software
to allow users to input personal individualized data and notify the risk and
protection messages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.