* 1919875
* MRI: Acquisition of a flow cytometer to promote microbe-focused research, training, and teaching at NC State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Francis de los Reyes III, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 177,356.00

An award is made to North Carolina State University (NCSU) to purchase a
cytometer for fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). The acquisition will
support new (e.g., Single-cell Technologies) and revamped (e.g., Immunology and
High-Throughput Discovery) teaching modules within NCSU's Biotechnology (BIT)
program, whose primary goal is to educate and train undergraduate and graduate
students in areas of biotechnology. Courses outside BIT will also be supported;
the cytometer will enable more modern labs/instruction in undergraduate
Genetics, as well as in various environmental microbiology areas (e.g., Aquatic
Microbiology, Biological Oceanography, Estuary Biogeochemistry). Cumulatively,
&gt;350 students are anticipated to gain experience with flow cytometry
technology through these courses. More than 25 graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars will gain direct experience with FACS through NCSU
research projects utilizing the system. To increase awareness of FACS (and flow
cytometry in general) technology among underrepresented undergraduates in the
Raleigh, NC, area, FACS &amp; Flow Cytometry workshops will be conducted
annually for 4 years. The participants in these workshops will make
presentations at the NC Museum of Natural Science to convey their resulting
scientific literacy and knowledge to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is heavily devoted to
promoting diverse scientific research programs at NCSU, as well as at
neighboring universities. Areas of scientific research that will be supported
include: aquatic plankton ecology, harmful algal bloom ecology, detection of
pollutant degrading bacteria, extremophile microbial ecology, symbiosis, rapid
antibiotic and enzyme discovery, genetic identification of dinosaur cells, and
bivalve nutrition and microbiomes. At NCSU alone, these research groups
represent four colleges and extensive support from current research awards. All
results from the research enabled by the FACS system will be disseminated in
reputable peer-reviewed publications and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.