* 1919832
* MRI: Acquisition of Multimodal Light Sheet Fluorescence Microscope Workstation to Accelerate Multi-Disciplinary Research and Impact STEM Outreach in Northern Indiana
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 468,807.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a light
sheet fluorescence microscope workstation system at the University of Notre Dame
in Indiana. The light sheet fluorescence microscope system will be available as
a shared instrument managed by the Notre Dame Integrated Imaging Facility and
its expert, permanent staff. Given that the facility is connected to a shared
network, it also will be accessible to many institutions throughout Indiana.
Access to the light sheet fluorescence microscope will provide cutting-edge
training opportunities for a diverse range of undergraduate, graduate, and post-
doctoral researchers. The faculty and their trainees, supported by the Notre
Dame Integrated Imaging Facility staff, will undertake a range of educational
and outreach activities using the light sheet fluorescence microscope
workstation. The light sheet fluorescence microscope workstation system will
expand and amplify the University of Notre Dame's contributions in advancing
innovative engineering and science research, education and community
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This microscope enables three-dimensional images
to be acquired at unprecedented speeds and improved axial resolution compared to
traditional confocal microscopes. In addition to fast speeds and larger samples,
three-dimensional stem-cell derived organoids or small model organisms (e.g.,
zebrafish, fruit flies, or frog embryos) can be imaged without damaging samples
with the illumination light. The reduced bleaching and phototoxicity enables
long-term imaging over many days. This extended timeframe and additional
photomanipulation modalities dramatically expand the range of possible
experiments that can be conducted. The multimodal microscope enables
unprecedented capabilities for investigating the dynamics of cell behavior in a
broad range of three-dimensional samples, including epithelia, brain, eyes,
heart, and kidney tissues. The tool will allow new questions to be answered on
how normal and genetically modified cells interact at the systems level. The
tool also will facilitate new analyses of engineered vascularized tissue models
and biorobots by enabling both photomanipulation and fast
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.