* 1919722
* MRI: Acquisition of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Time-of-Flight(MALDI TOF) Mass Spectrometer for of Research and Research Training at CSULA
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Jamil Momand, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 164,614.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation Program. Professor
Yong Ba from California State University Los Angeles and colleagues Jamil
Momand, Edith Porter, Yixian Wang and Cecilia Zurita-Lopez are acquiring a
matrix-assisted laser desorption / ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometer
(MALDI-TOF-MS) equipped with a photodiode array. In general, mass spectrometry
(MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize
small quantities of chemical species in complex samples. MALDI TOF combines
gentle ionization (ideal for producing intact ions of peptides, proteins,
nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and other similarly sized
species) with a detection mode that offers an excellent balance between
sensitivity and accuracy across a wide range of samples. The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the university and within the
regional. The instrument broadens participation by giving hands-on access to a
diverse student population. The instrument is also used in outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. It especially impacts studies correlating molecular
structure, orientation and dynamics. Researchers use the MALDI-TOF-MS to study
interactions of a mucoadhesive co-polymer colloidal gel systems and in
identifying in vivo substrates and binding partners for the protein arginine
methyltransferase 7 (PRMT7) in mammalian cells. The mass spectrometer is used
for studying cell disruption mechanisms that may be operational in Parkinson's
disease and for studying antifreeze proteins. The instrument also serves
researchers identifying proteins associated with t-Darpp AKT activation
proteins, in which t-Darpp is a truncated isoform of dopamine-regulated
phosphoprotein having an elongated monomer that binds calcium and is
phosphorylated by cyclin-dependent enzyme kinases. Finally, the instrument is
used by researchers investigating antimicrobial peptides. Overall, the
instrument acquisition may benefit the National health and welfare as well as
supporting education and diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.