* 1919244
* PFI-TT:  Limiting agricultural loss due to powdery mildew disease
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Mary Wildermuth, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,126.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to reduce agricultural loss due to
powdery mildew. The wine and grape industry is a multi-billion dollar industry
which is heavily impacted by powdery mildew disease that reduces yield and
product quality, resulting in an 'off' flavor. For grapes, powdery mildew
treatment represents 75% of pesticide costs, and current treatment methods are
becoming less effective. Every grape-bearing acre is treated numerous times in a
growing season, typically with sulfur treatments interspersed with the use of
systemic fungicides (chemicals that inhibit powdery mildew protein function).
However, resistance to currently used fungicides is increasingly common and
recent reports suggest that sulfur poses health risks. We are using a non-GMO
approach called RNAi (RNA interference) which limits the production of specific
powdery mildew chemicals in an environmentally friendly process. In addition,
the market for the proposed products will be further explored, and a detailed
commercialization plan will be developed with active input from
commercialization experts and industry stakeholders. Training in
entrepreneurship of women and minorities is an important component of this
project, which is led by women and will include women and minority Agriculture
Innovation Undergraduate Interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
address the pressing and widespread problem of powdery mildew disease of
agriculture, focused on grapevine. Powdery mildew is a ubiquitous pathogen of
grapevine that has a major impact on yield and product quality. The team
developed a non-GMO RNAi approach to limit the function of specific powdery
mildew genes and the means to screen for the targets that most efficiently
result in decreased disease on plants. In this proposal, the team will screen
for additional novel powdery mildew targets and perform field testing of at
least one highly promising RNAi product. Novel powdery mildew targets can be
readily identified using this approach and grapevine treatment with distinct
RNAi products over the course of the growing season can provide a cost-effective
and safer means of limiting powdery mildew disease. RNAi products are
biodegradable and highly specific with minimal off-targets, making them
attractive as more environmentally benign than current treatments. Intellectual
property for the target identification process and efficacious powdery mildew
targets will be secured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.