* 1919798
* MRI:Acquisition of Ultra high Performance Electron Beam Lithography System for the Western New York Region
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jonathan Bird, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

This major research instrumentation project is to acquire a high-performance
Electron Beam Lithography system for research, education and broader impact in
the Western New York region. The system uses an ultra-narrow beam of high energy
electrons (1.8 nm wide) to define features on the scale of tens of nanometers.
The unique capabilities of this advanced nanofabrication tool will enable
crucial research in a broad range of fields spanning engineering, physics,
chemistry, materials science and biology. The state-of-the-art tool will be
installed at the University at Buffalo and provide both onsite and remote access
to a large number of students, faculty, researchers and entrepreneurs across the
region. The unique feature of the tool is the ability to define sub-10 nm
dimension structures with fast writing speed over large areas. This feature is
very important for cutting edge research in electronics and photonics. The aim
is to rapidly translate the fundamental knowledge gained in academic
laboratories to real world applications. Another feature of the tool is the
ability to define nm structures on flexible substrates that are essential for
biomedical applications. Undergraduate and graduate students in the engineering
and science disciplines will have access to the tool. They will be trained in
its use through courses and programs offered by the electrical engineering
department at the University at Buffalo. The tool will enable cutting-edge
research across computing, communications, healthcare, and education. The
research opportunity given to undergraduate and graduate students will help
build the skills of the future workforce for knowledge-based economy and
maintain the economic competitiveness of the US. The tool will improve the
research infrastructure in the western New York region and positively impact the
economy of the region. The remote access feature will enable students to submit
their designs for fabrication from any location. The instrument will also
contribute to strong outreach programs in engineering and applied sciences.
Investigators will provide mentorship to underrepresented students in science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron beam lithography is an
indispensable tool for advanced research in electronics, photonics, physics, and
materials science. The tool will enable research in a broad range of topics: low
power non-volatile high speed ferroelectric and magneto-electric based logic and
memory devices for energy efficient data intensive computing applications;
emerging low power and efficient quantum devices; nano-electronics based on two-
dimensional (2D) materials; high power flexible electronics based on widebandgap
semiconductors; room temperature THz devices based on coupling of optical
phonons in III-V semiconductors to graphene plasmonic structures; understanding
of the fundamental physics in correlated electron systems; THz plasmonic
structures for chemical and biological sensing; graphene plasmonic array for THz
communication; and characterization of 2D materials, heterointerfaces, and
devices. These high impact research have applications that range from computing,
communication, energy and health. It will also help in understanding fundamental
physics in correlated materials and the switching dynamics in technologically
important antiferromagnetic oxides. The proposed tool to be acquired will have
large acceleration voltage, sub-10nm lithographic resolution, high beam position
resolution, sub-20 nm stitching and overlay accuracy, tunable field size up to
3000 micrometers for high throughput writing, and height correction feature for
writing on flexible substrates. These unique features are essential to carry out
the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.