* 1919494
* Collaborative Research: Evidence in Economic Models
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Eddie Dekel, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 235,000.00

This award funds research in economic theory. The team will study the
acquisition and use of hard information or evidence which enables interested
parties to prove some assertions they wish to make. When can social institutions
be designed in such a way as to provide strong enough incentives to interested
parties to acquire enough sufficiently credible evidence as to enable efficient
outcomes? When efficiency is not possible, what is the nature of the distortions
from efficiency generated by the best institutions that are possible? The
research team will develop mathematical models for studying these questions,
including tools for making the analysis sufficiently tractable to yield clear
results. More broadly, the work will facilitate research of applied economic
models in this large class of interesting environments. By providing tools for
making the analysis more tractable, the research may generate new classes of
economic institutions and shed new light on existing ones. The tools will also
be useful in studying the structure of organizations, such as firms and
governments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on mechanism design when
agents can acquire noisy evidence. The general model has connections to a wide
range of economic models of "hard information", such as Bayesian persuasion and
models of testing. The team will develop tools for simplifying the mechanism
design problem to be able to focus on a more tractable class of mechanisms. In
particular, they will develop conditions under which one can identify the
evidence the principal will request given any claim by the agent and/or the
evidence generation actions the principal will recommend given any type report.
Together or separately, this identification will greatly simplify
characterization of the optimal mechanism. The investigators will also compare
optimal mechanisms to outcomes when the principal cannot commit himself.
Finally, they will characterize environments in which efficient outcomes are
possible and the nature of distortions when efficiency is not
achievable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.