* 1919450
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Selling Shares to Many Budget Constrained Bidders
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* John Kagel, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 11,981.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement grant will fund a study of the
efficiency and revenue effects of share auctions. Share auctions are also
sometimes called voucher auctions. In this kind of auction, every bidder pays
what she bids and receives a fraction of the item equal to her bid divided by
the sum of all bids. These auctions have been used to privatize publicly owned
assets and have also been used for cryptocurrency crowd sales. The project will
use lab experiments to compare the results of share auctions to the results of
first price auctions. The results will help us understand whether or not share
auction methods could be a practical alternative for use in business and by
governments who seek to raise revenues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coPI has
developed a theoretical model that predicts that the share auction is dominated
by second price auctions, first price auctions, and all pay auctions if bidders
are not budget constrained or face only a weak constrain. With a strong budget
constraint, the theory predicts that share auctions can achieve higher
efficiency and revenue than that second or first price auctions, although all
pay auctions still give better results. The lab experiments will test whether
these predictions hold. The results will give us new understanding of bidding
behavior and economic performance when share auction methods are used. The
project also adds to our understanding of auctions with budget constrained
bidders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.