* 1919633
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultrafast Transient Absorption Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Lei Zhu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 321,490.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Kenneth Hanson from Florida State
University and colleague Lei Zhu have acquired an ultrafast transient absorption
laser spectrometer. Transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy is a powerful
technique for monitoring a sample's change in energy absorbance (i. e., color)
with respect to time after excitation by a flash of light from a laser. TA is
employed to study photochemistry and photophysical processes such as the
conversion of sunlight into energy. Such processes can be very fast, on a time
scale of a femtosecond which is 14 orders of magnitude faster than 1 second. The
ultrafast laser system is used to characterize new materials which have
desirable properties such as better solar cells or light emitting diodes. The
spectrometer is used to train students in ultrafast technology and applications
at Florida State University and other institutions including the neighboring
HBCU Florida A&amp;M University as well as Central Florida University, New
College of Florida, Virginia Military Institute and the University of South
Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will enhance research and education
broadly. One research area being investigated is photocurrent generation in
materials with self-assembled organic-inorganic interfaces. Fluorescent
molecules that can emit simultaneously at different wavelengths for applications
including bio-imaging are also currently investigated. The properties of
photomagnets, a fundamentally interesting and technologically promising group of
light responsive materials, are being evaluated. Halide perovskite are
intensively studied for their remarkable performance in optoelectronic devices
such as solar cells. Exciton self-trapping (or excited state structural
reorganization) processes in low dimensional organic metal halide hybrids with
unique photophysical properties are also studied in a collaboration with Oak
Ridge National Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.