* 1919139
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Do Identity Concerns Affect Labor Supply?
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Eric Verhoogen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2020
* USD 28,000.00

A sense of identity can be a powerful influence over behavior, including work.
Workers who identify themselves as belonging to one group may regard a job
associated with a different group as a violation of their identity, especially
if the job is associated with a group perceived to have lower social status.
This identity channel may partly explain why some groups are over- or under-
represented in some occupations. The identity-related mis-representation of
groups in occupations leads to a misallocation of talent and cause economic
inefficiency. The effect of identity on labor supply, however, has been
difficult to establish by researchers for a variety of reasons. This study will
use experimental methods to study how identity concerns affect labor supply. The
study provides the first experimental test of identity effect on labor supply
and distinguishes the effect of intrinsic motivations (e.g. self-image) from
extrinsic motivations (e.g. fear of social sanctions). Understanding these
identity effects would inform discussions on why occupational choice is not
evenly distributed across groups of people with potentially important policy
implications. The results of this study will provide major inputs into policies
to increase the efficiency of labor markets, improve job matches and increase
economic growth.

This project examines how identity concerns affect job-specific labor supply
using a field experiment. Casual laborers interested in a one-day job
opportunity are presented with a large set of potential job offers and asked to
choose whether to accept or decline each offer, one of which is randomly
implemented. While all offers involve a default manufacturing task, job seekers
are also required to spend some time privately on an additional task, which
changes across offers. Using separately-collected survey information on the
social associations of the tasks and the perceived hierarchy of local social
groups, predictions are made of which worker-offer combinations would involve
identity concerns. This design allows researchers to quantify the reduction in
the job take-up rate that is attributable to the predicted presence of identity
concerns. In addition, by randomly varying whether workers expect their job
take-up decisions to be publicized to their neighbors or not, one can
distinguish the effects of intrinsic and extrinsic motivations. The results of
this research will improve the functioning of labor markets, hence economic
growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.