* 1919847
* MRI:  Acquisition of an automated fluorescent microscope and imaging system for undergraduate biology and chemistry research and research training
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Karen Snetselaar, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 138,238.00

An award is made to Saint Joseph's University (SJU) to purchase a wide-field
automated fluorescent microscope and imaging system. This equipment enhances the
research and research training within SJU's biology and chemistry departments.
College students will be exposed to projects involving fluorescent microscopy in
upper-level undergraduate and graduate coursework and as a part of their
research experiences at SJU. Additionally, through SJU's established connections
with the Philadelphia area's public education system, this instrument will allow
for enhanced engagement with local elementary and high school students.
Microscopy-based teaching projects will help foster an appreciation among these
students for the natural sciences, teach students about research, and will
inform their future career interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fluorescence
microscopy is an essential component of the ongoing research of both the biology
and chemistry departments at SJU. The new microscope and imaging system will be
used as a key component in the following projects: (1) in vivo imaging of
signaling molecules using fluorescence-based biosensors during sleep in
nematodes; (2) immunofluorescence of brain slices to determine the impact of
sleep and sleep deprivation on memory in mice; (3) visualization of light- and
dark-adaptive cellular movements in the eyes of fish; and (4) direct observation
of host-pathogen interactions using Ustilago maydis, a fungal pathogen of maize.
Other projects using this equipment involve: (1) the maintenance of chromosome
telomeres in baker's yeast; (2) oxygen sensing mechanism of the Heme-PAS protein
FixL from nitrogen-fixing bacteria, S. meliloti; and (3) analysis of
semiconductor nanocrystals or "quantum dots." Results of this research will be
presented at local, national, and international conferences, and published in
peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.