* 1919038
* PFI-TT:  A Noninvasive Biological Research Tool for Measurement of Tissue and Cerebral Oxygenation
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Valencia Koomson, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project addresses the lack of cost-effective
tools for to measure oxygen in biological tissues, currently a major bottleneck
for important studies. Over the past decade, a biological research community has
emerged utilizing specific noninvasive techniques for in vivo studies of
biological tissue. A measurement technique known as near-infrared spectroscopy
(NIRS) will have an impact on many fields, including functional brain imaging,
stroke assessment, breast cancer screening, and premature infant brain
monitoring. Applying silicon manufacturing techniques to making these near-
infrared (NIR) instruments presents a significant milestone toward wearable
diagnostic tools providing precise data on tissue oxygenation, in a compact form
similar to a typical pulse oximeter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
presents a significant milestone in the development of point-of-care diagnostic
tools. The team was the first to demonstrate the promise of implementation of
frequency domain tissue spectroscopy techniques in an unmodified commercial
silicon fabrication process. They propose a wearable device that implements
advanced NIRS methods in a compact form factor by employing low-cost, solid-
state optical devices and a system-on-chip (SoC) platform integrating complex
signal processing circuitry, laser drivers, digitization, and wireless
communication capability. Frequency domain SoC microsystems will play a
significant role in development of scalable, wearable and bedside monitoring
systems capable of operation over multiple wavelengths to measure absolute
concentrations of several biological chromophores and, as proposed here, achieve
selective depth sensitivity, which is currently not possible with continuous-
wave NIRS systems that only measure intensity. In addition, miniaturization
enables the realization of systems for concurrent measurement of multiple
diagnostic modalities. The integration of on-chip wireless data transmission
will enable the flexibility to observe tissue oxygenation while subjects are in
motion without the limiting constraints of a bulky fiber optic cable
harness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.