* 1919654
* RCN-UBE:  Inclusive Environments and Metrics in Biology Education and Research (iEMBER):  Novel Networking Fostering Interdisciplinary Communities and New Research Collaborations
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Natalia Caporale, HARRIS-STOWE STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 01/31/2020
* USD 499,999.00

The RCN-UBE: Inclusive Environments and Metrics in Biology Education and
Research (iEMBER) Network aims to improve the inclusion and retention of
students in STEM fields. Barriers to increasing diversity and retention are
multifactorial, with academic, cultural, economic, curricular, affective, and
social forces contributing to student attrition, particularly among those from
underrepresented groups. Thus, it is imperative that research attempting to
address these issues incorporates knowledge from multiple fields. To that end,
the iEMBER Network aims to create a framework that will provide opportunities
for researchers from different fields including biology, education, and the
social sciences to work together. This will be done through networking
workshops, conferences, and the development of community resources and an online
collaboration platform. As a part of their work, the network's research teams
will examine educational environments to determine how they impact inclusion and
retention.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the network include creating a
robust community of practice and hubs of research innovation and finding
partners who share our vision of expanding the reach of diverse and effective
STEM environments. The intellectual merits of the project lie in 1) employing a
novel startup pitch networking strategy to foster new cross-disciplinary
research collaborations; 2) having researchers attend conferences outside of
their areas of expertise, thus promoting cross-disciplinary research; 3)
developing an online platform that supports ongoing collaborations, fosters new
ones, and functions as a reservoir of pedagogical, theoretical, and practical
resources on inclusion and diversity in STEM. Members of the network will use
these resources to develop new knowledge, theories, and practices around issues
of inclusion in STEM that would not have been possible without them.
Furthermore, iEMBER will promote the training of a new generation of researchers
that has the broad expertise needed to continue to tackle problems in STEM
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this project is being provided by
the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) program in recognition of
the project's alignment with the overarching goals of the IUSE: EHR
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.