* 1919305
* Collaborative Research: How between-group competition impacts within-group cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Marcela Benitez, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 798,467.00

Popular belief holds that nothing unites like a common enemy, but to what degree
is this true? Recent advances in economics, anthropology and psychology support
the existence of a phenomenon in which conflict between groups improves
cooperation within those groups. This has disturbing implications for a society
whose goal is to improve cooperation, suggesting that between-group conflict is
necessary to enhance within-group cooperation. The goal of this project is to
determine the degree to which this is true and use the information to formulate
possibilities for improving cooperation in the absence of intergroup conflict.
Understanding this would benefit society from the level of local interactions to
international relations. The project will also train numerous students at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate levels in the methods of scientific
inquiry and bring this research to the general public through talks to the
general public, at local K-12 schools, and through our ongoing collaboration
with the Fernbank Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Recent research suggests the existence of parochial
altruism, in which between-group competition improves within-group cooperation.
From an evolutionary perspective, this makes sense, as individuals within a
group, who cooperate to outcompete other groups, will do better than individuals
who fail to do so. But to what extent is this a broad feature of cooperative
behavior versus a characteristic specific to humans? If this is a general
disposition of cooperation, how frequently is it really a driver of cooperation?
The overarching goals of the current proposal are to 1) understand the impact of
between-group competition on cooperation and 2) the hormonal mechanisms
underlying these decisions. To achieve these goals the researchers will examine
how monkeys, apes and humans cooperate with other members of their group, with
and without between-group competition. The focus will be on individuals
interacting within their social groups, who are freely choosing to work jointly
with other members of their group, but in tightly controlled circumstances that
allow the influence of specific variables to be identified. This approach
combines the best aspects of naturalistic field work, highlighting the
endogenous emergence of cooperation from individual interactions, and the best
aspects of tightly controlled experiments, highlighting the mechanisms and
clarifying how specific contexts influence cooperation. Levels of two hormones
purported to be key to understanding cooperation, testosterone and oxytocin,
will be collected during the interactions to begin to unpack the endocrine
mechanisms underlying cooperation and competition. This work will help to
untangle uniquely human characteristics of cooperation from those more broadly
shared across the primates and help elucidate core mechanisms that promote
cooperation, either in concert with, or in the absence of, human-specific
adaptations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.