* 1919455
* Cyclic di-GMP Regulation of PilB in Motility and Biofilm
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Zhaomin Yang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,003,732.00

To go, or to stay, that is the decision a bacterium must make in any environment
it encounters. To go, it must assemble a motility apparatus and disable
structures for attachment to surfaces. To stay, it needs to establish a
protected settlement by producing building materials of its own to form a
bacterial biofilm on a solid surface. This decision and its execution by
bacteria profoundly impact our lives and society because biofilms can form on so
many critical environmental surfaces. This research project probes at the
molecular level how a bacterium makes and executes this decision to either form
biofilms or move by enabling its motility. Besides advancing basic microbiology,
this project will allow integrated teaching and learning opportunities as well
as interdisciplinary training of both graduate and undergraduate students. In
addition, a variety of outreach activities will be performed to help diversify
our STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the regulation
of PilB by the universal bacterial second messenger cyclic-di-GMP (cdG). PilB is
an ATPase that powers the assembly of bacterial type IV pilus (T4P) as a
motility apparatus for movement on solid surfaces. Additionally, Myxococcus
xanthus T4P has been demonstrated to stimulate the production of
exopolysaccharide (EPS) which is the major building materia of bacterial
biofilms. M. xanthus PilB (MxPilB) would thus appear to promote both motility
and biofilm formation, which are two alternate and mutually exclusive lifestyles
of bacteria. Evidence indicates that MxPilB and its Chloracidobacterium
thermophilum orthologue (CtPilB) both bind cdG using a conserved cdG-binding
domain. The investigators propose a model wherein cdG inversely regulates the
two seemingly incompatible and opposing functions of PilB. One part of this
project uses M. xanthus to test this model in vivo combined with cdG binding
assays in vitro. The rest of the project employs CtPilB as the model protein to
analyze the interactions of PilB with cdG by quantitative and structural
analysis in vitro as well as advanced imagining platforms including single-
particle cryo-EM and high-speed atomic force microscopy. The successful
completion of this project will provide insight into the lifestyle decision-
making by T4P-motile bacteria that are present in numerous ecosystems and on
many branches of the phylogenetic tree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.