* 1919267
* PFI-RP:  Developing Bio-based Ingredients for Plastics from Agricultural Waste
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,03/31/2025
* Bala Subramaniam, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2025
* USD 757,681.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project will be to transform plastics
manufacturing by using lignin, a naturally occurring material, as a renewable
feedstock. Plastics are a major component of many consumer products such as
bottles, synthetic fibers, building materials, etc., and are currently made from
petroleum resources. In recent years, many attempts have been made to produce
ingredients for plastics from agricultural resources as a more sustainable
feedstock. One technological challenge is the ability to handle the diversity of
plant sources (grasses vs. hardwoods) as feedstocks to make consistent and
compatible ingredients currently used in plastics. This work develops a
technology to make plastic precursors from lignin derived from various sources,
such as cellulosic ethanol plants or the pulp and paper industry. The proposed
technology breaks down the lignin into smaller chemicals that are readily
transformed into substances that can be used to make plastics. By demonstrating
a modular technology concept, scale-up to industrial production rates is
achieved by simply increasing the number of modules. The commercialization of
this technology has the ability to capture a significant fraction of the related
global phenolic resins market, expected to reach nearly $16 billion by 2025.
Such value-added products will significantly enhance the economic viability of
biorefineries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address the
major challenge of developing practically viable technologies to make value
added products from lignin for profitable biorefineries. Specific objectives are
to demonstrate a scalable technology for converting lignin from various sources
(alkaline, organosolv and milled lignin) to bio-based prepolymers suitable for
making resins and plastics. This is achieved by selective ozonolysis of the
lignin solution (in acetic acid) in a spray reactor to partially break up the
lignin into low molecular weight aromatics which are then grafted on to the
macromolecular lignin structure by acidification with sulfuric acid in a stirred
reactor. This technology converts &gt;95% of the lignin to prepolymers which are
separated by filtration from the solvent which is recycled. These two steps
occur sequentially at mild operating conditions (ambient temperature and
pressure) that favor process economics. Process optimization to form prepolymers
with desired properties will be guided by benchmarking with conventional phenol-
formaldehyde and bakelite-type resins. Process scalability will be demonstrated
by operating multiple spray reactors in parallel followed by acidification of
the combined ozonolysis product to generate prepolymers with identical
properties and in sufficient quantities for product
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.