* 1919476
* Collaborative Research: Bubble impacting a curved surface: a sustainable way to sanitize produce
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Joseph Eifert, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 128,912.00

Cleaning practices using microbubbles have been proven to be a sustainable and
environmently benign sanitation method in a wide range of industrial
applications. When a stream of bubbles impact and slide on a surface,
contaminants on the surface can be removed due to the strong force generated by
the bubbles. Bubble-cleaning of agricultural produce like fruits and vegetables
has not been studied extensively. Potentially, this method could be used to
minimize cases of food poisoning affecting millions of people every year, since
bubble streams could be used to remove and inactivate pathogenic microorganisms
from produce surfaces. Understanding the bubble-surface interaction is
challenging due to the fact that the process transpires over multiple length
scales, in which bubble deformation and trajectory occur on the order of a
millimeter while the liquid film between the bubble and solid involves only a
few hundreds of nanometers. This research project could lead to a novel
technology for an environmentally benign sanitization process for raw fruits and
vegetables. The method could even be applied to other technological processes
such as semiconductor manufacturing. The research project serves as a training
ground for graduate and undergraduate students to perform cutting edge research.
The research team will make an instructional video on how to make a bubble-
stream fruit cleaner and share it via social media and web-based outlets at
Cornell University. Farmers could use the video to learn how to put together
their own bubble cleaners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative
research project is to investigate both macro- and microscopic dynamics of a
bubble impacting and sliding along a surface. This research will elucidate how
bubbles remove particulate dirt or biological micro-organisms from a surface.
There are limited studies in bubbly flows on tilted or curved surfaces, even
though bubbles are used to clean various surfaces in many industrial processes.
The research team will use high-speed photography, particle image velocimetry,
pressure distribution measurements, and an interferometry microscopy technique
to characterize shear and normal stresses, as well as thickness profiles of an
asymmetric thin liquid film while bubbles impact on a surface. The research
project involves three tasks:1) characterizing the macroscopic dynamics of a
bubble on a surface as a function of the inclination angle and the curvature; 2)
experimentally measuring and computationally modeling the shear stress and
interfacial deformation of a bubble near the surface; and 3) testing the
particle-scavenging and retaining performance of bacteria using agricultural
products. The outcomes of this research will lead to an understanding of the
underlying fluid mechanics in bubble sanitization
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.