* 1919220
* PFI-TT: Next Generation Fuel Cell Catalysts for Efficient Energy Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Sundeep Mukherjee, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 409,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is a transformative approach to design
and manufacturing of special materials, called catalysts, to accelerate chemical
reactions for next-generation energy conversion applications. State-of-the-art
catalysts used in fuel cells have low efficiency and poor durability, limiting
their widespread use. This program will address the key bottlenecks in catalyst
design and manufacturing to increase their efficiency and durability, while
reducing their cost. A broad spectrum of high-tech industries could potentially
benefit from commercialization of this technology, including automotive
industry, consumer electronics, and fuel cell and battery manufacturers. The
proposed technology can potentially have a direct impact on high-tech
manufacturing in the United States, paving the way for clean-energy technology
ventures and possibly leading to multiple start-up companies. This project will
enhance the engagement between academia and industry on multiple fronts,
including entrepreneurial education, exposure of students to industrial
development, and development of a new ecosystem based on clean energy
technology. Working alongside industrial partners will help train students to
enter the workforce upon graduation with innovation experience beyond their
laboratory-based research knowledge. Advanced manufacturing entrepreneurship
will be a key outcome of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will address the key bottlenecks of efficiency, cost, and durability in current
energy conversion technologies. It will lead to rapid discovery and scale-up of
high performance catalysts, using an integrated manufacturing and computational
approach. The higher durability, resistance to poisoning, and lower cost of
high-performance amorphous electro-catalysts could be potentially transformative
in energy conversion devices. It will provide a pathway for technical
advancement of next generation electro-catalysts as well as their successful
commercialization. The intellectual merit of the project is based on pulsed co-
electrodeposition of catalysts, which will allow fabrication of a wide range of
chemistries with continuous control over their surface characteristics.
Amorphous metals represent a transformative approach to electro-catalyst design
because of their tunable catalytic properties and high concentration of atomic-
level defect sites unavailable in current state-of-the-art catalysts. The
specific research tasks include combinatorial synthesis of a large number of
catalyst libraries by thin-film sputtering, high throughput molecular dynamics
simulation, parallel characterization of catalytic activity by advanced
multiplexing strategies, and manufacturing scale-up of promising compositions.
Finally, the developed catalysts will be benchmarked against the state-of-the-
art technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.