* 1919818
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Computed Nanotomography system with in situ material testing to advance understanding of natural and engineered materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Maria Auad, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2022
* USD 865,973.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
X-ray Computed Nanotomography (nanoCT) system equipped with in situ mechanical
and thermal material testing that enables fundamental research in biological,
geological, and engineered materials. This project will advance critical
research in additive manufacturing, biomedical engineering, earth and
environmental systems, energy and smart materials, and sustainable, resilient
infrastructure materials. High imaging resolutions and in-situ testing
capabilities will be leveraged to enhance understanding of porosity formation
and the integrity of additively manufactured parts, materials for biomedical
applications and design of novel nanoparticle-based drug therapies, hydro-
chemical-mechanical processes in natural and engineered geomaterials, and
structure-property relationships and design of energy and smart polymeric
materials. As a publicly available resource, this award will provide new
research, outreach, teaching and student training opportunities to students,
faculty, and staff at Auburn University and regional institutions. In addition,
this instrument will enrich education through integration into undergraduate and
graduate courses and will encourage underrepresented students to pursue STEM
fields through inclusion in outreach activities including Auburn University's
Women in Engineering camps and the Engineering Academic Excellence Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This X-ray nanoCT will facilitate non-destructive 3D
imaging of materials where material transformations can be captured using time-
lapsed imaging. This nanoCT features new advanced material testing stages,
abilities to image specimens at resolutions as high as 100 nm and under
variations in temperatures (-20 degrees C to 85 degrees C) or with compressive
or tensile loads. Advanced capabilities will permit an enhanced understanding of
the processes leading to pore generation in additively manufactured parts, and
the impact of these pores on the structural integrity of parts. This instrument
will additionally enable fundamental research towards advancing novel
nanoparticle-based drug therapies, improved diagnosis of respiratory diseases
and cancer, new contact lenses and the design of novel materials for biomedical
applications. With the aid of the nanoCT, multi-scale connected porosity and
mineral accessible surface areas in geologic porous media will be characterized.
Time-lapsed imaging will be coupled with in situ experiments to evaluate the
reactive changes in pore structures and fractures due to geochemical reactions
and/or applied mechanical and thermal forces, transforming understanding of
thermo-hydro-chemical-mechanical processes in geologic systems. High-resolution
imaging of polymeric materials will increase understanding of structure-property
relationships from the nano- to macro-scale, generating the knowledge needed for
designing a new generation of functional nanomaterials. Furthermore, the
observations of infrastructure material structures and the inception and
evolution of localized deformation under in situ loading and in a range of
environmental conditions will transform the understanding of material
characteristics and failure mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.