* 1919190
* PFI-TT: Creating Commercial-grade Hardware Design Tools for Automated Design of Application-specific Embedded Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* John Sartori, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(PFI) project is the ability to automatically create highly-optimized
application-specific systems with minimal engineering effort. This ability will
be an enabler in several growing and emerging industry sectors, such as IoT,
med-tech, wearables, and printed electronics. For the low-power systems that
drive these applications, energy efficiency is the primary factor that
determines critical characteristics such as size, weight, cost, reliability, and
lifetime. Likewise, security is critical for these systems, as they collect and
handle data encompassing many aspects of daily life and thus expose a huge
attack surface for information security attacks. Automated solutions for
security and energy efficiency developed in this project can potentially make a
disruptive impact on the IoT space, which is predicted to have a market size of
$457 billion by 2020. Tools developed in this project can significantly reduce
design time and cost for application-specific systems, enabling wider deployment
and providing traction for entirely new markets such as DIY printed processors.
Additionally, these tools can improve information security for the population at
large and allow broader deployment of intelligent systems integrated into a
large number of daily activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will create commercial-grade electronic design automation tools that can
automatically create an application-specific hardware design for a specific
target application. These tools will have the capability to optimize designs for
extreme energy efficiency and to perform security analysis that can guarantee
the security of a system for a set of desired security properties. The primary
work of this project involves translating research tools into commercial-grade
tools, based on industry-defined needs and requirements. Transforming the
research tools into tools that can be seamlessly integrated into industry design
flows requires enhancements to allow the tools to support arbitrary hardware
designs and system components. The tools must also be optimized to enable
scalable analysis of larger hardware designs and more complex applications used
in industry. To demonstrate commercial viability, the developed tools will be
evaluated on industry designs and applications and must demonstrate the ability
to create highly-optimized application-specific hardware designs quickly,
efficiently, and automatically with little engineering effort. Tools that can
meet these objectives will have strong commercial potential in a number of
industries that require ultra-low-power application-specific systems, such as
IoT, med-tech, and printed electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.