* 1919613
* RCN-UBE:  Quantitative Biology at Community Colleges
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sarah Prescott, BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 533,361.00

Life sciences students must be well equipped with the mathematical and
quantitative skills to work in the increasingly data-rich careers in
biotechnology, health care, and agriculture. Community colleges serve almost
half of the undergraduates in the U.S., including many minority, low-income,
first-generation, and underrepresented students, and many of these students are
pursuing careers in life sciences. In this rapidly changing field, it is
important that community college faculty have up-to-date teaching materials that
reflect the most recent discoveries in biology and innovative data-analysis
approaches. This RCN-UBE network will bring together a community of two-year
college faculty to create appropriate teaching materials and offer professional
development with the goal of incorporating cutting-edge biology research and
high-impact teaching practices to improve student outcomes. Empowering community
college faculty to increase student success will have a significant impact on
the qualifications and diversity of the science and technology workforce.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The resources developed by the network will be openly
licensed and available in the Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education and
Synthesis (QUBES), National Science Digital Library (NSDL), Community College
Consortium for Open Educational Resources (CCCOER), and similar open-access
content hubs, thus sustaining the resources beyond the span of the grant.
Professional development will be offered in person at various conferences and
workshops, as well as virtually through the QUBES Faculty Mentoring Network
model. This network focuses on generating materials for and by community college
faculty; however, the Open Education Resources (OER) collection and the
professional development designed to support the use of these materials are
relevant for all biology faculty teaching introductory undergraduate courses,
and faculty outside of the network are free to use and adapt the resources for
their own curriculum. The network will advance preparation of adjunct faculty
and recruitment of future faculty, who might not otherwise have the opportunity
to build relationships with full-time community college faculty around the
country.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.