* 1919148
* PFI-TT: Laser ranging system with tunable optical elements
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Victor Bright, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is a new modality for light detection
and ranging (LIDAR), an optical technique that generates high-resolution images
of an object. LIDAR is commonly used in applications such as mapping,
agriculture, energy and environmental studies, and more recently, for autonomous
navigation and collision avoidance for self-driving cars, drones, and
satellites. These applications are all crucial to societal function today. For
example, surveying the snow pack can be important for hydroelectric power and
drinking water estimates. Other important applications include mapping
coastlines, as well as determining the health of agricultural crops and trees to
predict yields as well as fire risks. However, the mechanical-based LIDAR
scanners currently used have a limited lifetime, are large, and power hungry.
This can cause significant constraints; for example, a drone can only carry a
very limited and small system, or battery life will be impacted. Nonmechanical
scanning methods can offer a solution. The research will demonstrate an
innovative technique for nonmechanical scanning applied to LIDAR
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project focuses on an incoherent
light detection and ranging (LIDAR) system, using nonmechanical beam steering
with adaptive optical elements. The system is compact, versatile, and ultra-low
power. It will enable a new generation of systems that are able to adapt with
agility to changing conditions and targets. Unlike conventional LIDAR systems
which often use beam steering based on prisms or gimbals that rely on
mechanically moving parts, which can be heavy, power hungry, and have a limited
lifetime, the proposed LIDAR design has operational lifetime orders of magnitude
longer due to nonmechanical components. The proposed work will enable new LIDAR
technology with enhanced capabilities (ability to adapt to changing conditions)
and steer the technology in a direction for eventual
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.