* 1919429
* MRI: Acquisition of a Rheometer for Interdisciplinary Material Science Research and Training of Undergraduate Researchers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Prairie, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 263,763.00

This award, from the Major Research Instrumentation program, supports the
University of San Diego's acquisition of a rheometer. Rheometers are routinely
used to study the flow and deformation of soft materials (for example, gels) as
a function of applied force and time. Rheometers measure properties such as
viscosity, which is a measure of resistance to flow. For instance, water flows
easier than honey, so it has a lower viscosity. Viscoelastic materials are those
that exhibit both viscous and elastic characteristics under deformation. The
rheometer to be acquired is capable of precisely controlling sample temperature,
and it also provides direct microscopic visualization of samples under flow. The
rheometer also is equipped with tools to measure the tensile and bending
strength of solid materials. This instrument will enable the University of San
Diego faculty to conduct cutting-edge research on topics related to the behavior
of biopolymers (for example, DNA solutions) and antibacterial materials. The
rheometer will be used to provide hands-on training of undergraduates across
different disciplines such as bioengineering and physics. The instrument also
will enable the development of a new interdisciplinary course on
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A state-of-the-art rheometer equipped with
multiple accessories will accommodate diverse research and teaching needs at the
University of San Diego, a primarily undergraduate teaching institution. This
instrument will significantly advance four specific projects at the University
of San Diego. First, it will be used to answer questions on how fluid-fluid
phase separation is influenced by shear. Second, it will measure the mechanical
properties of starch hydrogels which are used to deliver antimicrobial agents.
Third, it will determine how the rheological properties of seawater are altered
by mucous secretions and aggregates of microorganisms. Finally, it will measure
the viscoelastic properties of biomaterials including cytoskeletal networks and
entangled DNA solutions. These main projects, as well as others at the
University of San Diego and at neighboring institutions, will be advanced
substantially by this state-of-the-art rheometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.