* 1919350
* MRI: Acquisition of a modern single-crystal X-ray diffractometer with a high dynamic range detector
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Ilia Guzei, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 244,300.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Ilia Guzei from the University of Wisconsin-
Madison and colleagues are acquiring a single crystal diffractometer equipped
with a sensitive wide-field detector system and a copper source. In general, an
X-ray diffractometer (XRD) allows accurate and precise measurements of the full
three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles.
XRD also provides accurate information about the spatial arrangements of a
molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact
many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. The X-ray laboratory personnel utilize the diffractometer to
foster an inclusive climate for underrepresented minority, low-income, and/or
first-generation graduate students. In addition, the laboratory plays an
important role in strengthening the relationship between the University and
Wisconsin citizens through an outreach program for middle and high school
students and by working closely with other programs advocating the importance of
science, research, and education to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
of the X-ray diffractometer is an integral part of teaching as well as research
and research training of undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. The instrument
acquisition award is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels.
The XRD will impact research areas involving the development of catalysts for
aerobic oxidation and the characterization of molecules and proteins that wrap
around themselves, commonly called foldamers. It is also used in studies aimed
at decoding bacterial communication and for carrying out enantioselective
photocatalysis. The diffractometer is used in engineering biocatalysts,
characterizing transition metal compounds, and understanding the structure and
function of bioactive molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.