* 1919570
* MRI: Acquisition of a high-speed volumetric particle image velocimetry system for fluid mechanics research and research training in science, mathematics, and engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Steven Rice, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 384,725.00

Particle image velocimetry is a laser-based diagnostic technique used for non-
intrusive flow velocity measurements. The acquisition of this instrument will
enable interdisciplinary fluid mechanics research in biological, environmental,
and engineering applications. The topics to be investigated span from turbulent
flow over rough surfaces to blood flow within a heart. The findings of this
research will aid in improving environmental protection and restoration efforts,
reducing drag and increasing efficiency of flows across a surface, and
determining the causes of congenital heart disorders. The state-of-the-art
instrumentation will strengthen undergraduate research training, teaching, and
outreach efforts at Union College. The research projects aided by this
instrument will provide engaging research experiences for undergraduate students
who will work alongside faculty. The use of this equipment also will be
incorporated into the curriculum through demonstrations, laboratory experiments,
and projects in science, mathematics, and engineering courses. Through outreach
activities, the project researchers will spark the interest of underrepresented
and economically disadvantaged middle and high school students in the fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurement of all three velocity components at high
speeds throughout a volume will enable innovative research that will 1)
investigate turbulent boundary layer perturbation by roughness elements arranged
in tandem to understand the effects of sheltering and the modification to
coherent structures; 2) characterize the turbulent flow over heterogeneous
canopies resembling aquatic vegetation to highlight the effects of regional
heterogeneities; 3) examine the flow over aerogel-based super-hydrophobic
surfaces, which have potential to reduce drag without the need for complex
fabrication approaches; 4) characterize the blood flow within the embryonic
chick heart during its early formation stages to better understand the valve-
less pumping mechanisms; 5) inspect the structure of convective flows within
bryophyte shoot systems, which are suspected but have yet to be confirmed or
quantified; and 6) determine the mechanisms of transition to turbulence induced
by distributed roughness and describe the interaction of generated disturbances,
which is necessary for designing roughness to mitigate
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.