* 1919402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Modern Financial Markets and Macroeconomic Growth in Historical Context
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Kenneth Pomeranz, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 18,546.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement grant will fund data collection
for a study of the relationship between between modern financial markets and
macroeconomic growth. The goal is to understand the role a vigorous and
competitive financial system can play in facilitating economic development. The
PI will develop a new data set using historical records and will use the data to
test theories about the relationship between financial markets, politics, and
economic development. The results will help us understand the advantages of
economic liberalization for global economic well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
doctoral student will focus his efforts on a specific promising case: Sichuan,
China from 1933 to 1942. During this period, China made efforts to build a
financial sector capable of accumulating capital and funding needed
industrialization. Sichuan was China's most populous province, and the local
government experimented with fiat currency and initiatives to expand the capital
base of the private banking sector. The project will use archival records to
construct data on Sichaun's prewar financial system, including regional interest
rates, exchange rates, prices of local government debt, and balances of
banknotes outstanding, as well as variables measure the political and
infrastructure landscape. The team will use the data to determine the role of
private enterprise in spurring the early stages of economic growth in Sichuan.
The results may therefore be transformative for our understanding of the
importance of economic liberalization around the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.