* 1919658
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Collector ICP-MS with Laser Ablation for Geochemical and Geochronological Applications
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Amy Wolfe, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2023
* USD 711,822.00

This award supports the acquisition of a multi-collector inductively coupled
plasma mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) with a laser ablation (LA) system to be
housed in the Department of Geology and Environmental Earth Science at Miami
University. The (LA)-MC-ICP-MS will complement the existing Triton thermal
ionization mass spectrometer (TIMS), creating a state-of-the-art isotope
geochemistry facility for student training and research initiatives in a wide
range of geoscience and related disciplines. The (LA)-MC-ICP-MS will enable
students to gain significant hands-on experience with modern analytical
techniques that are becoming widely applied across disciplines in science and
medicine, and throughout industry and government employment sectors. The new
instrumentation will also be a key component of two new programs that the PIs
will develop for training and mentoring of underrepresented groups in STEM: a
summer research program for local high school girls, and a First Year Research
Experience for minority students, linked to Miami's Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The (LA)-MC-ICP-MS will
facilitate research initiatives in the areas of high temperature geochemistry
(e.g., crustal evolution, growth of orogenic belts, subduction fluxes, magmatic
processes and timescales) and low-temperature geochemistry (e.g., paleoclimate
reconstruction, ore deposit formation, fate and transport of environmental
contaminants), as well as geoarchaeology, geobiology, geomicrobiology, planetary
geology, and nuclear forensics. The research will involve analysis of a wide
range of radiogenic (Nd, Pb, Hf, Th, U) and non-traditional stable isotope
systems, including several that are in the relatively early stages of
development and application, e.g., solution-based Mo, Ag, 235U/238U "stable"
isotope systems; and in situ U-Pb and U-Th dating (carbonates) and Sr, Mg, and S
isotopes via LA-MC-ICP-MS. As such, acquisition of the proposed instrumentation
will contribute to further establishing these isotope systems and techniques as
useful geochemical tools that can be used community-wide and applied to a wide
range of future scientific investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.