* 1919362
* Monetary Policy, Demographics and the Business Cycle
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* John Leahy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 414,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how aging affects macroeconomic
policy becomes increasingly important as baby-boomers retire in the U.S. and
there are shifts in the age-composition of population in the world. This project
documents how changes in age distribution affects the response of incomes and
employment to monetary policy. Preliminary results indicate that states with
many young residents appear less sensitive to monetary policy, whereas states
with many middle-aged residents appear more sensitive. The project explores the
underlying reasons of such differences and uses these results to construct
models of the economy that more accurately reflect the demographic changes
observed. The research improves the understanding of how monetary policy impacts
the economy in relation to demographic changes. Thus, the project helps the
Federal Reserve and the private sector anticipate changes to the economy brought
about by an aging US population. Similarly, the research has implications for
monetary policies of other economies where there are shifts in age-composition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses the U.S. states as a laboratory to
explore how age distribution influences monetary policy. The proposed research
looks at how state level variables such as income and employment respond to
monetary policy initiatives. These responses are then related to the age
composition of the state, while controlling for other reasons that states may
differ. Preliminary results indicate that incomes of all age groups respond more
to interest rates in a state with more middle-aged residents. These preliminary
results indicate that what matters most to an individual is not their own age,
but the age distribution of the state in which they live. The proposal further
looks at the mechanism that drives this sensitivity. Potential mechanisms
include greater sensitivity of construction and proprietor?s income to the
proportion of the middle aged and differences in the elasticity of demand across
age groups. In the theoretical component of the proposal, empirical results are
used to construct models of the economy that accurately reflect the demographic
influences we observe. Explicitly considering demographics improves the
understanding of monetary policy transmission and has broader implications on
the economy as population ages and baby boomers
retire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.