* 1919810
* MRI: Acquisition of Mass Spectrometer-Coupled Thermogravimetric Analyzer System
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* John Welch, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2022
* USD 118,384.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Jeremy Feldblyum from SUNY at Albany
and colleagues John Welch, Rabi Musah, Evgeny Dikarev and Marina Petrukhina have
acquired a thermal gravimetric analysis system equipped with a mass spectrometer
(TGA-MS). This instrument measures the weight of a sample as it is heated. As
vapors evolve, the samples are analyzed by a mass spectrometer to determine the
mass and chemical composition of the vapors emitted. This data provides
information on the identity of the sample itself and its composition (if a
mixture). The vapors may be decomposition products providing information on the
thermal stability of the sample. TGA-MS is a powerful tool in analyzing
materials. The research may impact many areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry and polymer chemistry. One example involves the synthesis of materials
which can be used to separate high-value organic compounds in hydrocarbon fuels
which are difficult to separate by distillation. In another project, energy
storage materials are being tested. The thermal decomposition of novel polymers
used in photolithography is also being investigated. Instrumentation usage by
local research institutions, including universities and colleges, commercial
companies and government institutions (eg. the NY State Crime Laboratory) is
encouraged. The instrument provides training opportunities for students at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels in research and laboratory instruction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this thermogravimetric analyzer
enhances the research and education of undergraduate and graduate students at
SUNY at Albany and surrounding institutions. Heterometallic molecular precursors
for the preparation of energy-related materials are under investigation. Metal-
organic frameworks (MOFs) are being tested for separating high-value organic
compounds. Storage materials such as for hydrogen capture are being synthesized
and tested. The decomposition mechanism of polymers useful in photolithography
is followed in thermal heating studies. Water desorption studies from RNA
strands/fibers is assessed to understand thermal robustness and relative heats
of adsorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.