* 1919034
* Robust Inference on Counterfactuals
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Timothy Christensen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 232,451.00

Large scale and detailed econometric models are used to evaluate the effects of
economic and social policies before these policies are implemented. This
approach is needed because experimenting with alternative policies is too costly
or not possible. In developing data-ready models for such policy evaluation,
model-builders often make several restrictive assumptions without the guidance
of economic theory. However, policy predictions can be very sensitive to such
assumptions. Researchers and policy makers need methods to help understand to
what extent policy predictions are driven by economically grounded assumptions
or on restrictive assumptions. The proposed research project will develop
econometric tools that allow researchers to judge whether policy predictions are
based on economically grounded theory or on restrictive assumptions. Researchers
studying education, labor, public health, antitrust, trade, development, and
environmental policies, among others, will use the tools developed in this
project. This research project will therefore aid in formulating policies to
improve social outcomes including welfare, the efficient provision of goods and
services, and economic growth and competitiveness. The research will also
contribute at a technical level to STEM education including operations research
and statistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to
develop robust, computationally tractable estimation and inference methods for
counterfactuals in structural econometric models. The methods will be robust in
the sense that they will characterize the set of counterfactuals predicted by
the model when some distributional or functional form assumptions are relaxed
but other features of the model more strongly grounded in economic theory are
maintained. To provide computational tractability, the research will build on
recent advances in convex programming methods developed in the field of
distributionally robust optimization (DRO) in operations research. The research
will advance techniques and inference procedures developed in DRO to accommodate
important distinguishing features of structural econometric models, including
endogeneity, fixed-point constraints, and unobserved heterogeneity. The
inference procedures developed during this research will also contribute broadly
to the literature on partially identified semi-parametric econometric models.
The methods will be specialized to leading models of demand for differentiated
products, workhorse dynamic models of single-agent behavior, and static and
dynamic models of strategic interactions between multiple
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.