* 1919179
* TIMING OF COOLING AND EXHUMATION OF LARAMIDE UPLIFTS INFORMS MODELS OF FLAT-SLAB SUBDUCTION
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Peter DeCelles, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 427,413.00

This project intends to determine the ages of uplift of the major mountain
ranges that together constitute the Rocky Mountains of the western interior
United States. These ranges are referred to in the geological literature as
"Laramide uplifts", after the city and county of Laramie, Wyoming, which is
situated in the region where these uplifts are notably developed. The timing of
uplift of the Laramide ranges is poorly understood, but critical for assessing
the shape and movement direction of tectonic plates in the eastern Pacific basin
and western regions of the North American plate. This work is important to the
public for several reasons: (a) The Rocky Mountains are the definitive landscape
of the mountain west, a landscape that has inspired writers, artists,
entrepreneurs, emigrants, and scientists for more than 200 years; yet, no
consensus exists among geologists to explain the origins of these mountains. (b)
By virtue of its high elevation and north-south orientation, this spectacular
landscape impacts the ecology and climate of the entire U.S. (c) The Laramide
region is of enormous economic importance to the U.S., containing strategically
important groundwater, mineral, and hydrocarbon resources. (d) Although the
Laramide uplifts are no longer "active", results of this project will useful for
understanding seismic hazards in regions on Earth today where similar tectonic
processes are still active (for example, western South America and southern
Alaska). Finally, a group of undergraduate and graduate students will be trained
in the context of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of
this project is to determine the timing of exhumation of Laramide uplifts in
Montana, Wyoming and Utah. This is essential to inform tectonic and geodynamic
models of the Laramide orogeny, which is generally attributed to flat-slab
subduction. Such models rely heavily on spatio-temporal patterns of Laramide
uplift. Flat-slab subduction of oceanic plateaus and aseismic ridges are
important geodynamic phenomena in convergent margins, with respect to regional
plateau uplift, termination of arc magmatism, and active seismicity in the
overriding plate. This project will apply a multi-component dating approach,
including apatite fission track and (U-Th-Sm)/He thermochronology, which, when
combined with thermo-kinematic modeling and the record of sedimentation, will
constrain the cooling and erosion histories of the Laramide region. Regional
patterns in timing and distribution of uplift events will provide constraints
for plate tectonic models of the western U.S. Knowledge gained by this research
will be exportable to other active and ancient flat-slab tectonic systems such
as southern Alaska, Central America and western
Argentina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.