* 1919735
* MRI: Development of a High Resolution Neutron Detector for Decay and Reaction Studies with Exotic Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Robert Grzywacz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 05/31/2024
* USD 910,501.00

The scientific focus of this award is to explain the formation of elements in
the Universe by studying nuclear states that are produced through specific
processes and emit neutrons. That study will be done with a new multi-detector
array, n5D, which will be developed with this award. This new detector will
allow scientists to answer questions related to the rapid neutron capture
process, which is responsible for nearly half the elements heavier than iron,
and to study the properties of very neutron rich isotopes. Measuring neutron
energies precisely and efficiently is one of the most difficult tasks in nuclear
spectroscopy. With the high accuracy and detection efficiency of the new
detector array, scientists will be able to study beta-delayed neutron emission
on exotic nuclei, where knowledge of the beta strength distribution is necessary
to predict nuclear lifetimes for nuclei far from stability. This MRI project
will train future scientists who will conduct the bulk of the testing and
operation of the array. The project will leverage recent developments in
electronics and detector materials to provide a neutron detector for use not
only in fundamental science but also in national security, medical, and
industrial applications, and space exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a new neutron detector array with unique tracking
capabilities. This n5D detector array will serve decay and reaction experiments,
which require neutron detection in the 100 keV to 10 MeV range of energies. In
n5D, neutrons will be detected using the time-of-flight (TOF) technique. The
novelty of the project is the high neutron energy resolution, which will be
achieved by through tracking the interactions of the neutron as it travels
through the detector material. Unlike in the case of gamma ray detection, the
TOF technique does not require registration of the full energy deposited in the
detector; tagging/tracking the interaction points is sufficient. The tracking
will thus overcome the main limitation of a typical TOF neutron detector, where
the detector thickness required to maximize efficiency degrades the neutron
energy resolution. Bright neutron-gamma-discriminating plastic scintillators
will be used. They will enable experiments with otherwise limiting levels of
gamma-ray background and will improve the signal to noise ratio. Scintillation
readouts will be achieved using compact segmented photomultipliers facilitating
the high detector granularity required for tracking, a key advancement in this
field. Digital electronics will be implemented for signal processing providing
the timing and neutron-gamma discrimination as well as the flexibility needed to
implement new scintillators or light readout sensors in the future. An array of
about 40-50 modules will be constructed for decay and reactions experiments. The
University of Tennessee, Knoxville/Tennessee Tech University team will build
upon its expertise in neutron detector development and digital signal
processing. Key elements of the project are optimization of single-detector
module performance and an efficient production cost, such that the array is
easily scalable to work with large systems at major research centers throughout
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.