* 1919335
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Determinants of Domestic, A Randomized Control Trial
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Pascaline Dupas, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 26,000.00

A large proportion of married women suffer physical or sexual violence during
their lives; in some less developed countries, the proportion may be as high as
50%. The drivers of domestic violence and pathways to change it is poorly
understood. Income support programs targeted towards women have failed to
decrease domestic violence and, in some cases, may have led to temporary
increases in victimization. This suggests that interventions that increase
women's income without addressing the underlying causes of domestic violence
might increase violence. Understanding what drives spousal abuse and its complex
relationship with income is essential for designing effective anti-violence
interventions and to avoid backlash against victims; especially for poor women
with limited means to escape violent relationships. This study uses field
experimental methods to assess the relative importance of different motives for
which husbands might use violence against their wives as well as the reasons why
low-income husbands use more violence than high-income husbands. By providing an
understanding of why and how domestic violence occurs, the results of this
research will provide important inputs in designing policies to reduce domestic
violence. The results of the research project could establish the US as the
global leader in reducing domestic violence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project develops and experimentally test a conceptual framework to study the
mechanisms through which spousal disobedience and income might trigger episodes
of domestic violence. As opposed to existing framework, we assume that husbands
receive disutility from the use of violence. This research draws from economics,
psychology, and sociology to show why husbands might use violence despite a
preference aversion. This project creates random variation in the conditions
under which husbands consider the use of violence. The key intellectual merit of
the project is twofold: First, it assesses the relative importance of different
motives for violence---idiosyncratic violence, reactive violence, and reaction
violence. Second, it studies the role of certain triggers of violence such as
consumption concerns, and social image concerns. This will allow researchers to
design effective interventions to reduce domestic violence that directly target
the motives and triggers that are found to be important in this setting. The
results of this research contribute to the methodology of studying domestic
violence as well as provide inputs into policies to reduce domestic violence
both in the U.S. and globally. The results of the research project could
establish the US as the global leader in reducing domestic
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.