* 1919015
* PFI-TT:  Clip-On Smartphone Biosensor for Mobile Health Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Brian Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the Partnership for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a single-step, &lt;30
minute test for HIV viral load measurement with digital resolution and the
capability to measure small amounts. This system is designed to be used by HIV
patients with no laboratory expertise, which is currently not possible. The test
will be conducted by an inexpensive clip-on instrument to test a blood sample;
it uses the rear-facing camera of any modern smartphone to record video of the
chemical reaction and measure special light signals. The test will measure the
dangerous pathogens, including a way to correct for false positives and
negatives; it also provides immediate display of results and shares the data
with a cloud-based database. As HIV sensing in blood represents a challenging
application with a large commercial market, a successful demonstration will pave
the way toward a host of a wide array products and services for mobile sensing
of many potential infections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to
design, build, and rigorously validate a self-testing platform for digital-
resolution quantitation of HIV within a droplet of serum. Currently, no self-
testing approaches are currently able to detect HIV during peak viremia and
transmissibility in acute infection. The proposed approach utilizes an
inexpensive (&lt;$10) clip-on instrument that will enable the back-facing camera
of any modern smartphone to function as a fluorescence microscope that
illuminates and isothermally heats a silicon-based test cartridge that is pre-
loaded with primers for Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) of HIV-
specific nucleic acid sequences. The proposed technology will integrate several
innovative elements to achieve the goal of a sample-to-answer test within 30
minutes, while achieving &lt;1000 copies/ml detection limit by performing: 1.
LAMP reactions within a low-autofluorescence silicon-based microfluidic
cartridge pre-loaded with dried primers, and packaged for refrigeration-free
storage. 2. Spatial LAMP (S-LAMP) analysis of the amplification reaction using
video imaging of the process and automated image analysis to identify/count
fluorescent-emitting LAMP initiation points. 3. Integration of positive and
negative experimental control regions to ensure assay validity. 4. Chemical
lysis of the sample prior to dispensing of LAMP buffer and the test sample into
the paper test medium. 5. A clip-on instrument that makes an optical interface
with any smartphone rear-facing camera.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.