* 1919422
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hybrid Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer with an Ultra-High Pressure Chromatograph
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* James Gloer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,818.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemical
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Elizabeth Stone from the University of Iowa
and colleagues James Gloer, Keri Hornbuckle and David Cwiertny are acquiring a
hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer with electrospray ionization (ESI)
capabilities and equipped with an ultra high pressure chromatograph (UPLC). In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex
samples. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer
where they are ionized and the ions' masses are measured. An instrument with a
liquid chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds before they reach the
mass spectrometer. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
the University and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by
involving diverse groups of students in research and research training using
this modern analytical technique. Some of the programs using the instrument are
the Iowa Sloan Center for Exemplary Mentoring, Summer Research Opportunities
Program, the Iowa Biosciences Academy, and an NSF-supported Sustainable Water
Development Program. Advancement of scientific knowledge in the areas of
environmental chemistry, water treatment, bioremediation, natural products,
medicinal chemistry, and food safety contribute to the achievement of
societally-relevant outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition award
enhances research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the
characterization of molecular atmospheric aerosols and improves drinking water
quality. The mass spectrometer is also used to identify the outcomes of steroids
and other pharmaceuticals in the environment and bioactive products from fungi.
The instrument also serves researchers evaluating toxicity and remediation of
polychlorinated biphenyls as well as those characterizing environmental
contaminants. In addition, the mass spectrometer aids in the discovery of
transformation products and pathways of emerging water contaminants, and
investigations of surface films at active environmental
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.