* 1919143
* New Probes of Strong Interactions in Quantum Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Philip Phillips, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2022
* USD 165,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eliminating inefficiencies in
electrical conduction in the power grid by the use of superconducting wires
could result in the saving of billions of dollars. The AmpaCity project in Essen
Germany is one such example. However, a major obstacle to achieving that goal is
understanding how to design new superconductors that work increasingly close to
room temperature. A surprise in recent years was the discovery of high-
temperature superconductivity in materials that have nothing in common with good
metals. Consequently, understanding how such materials superconduct cannot be
done with the standard building blocks of solid-state physics. This award
supports research and education towards developing theoretical models to
understand such superconductors. The PI will focus on analyzing a new class of
recent experiments that offer unprecedented insight into the fundamental
building blocks of the cuprate superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to training and mentoring graduate students, the PI will continue broad
educational and outreach activities that include giving lectures to local
middle-schools and public lectures to raise public awareness of
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the strange metal has always stood as the
basic obstacle in developing a theory of superconductivity in the cuprates,
experiments designed to reveal the universal excitations that underly this state
of matter have been nonexistent until now. The new experiments, momentum-
resolved electron-energy loss spectroscopy (MEELS), measure the two-particle
susceptibility and hence have all the many-body information needed to construct
the dielectric function and also the single-particle electron self-energy. This
award supports research and education towards extracting such information from
the MEELS data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Special emphasis will be placed on
comparison with optical measurements. Optical conductivity experiments measure
the transverse dielectric response, while MEELS measures the longitudinal
dielectric function. A key unanswered question is whether the two are equal.
Certainly, they are expected to be equal in the limit of zero-momentum transfer,
as any distinction between longitudinal and transverse dielectric functions
disappears in this limit. However, the PI's analysis of the experimental data
shows that this is not the case. The same analysis on other materials such as
tantalum-diselinide, ruthenates, and even iron-pnictide superconductors reveals
complete agreement between zero-momentum limits of the transverse and
longitudinal dielectric functions. As this is the first instance where these two
limits disagree, the cuprates represent an unprecendeted class of materials.
Understanding of this discrepancy is at the heart of this project. The key
question that arises is: Does the discrepancy between these two limits stand at
the heart of strange-metal physics? Specific models will be studied to obtain a
discrepancy between the two limits, and these models will be used to examine if
they simultaneously explain the key characteristic of the strange metal, namely
T-linear resistivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training and mentoring
graduate students, the PI will continue broad educational and outreach
activities that include giving lectures to local middle-schools and public
lectures to raise public awareness of physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.