* 1919135
* PFI-TT:  Smart Gloves for Remote Clinical Assessments and Treatment Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Kunal Mankodiya, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 12/31/2021
* USD 281,977.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enhance the quality of care
provided to patients with movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease,
stroke, arthritis, and hand injuries or other conditions. Parkinson's disease
(PD) alone has a very high prevalence in the US. PD will affect nearly 930,000
people by 2020 and is projected to increase to 1.2 Million by 2030. Through the
incorporation of wearable technology for clinically valid movement assessment,
doctors can utilize telemedicine tools to provide a more optimized care plan to
their patients without increasing the number of regular clinic visits. The
patients will benefit as well through a friendly guided exercise routine that
can be performed at home. The quantified results of the exercises will be given
to the patients in a way that will help them understand the effects of
medications and will provide data to doctors to inform decisions about
medication changes. The proposed technology product aims to improve efficiency
and reduce the cost for medical treatments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to pursue research on developing smart textiles that are
appropriate for clinically-valid medical screening of movement conditions
especially those seen in Parkinson's disease. Smart textile fabrication faces
several roadblocks and technical barriers including the integration of
conductive material in conventional fabric and washability and durability of
smart textiles. In addition, the selection of materials and construction methods
significantly impacts the sensitivity, repeatability, accuracy, and precision of
smart textile sensors. The proposed project aims to address these challenges
through two aims: 1) AIM 1 focuses on design and validation of smart textile
sensors. This activity involves a series of developments and experiments in
collaboration with neurologists, medical personnel, and patients with PD who
will jointly participate in the design of the proposed smart gloves. 2) AIM 2
will be centered around creating a manufacturer-friendly design of the smart
gloves. The aim is to investigate how the complex structure of smart textiles
(due to electrical circuits, conductive threads and layers, and base fabric) can
be made at scale within existing fabrication facilities and processes. This
project builds directly from fundamental research discovery supported by the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.