* 1919490
* Rethinking Mathematics Classroom Observations: Connecting Interactions, Student Outcomes, and Teacher Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Megan Franke, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 09/30/2024
* USD 393,317.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funded by the
EHR Core Research Program, this project addresses the need for the development
of and research about a near real-time observation tool to improve mathematics
classrooms. The observation tool will provide information about the kinds of
student interactions in mathematics classrooms that are known to predict student
outcomes. The level of detail obtained through the tool will be sufficient to
capture different ways in which students participate, as well as produce data
that teachers can use to inform and improve their teaching practices. Research
on the use of this new tool will provide knowledge and build theory on how
teachers' use of the feedback provided by this tool influences their practice,
what student interactions in K-12 mathematics classrooms are occurring, and how
the student interactions may connect to student outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on producing data about the value and
usefulness of the information provided by a near real-time observational tool
that tracks student participation and teacher support of students'
participation. The results will inform the potential next step of promoting
large-scale use of the tool by teachers, principals, school district leaders,
and researchers to inform and improve teacher learning, teaching practices, and
student outcomes. Results from the project will: show how to feasibly produce
near real-time information about classroom interaction; produce a tool that can
support teachers, principals, district leaders, and researchers in efforts to
improve teaching and learning; and provide specific evidence about how such an
observational tool can influence teacher learning and practice. Student
participation with others around mathematical ideas and students' perceived
competence about their abilities are important for both immediate learning
outcomes and long-term participation in mathematics. Although no single
instrument can address all variables that influence learning and teaching, this
tool will move the field forward by focusing on a bounded set of classroom
interaction features that research shows are predictive of student outcomes for
diverse schools and student populations. This project will provide professional
development opportunities to graduate students, pre-service teachers, and in-
service teachers in Southern California and results will be disseminated to
educators and other researchers. The findings have the potential to support
teachers' efforts to provide each student with equitable opportunities to
participate and learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.