* 1919280
* PFI-RP: Commercializing Active and Durable Materials and Electrodes for Fuel Cell and Electrolyzer Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Svitlana Pylypenko, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2023
* USD 793,611.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is in addressing the urgent need for
cost-effective, high-volume fabrication of durable electrodes for two of the
most promising sustainable and clean power generation technologies,
electrolyzers and fuel cells. Current low-volume electrode optimization
processes, aimed at lowering the need for special chemicals (catalysts) and
improving durability, are costly and slow, hindering the commercialization of
these important technologies. If successful, the project will enable scaling up
the production of a novel catalyst and will establish highly needed scientific
understanding of the correlations between catalyst properties, electrode
fabrication processes and performance. Therefore, this project is expected to
provide clear guidance for the design of novel catalysts and electrodes. The
multidisciplinary partnership between academic, industrial and National
Renewable Energy Laboratory experts will work towards moving fuel cell and
electrolyzers to the next level of high-scale production. Overall, the project
is expected to enable the commercialization of clean energy technologies,
benefit the environment and the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to establish: 1) scale-up approaches to fabricate a novel,
internally developed catalyst, with tunable properties and enhanced performance
and durability, and 2) structure-property-process-performance (SPPP)
correlations applicable to a wide range of catalysts/ink/electrode fabrication
methods to enable fast transition to cost-effective scaled-up fabrication of
fuel cell and electrolyzer electrodes, bringing these technologies closer to
commercialization. Despite large investments and growing interest in these
technologies, their commercialization is hindered by high cost and low
durability of currently employed catalysts, and by slow and costly low-volume
components fabrication. To address these challenges, the project will
investigate a number of scalable ink/electrode fabrication approaches using
advanced catalyst/ink/electrode characterization methods, providing a large
parameter matrix for structure-property-process-performance correlations. The
parameter matrix and established correlations will aid future catalyst/ and
electrode design and enable fast transition from the current time-consuming and
costly incremental low-scale process, to a streamlined and advanced scale-up
approach. The anticipated technical results include: 1) delivery of 25g batches
of novel catalyst produced at scale; 2) identification of SPPP correlations; 3)
validation of team findings by industrial partner for effective technology
transfer, and 4) dissemination of recommendations/protocols derived from the
project to the community to promote deployment of future
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.