* 1919906
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryoprobe Equipped Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Studying Macromolecules, Bioactive Isolates, and Dynamic Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Elizabeth Papish, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 532,871.00

This award is jointly funded by the Chemical Research Instrumentation (CRIF)
program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program. Professor Paul Rupar from the
University of Alabama Tuscaloosa and colleagues Elizabeth Papish, Jason Bara,
Marco Bonizzoni and Lukasz Ciesla are acquiring a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer
equipped with a cryoprobe. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometers
measure the interaction of radio waves with a sample's atomic nuclei in the
presence of a strong magnetic field. The information provided by NMR
spectrometers allows researchers to identify unknown substances, determine the
structure of molecules, macromolecules, and biomolecules, and monitor reaction
dynamics in solution. Because of its versatility, ease of use, and non-
destructive nature, NMR spectroscopy supports much of modern chemical-based
research and is critical to the fields of organic chemistry, inorganic
chemistry, biology, chemical engineering, biochemistry and materials science.
The cryogenic probe provides a significant increase in sensitivity relative to
standard NMR probes. The instrument is also used to train undergraduate and
graduate students in the use of this powerful tool. The spectrometer is
available for use by researchers at other institutions including Tuskegee
University and Samford University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. Many research projects are
progress and aided by this spectrometer. One project conducts structural studies
of polymers used in chemical sensors, three-dimensional (3D) printing and in
non-viral gene-transfection. Studies of the reduction of carbon dioxide
catalyzed by transition metals are also being carried out. Work in another
research group focuses on the bioinorganic chemistry of chromium, a potent
mutagen and carcinogen when present as chromate. Routes to the development of
pure cellulose-based plastics using current 3D printing technology are under
study. Carbon dioxide reduction using ruthenium complexes as catalysts is also
being investigated including efforts to eliminate the photosensitizer in the
reduction process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.