* 1919094
* PFI-TT:  Improved microfluidic devices for protein crystallization and x-ray diffraction
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 04/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in the improvement of structure-based
drug design, a valuable pharmaceutical discovery tool, to accelerate discovery,
reduce development costs, and boost the strength of the ultimately selected drug
candidate. A critical step in this process is the accurate understanding of the
three-dimensional structure of the drug target, in the presence or absence of
the potential drug candidate. Currently, a method called X-ray crystallographic
analysis is the most important way to determine structure, but it is expensive
to operate. Two devices will be developed - one, to make small vessels to test
many types of drug chemistries simultaneously, and another for better studies of
the structure. Compared to current technologies, the microfluidic devices will
perform better and be easier to operate, at a reduced
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will lead to commercialization
of two microfluidic devices. The first, intended for the high-throughput
screening of protein crystallization conditions, will be developed with the
following features: (a) ability to screen 400 different conditions per square
centimeter using counter-diffusion, (b) no cross-contamination, (c) consumes
less than 10 nanoliters protein per condition, (d) low cost to manufacture and
operate, and (e) improved performance over existing technologies. The technical
innovation of this device is to use passive capillary valves operating with
minimal external control to sequence fluid flow and create isolated storage
compartments. A second device will be developed to produce crystals optimized
for X-ray diffraction using a novel feedback mechanism to separate protein
crystal nucleation from growth. The device will be manufactured from a low
molecular weight thermoplastic, allowing on-chip serial diffraction from
hundreds of identical crystals thereby avoiding expensive and time consuming
cryoprotection. This will improve screening of crystallization conditions,
optimize the rate of crystallization, reduce the amount of protein and eliminate
laborious crystal processing steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.