* 1919569
* Acquisition of a scanning electron microscope with integrated EDS for enhancement of multi-disciplinary undergraduate research and research training
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Joseph Reczek, Denison University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 398,000.00

Acquisition of a field emission scanning electron microscope at Denison
University Geosciences Department&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Denison University's
Geosciences Department will acquire a field emission scanning electron
microscope (SEM) to measure chemical composition and structure of many
materials. The instrument will enhance faculty research, carried out with
talented undergraduate students at Denison. The instrument will support research
in many areas including analysis of magmatic processes to improve understanding
of volcanic history and development of new electronic materials and electrodes
that could lead to sustainable technologies and efficient energy sources. Access
to leading-edge technology is critical for undergraduate institutions like
Denison's small liberal arts college that is residential in nature and
geographically isolated; it enables training of a competitive workforce and
prepares scientific leaders. The project is led by young, diverse faculty who
will use the SEM for years to come for their research, teaching, and community
engagement. Denison has several programs to support underrepresented minority
groups in the sciences. Experience using a state-of-the-art analytical
instrument is especially important for these students who apply to graduate
school or enter the workforce after their college careers. Denison's rural
location will draw collaborators to this SEM facility from nearby institutions,
including local schools, colleges, and regional campuses, that would not
otherwise have access to such facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award is made to Denison University to support the acquisition of a field
emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), with integrated energy
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and cathodoluminescence (CL) for elemental
analysis and characterization, along with sample preparation equipment. The
state-of-the-art instrument will greatly enhance current research and open new
lines of inquiry for faculty and student research, research training, and
teaching across the science divisions at Denison, including the Departments of
Geosciences, Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Biology. The instrument's
capabilities are customized to support the needs of science faculty externally
and internally funded research: (1) high resolution and high magnification
characterization and imaging of a wide variety of materials; (2) qualitative,
semi-quantitative and quantitative analysis for crystals and other materials,
both natural and synthetic, via EDS and CL; and (3) variable pressure capability
for versatility in imaging and analysis of low- to non-conducting, as well as
wet, samples. Specifically, in Geosciences, the SEM-EDS/ CL will allow for
quantification of the zoning of igneous crystals and composition of glass in
volcanic rocks and tephra, and for the evaluation of grain coatings on soil and
fluvial sediment for gamma spectroscopy and documentation of diagenetic
alteration in fossil bivalve mollusks prior to isotopic analysis. In Chemistry
and Biochemistry, the instrument will support multiple avenues of functional
materials development, including novel laser-writable charge-transfer liquid
crystals, as well as the imaging of nanostructured photoelectrodes and catalysts
for physical characterization and determination of the elemental composition of
mixed-metal dopants by EDS. Finally, in Biology, the instrument will allow for
the examination of surface structures and anatomy of immature and mature flowers
under low vacuum or processed using the critical point
dryer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.