* 1919191
* PFI-TT: Developing a self-powered pipeline sensing and monitoring system
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Na (Luna) Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2023
* USD 370,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes ensuring the safety, security
and efficiency of our nation's energy infrastructure by providing self-powered
pipeline sensing and monitoring systems. This project will produce a novel
approach to provide a reliable power source to enable continuous monitoring of
pressurized steam distribution system in energy plants, with an estimated market
potential of ~ $2.4 Billion. The technology has a high potential for later
commercialization in other energy distribution systems, such as the oil and gas
industry. The project will provide training and mentoring on innovation and
technology translation to undergraduate, graduate students through a multi-
faceted educational plan, including new curriculum development. The educational
contributions of this effort include (1) provide students first-hand knowledge
of how to translate fundamental scientific research into technology and product
development; (2) enhance interdisciplinary education and research programs; (3)
broaden the participation and success of underrepresented groups in innovation
education through the PIs' ongoing collaborations with existing programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is to develop a self-powered sensing
and monitoring system to enable continuous monitoring of pipeline operation for
our nation's energy infrastructures. Most of these critical infrastructures are
located in the areas with difficult access. This presents a significant
challenge when using battery powered sensors or monitoring devices for
continuous monitoring of pipelines. To solve this problem, a novel conformal
thermoelectric generator is proposed in this program to harvest wasted heat in
the pipeline for sensor powering. Three technical innovations will be used in
this project at materials, devices, and system levels. 1) At the materials level
nanostructured oxides will be used to replace conventional telluride-based
materials which are toxic, expensive, and low temperature stability. 2) At the
device level, a continuous production of thermoelectric devices will be used to
reduce the cost of device fabrication and packaging at large-scale. 3) At the
system level, new technology for thermoelectric voltage booster and energy
storage devices will be used for integration of thermoelectric generator with
sensors and monitoring devices. A multi-disciplinary research team will work
with two industry partners on technology development to ensure the solutions are
practical to the challenges that industry specific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.