* 1919028
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Noise, Attention and Performance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Isabelle Salcher, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2022
* USD 34,498.00

Noise pollution is pervasive around the globe and predicted to grow in extent,
frequency and severity (Goines and Hagler 2007). Decades of cognitive science
research has established that noise negatively affects the learning and
attainments of school children (ex. Shield and Dockrell 2003; Evans and Lepore
1993), while recent work in economics has shown that noise also lowers worker
productivity (Dean 2017). However, the exact mechanism through which noise
impairs performance and productivity remains uncertain and unquantified. This
project aims at examining the importance of an often-suggested mechanism, which
is attention. While central to economic behavior, only recent advances enable
costs of attention to be quantified (Caplin et al. 2018). This project will
apply this new measurement method and be the first to quantify the costs of
noise in terms of attention. This project will also assess to what extent
individuals are aware of these cost impacts. The ability to obtain unconfounded
cost estimates of noise, and know whether these costs are correctly perceived,
have important implications for policy makers. Whether the detrimental effects
of noise pollution are correctly perceived determines whether awareness and
educational campaigns, or active noise control strategies should be the policy
maker's priority. Better estimates of the costs of noise are a crucial input for
the valuation of noise abatement strategies such as building of acoustic
barriers, changes in road profiles, traffic restrictions, and urban planning
based on noise maps. In addition, this work will help better assess the location
of schools and design of workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to quantify
the costs of noise, a theoretical framework will be combined together with a lab
experiment. The theoretical framework serves as a precise and objective
measurement device that allows costs of attention to be recovered from choice
data in the same way as costs of production can be recovered in competitive
supply. Building on this framework, noise is modeled as: (i) a change in the
marginal costs of attention, (ii) a direct disutility, and (iii) beliefs about
the productivity impacts of noise. Then, an experiment is designed to estimate
the costs of attention of two common sources of noise pollution in practice:
speech and city noise. After participants work on an incentivized task - both
under quiet and noisy conditions, their beliefs about their performance as well
as their willingness to pay (WTP) for a final round in quiet conditions will be
elicited. Comparing these beliefs and WTP to the participants? estimated costs
will shed light on awareness of noise impacts and adoption of protective
measures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.