* 1919677
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Vincent Lavallo, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 256,256.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor William Harman from the University of
California Riverside and colleague Vincent Lavallo are acquiring a single
crystal diffractometer equipped with a molybdenum source. In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry.
The X-ray laboratory personnel utilize the diffractometer to foster an inclusive
climate for underrepresented minority students. In addition, the laboratory
plays an important role in strengthening the relationship between the University
and local high school and community college students. The X-ray facility also
provides service to neighboring primarily undergraduate institutions serving the
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. The diffractometer is used in the exploration of small
molecule activation with redox-active boranes and in studies of carborane-based
ligands for use in catalysis. It is also useful for investigating high capacity
magnesium batteries having carborane electrolytes and for studying olefin
metathesis catalysis. In addition, it is being utilized for the characterization
of organometallic scandium complexes and metal-ligand
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.