* 1919479
* MRI:  Acquisition of a real time PCR instrument for a core facility supporting diverse research projects
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Andrew Nguyen, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 48,710.00

An award is made to the City University of New York, Queensborough Community
College (QCC), to purchase a real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) system
for the analysis of gene expression and protein-protein interactions. QCC serves
a diverse population of first-generation college students and admits many
students who would otherwise not have access to higher education. The
acquisition of the PCR system will complement a Biotechnology core facility that
includes a flow cytometry machine, a confocal microscope and tissue culture
capability. This facility supports research by faculty members within the
Department of Biological Sciences and Geology, many of whom include students in
their research projects. The instrumentation in the core facility allows faculty
to introduce students who are underrepresented in STEM to leading-edge
experimental methodologies and helps prepare them to enter the STEM workforce.
Furthermore, the newly acquired PCR instrument will be used as an integral part
of the educational training in the Biotechnology program and other program in
Biology at QCC, thus impacting even more students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
variety of diverse projects will be supported by the acquisition of the qPCR
system. These include studies of (a) the molecular regulation of STAT3 in cell-
cell interactions, (b) miRNA regulation of gene expression in C. elegans, (c)
microbial communities in wastewater treatment plants, (d) epigenetic changes
leading to gene silencing, (e) parasite-host cell interactions, (f) the
molecular regulation of cnidarian behaviors, (g) rhomboid proteases in
Streptomyces coelicolor and (h) cell fate in Arabidopsis regeneration. Data
generated using the qPCR instrument will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
journals, at professional scientific conferences and at regional and national
research conferences for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.