* 1919159
* PFI-RP: Building a Modular, Reliable, Scalable, and Secure Internet of Things Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Phuong Nguyen, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2022
* USD 549,718.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Partnership for Innovation-
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to significantly improve the
applicability of conventional blockchains to a wider array of use cases, thereby
benefiting the United States economy and society. The project proposes to
accomplish this objective by building and enhancing an intrusion-tolerant
permissioned blockchain system and focusing this PFI program on a high-value
application: modular, reliable, scalable, and secure Internet of Things (IoT)
infrastructure to improve the United States blockchain ecosystem. In addition,
the team will develop new curriculum on blockchains, covering technical,
ethical, and economic aspects of blockchains. The team will recruit
undergraduate students and underrepresented minorities and reach out to the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County Meyerhoff Scholars program, University
of Maryland. Baltimore County Center for Cybersecurity, and the National Science
Foundation CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service program.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project provides a novel permissioned blockchain-based
IoT infrastructure that is expected to be more secure and reliable than existing
cloud-based solutions and also more modular and scalable in terms of both
servers and IoT devices supported. The intellectual merit of the new
infrastructure includes a new permissioned blockchain protocol, a new IoT
architecture supporting IoT devices at scale, and an easy-to-use mobile app. The
permissioned blockchain protocol provides 1) modular trade-offs for not only the
underlying consensus protocols but also confidentiality and access control, and
2) server scalability by designing new reliable distributed systems and
cryptographic primitives. The new IoT architecture uses permissioned blockchain
as servers and industry edge nodes as immediate brokers to support miscellaneous
IoT devices at large scale. It uses fault-tolerant and cryptographic
technologies to ensure edge nodes function correctly, without introducing
additional points of failure or vulnerabilities. The app supports major IoT
functions (sensors, mobile routers, cameras, IoT switches), provides real-time
alerts, IoT data analysis, and anomaly detection for IoT
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.