* 1919154
* SPX: Toward Network Level Parallel Computing: Security, Efficiency and Scalability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Tongtong Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,062,693.00

The requirement on timely processing and analysis of huge volumes of data
generated by various applications in our daily lives has driven an steady but
urgent need to speed up the computing power. However, due to the physical limits
in transistor scaling and the cross-core interference in multicore systems, the
computer processor design for large-scale parallel computing is facing its
limits. A new network-level parallel computing architecture and innovative
performance optimization algorithms developed in this project can free the
speedup of computing power and completely break the barriers in computing
processor hardware design. The new technologies resulted from this project can
be widely used in many parallel computing related applications for timely
analysis of big data and secure data storage. Moreover, by integrating the
technological advances resulting from this project into the
undergraduate/graduate curricula and outreach activities, this project has
significant impacts on the training of a highly-skilled and diverse workforce
for high-performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to achieve a theoretically-optimal speedup of computing power by leveraging the
computing capability of the edge and cloud computing resources in the computing
network, so as to enable efficient, scalable and secure parallel computing at
the network level. More specifically, (i) this project develops new network-
level parallel computing architectures and innovative performance optimization
algorithms that can achieve a linear speedup of computing power by leveraging
the computing capability of the edge nodes and cloud computing servers in the
network; (ii) this project breaks new ground in developing secure parallel cloud
computing and data storage schemes. The new techniques make it possible to
implement efficient network-level parallel computing schemes without
compromising the security requirements, and hence pave the path for the wide
adoption of network-level parallel computing in future big-data
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.