* 1919417
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) Spectrometer at the University of Vermont
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Rory Waterman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 343,800.00

This award is jointly funded by the Chemical Instrumentation (CRIF) program, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program. Professor Rory Waterman from the
University of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural College (UVT) and colleague
Matthew Liptak are acquiring an X-band electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectrometer. This spectrometer is used in various fields including chemistry,
biology, and physics. The spectrometer allows observation of transitions when
electrons in a magnet field are irradiated with microwaves. The spectrum
obtained gives valuable information about the composition of a sample. This
information provides insight on the environment near the atom and the properties
of the system. For example, the instrument is used to rapidly screen candidate
materials for photovoltaic devices to optimize solar cell efficiency. The
instrument is housed and managed at the University of Vermont. It provides
service to researchers across Vermont as well as a broad swath of New England
and upstate New York. The instrument is used to train undergraduate and graduate
students in research and in lecture and laboratory courses preparing them for
the modern workforce. It also impacts high school students since UVT has
programs in place to foster this early STEM education interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels. The instrument is used in several research projects. The
mechanism of heme oxygenation by iron enzymes is under investigation. Electron-
transfer reaction of transition metal complexes are currently being explored.
The spectrometer is used to study vanadium oxidation catalysts and the mechanism
of spin exchange in organic magnetic semiconductors. The redox behavior of
selenium containing compounds is under investigation. Another research area is
the discovering of new bond-forming catalysis for the main-group
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.