* 1919887
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nano-Infrared Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2020
* USD 467,740.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;The surfaces of materials play a central
role in determining their properties and performance. In applications ranging
from energy storage to medicine to computation, scientists need to understand
the composition and structure of surfaces to explain their behavior and improve
their characteristics. These surfaces include the interfaces found within
batteries, the proteins on the surface of a cell, and the interfaces in new
kinds of plastics. Understanding surfaces and interfaces is a challenge,
however, because the composition and structure of surfaces can vary over tiny
distances. These tiny distances can be just one-billionth of a meter, called a
nanometer, and the structures may contain just one hundred atoms. To overcome
this challenge, the instrument acquired through this Major Research
Instrumentation grant is allowing far deeper insight into surfaces by combining
a tool that measures composition, called infrared spectroscopy, with a tool that
measures nano-sized structures. The resulting instrument, called a nano-infrared
spectrometer, enables scientists to study many complex surfaces in detail. This
new understanding is enabling important advances in numerous areas of science
and technology. In addition, this instrument is providing graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students - including those in underrepresented
groups - with access to and training on the instrument. The instrument is housed
in a shared instrument facility in the Chapel Hill Analytical Nanofabrication
Laboratory (CHANL) at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where the
instrument provides hands-on opportunities for training, education, and
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Traditional
infrared (IR) spectroscopy is a powerful tool that provides deep insight into
the composition of materials, but its poor spatial resolution has limited its
applications in nanoscience and nanotechnology. To overcome this challenge, the
instrument acquired combines IR microscopy with an atomic force microscope (AFM)
to measure IR spectra with a spatial resolution of approximately 10 nm. This new
tool allows the composition of heterogeneous surfaces to be studied, such as the
distribution of proteins on the surface of cells or the interfaces in organic
photovoltaics. A distinctive feature of this nano-IR system is the use of
multiple quantum cascade lasers as a light source. Collectively, these lasers
operate from 800 1/cm to 3600 1/cm, which is an unusually broad range. This
range facilitates measurements of many common functional groups, from C-F at 800
1/cm to O-H and N-H at 3600 1/cm. This new capability is allowing complex
surfaces to be measured, such as the electrode/electrolyte interface in
batteries, where the composition varies on the 10-nm length scale. The ability
to discern spatial variations in the chemical functionality of battery
electrodes will allow fundamental insight into, for example, mechanisms of
degradation. The uses of the nano-IR spectrometer extend beyond measuring
functional groups. For example, the instrument is enabling studies on plasmonic
nanostructures, where the AFM tip is used to map the spatial distribution of the
plasmonic component. These diverse capabilities allow nano-IR to have
applications that extend from nanophotonics to electrochemistry to cellular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.