* 1919504
* Biased Beliefs and Search in Education Markets
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Christopher Neilson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 558,589.00

Choosing the right school for one?s child may determine the child?s future
educational outcomes, yet parents do not always choose the best schools because
of inadequate information. This research will use experimental methods to study
the reasons parents make school choices with very little information about
options available to them. The research will study the relative importance of
two mechanisms through which this occurs: (i) difficulty and cost of acquiring
information about school characteristics, and/or (ii) families have incorrect
beliefs about the distribution of schools, believing that all schools are the
same. Each of these mechanisms has a different policy implication. The research
will develop a theoretical model based on parent?s beliefs about school quality
and how these beliefs change as they receive new information. The research will
then test this theory by providing different amounts of information to parents
to see how this affects their school choice decisions. Comparing outcomes for
parents who receive information to those of parents who do not receive
information allows the researchers to determine the effects of information and
its costs on parental school choice. The results of this study will provide a
better understanding of why parents do not always choose the best schools as
well as provide inputs into policies to improve parental school choice. The
results will also help improve school and education policies, increase human
capital formation, and ultimately economic growth. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
proposed research will examine why parents may not choose the best schools for
their children by investigating the process of information acquisition to make
school choices. The researchers will develop a structural model of sequential
search which allows for biased beliefs about school characteristics, search
costs, and the benefits of search. The researchers will test this model using
data collected from a randomized control trial (RCT). The experimental results
will then be used to estimate the structural model on parental educational
choice using merged data from the experiment and administrative data on school
characteristics, family characteristics, cost of information acquisition, and
school outcomes. The results of this research will provide important inputs into
parental education decisions, improve educational outcomes and ultimately
increase the stock of human capital and economic growth in the US. The results
will also establish the US as a global leader in research on parental school
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.