* 1919845
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Sensitivity Low-Energy Ion Scattering (HS-LEIS) Spectrometer with Multiple Reactive Environment Transfer for Interrogating Surfaces and Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Tanja Cuk, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2022
* USD 880,680.00

Materials interact with their environment through their surfaces. Knowledge
about the surface properties of materials is crucial to designing the next
generation of materials with targeted characteristics spanning chemical,
optical, electronic, thermal, mechanical, biological, and other applications.
Recent developments in ion scattering spectroscopy provide unprecedented
resolution and sensitivity for the top atomic layer of materials, which most
critically affects behaviors such as catalytic reactivity, coating permeability,
or charge transport in photovoltaics. This project involves the acquisition of a
high-sensitivity low-energy ion scattering spectrometer, which will be a vital
resource for the greater Rocky Mountain Region and its many researchers. The
instrument will stimulate the establishment of new collaborations in studying
catalysis, atomic layer deposition and coatings, photovoltaics, and solid state
structure and interfaces, among other areas. The project researchers will create
a new annual, web-based surface science symposium to connect the geographically
diffuse researchers of the region. As a publicly available resource, the
instrument will advance the scientific missions of local academic, government,
and industrial institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion scattering spectroscopy
can achieve true atomic layer surface sensitivity by measuring momentum transfer
during the recoil of low energy, non-destructive ions off of the surface atoms
of a sample. This methodology stands out amongst other techniques such as X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, which probe the near-surface region of materials to
a depth of several nanometers. Recent hardware advances, mainly in ion optics,
have improved the detection sensitivity of ion scattering spectroscopy by three
orders of magnitude over older conventional analyzers. This "high sensitivity"
ion scattering spectroscopy is still sparingly accessible; the proposed
instrument will be only the second comparable instrument in North America. It
also will be the only one to have capabilities to transfer samples from liquid
reaction environments, opening new frontiers in understanding surfaces exposed
to solvents, such as in electrochemical systems. The instrument will be used to
study a wide array of critical surface properties in catalysis, atomic layer
deposition and coatings, photovoltaics, and solid-state
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.