* 1919825
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tomographic Particle Image Velocimetry System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Douglas Bohl, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 288,441.00

With the Major Research Instrumentation award, Clarkson University will acquire
a tomographic particle image velocimetry system. Acquisition of the instrument
will facilitate advancements in scientific research across a diverse range of
topics, such as human voice production, modeling and prediction of sediment and
debris transport in hydrology and the impact on biodiversity and ecology, and
novel approaches for carbon sequestration. Ensuring broad and equitable access
to the system across the entire campus of Clarkson University will place
Clarkson at the forefront of fluid dynamics research capabilities and encourage
and promote novel cross-disciplinary research endeavors. Availability of this
instrument will afford educational opportunities at both the undergraduate and
graduate levels through classroom instruction on the experimental technique, as
well as hands-on laboratory training on the practical use of the system.
Clarkson University serves a significant number of students that are
underrepresented in STEM fields and that come from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds. Exposure to, and utilization of, this state-of-the-art measurement
system will inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary advantage of a tomographic particle image
velocimetry system is the ability to simultaneously resolve both the velocity
vector and the velocity gradient tensor over all three coordinate directions
within a volume. This capability will significantly advance research efforts at
Clarkson University in the following specific areas: (1) aero-acoustic sound
source identification and fluid-structure interactions in voiced speech
production to identify how pathological behaviors impact vocal function, (2)
quantification of flow morphologies in rivers arising from ice and debris
obstructions with application to mitigating damage arising from flooding events,
(3) enhancing ecological function in urban streams through quantification of the
physical, biological, and ecologically-relevant sediment transport processes,
(4) control of dynamic stall on airfoils to enhance aircraft performance, (5)
quantification of multiphase flows through geological fractures to optimize
carbon sequestration, (6) drag minimization of juncture flows with application
to increasing fuel efficiency in large vehicle transport, and (7) development of
a novel technique for estimating pressure fields from experimental velocity
fields. It is anticipated that implementing a strategy whereby a percentage of
the instrument availability is dedicated to new users, at no cost, will catalyze
additional new and exciting cross-disciplinary research efforts across
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.