* 1919830
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-throughput Flow Cytometry for Health Science Research and Training
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Kaiming Ye, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 346,502.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a high
performance, high-throughput, and multicolor fluorescence cell analyzer at
Binghamton University. The acquisition of this instrument will help Binghamton
University investigators to perform research in developing new technologies for
regenerative medicine, drug delivery, cancer early diagnosis, 3D bioprinting,
muscular dystrophy associated multicellular lesions, cancer vaccine formulations
for cancer immunotherapy, and high-throughput screening of anti-cancer agents.
These studies will advance fields such as tissue engineering, pharmacology,
regenerative medicine, cell biology, drug discovery, and protein sciences. This
added research infrastructure will spur more collaborations in educational
programs and will enhance a number of biological and health science courses. New
courses and workshops will be developed to provide new education and training
opportunities to both graduate and undergraduate students. Annual campus-wide
open-house events will be held to reach out to K-12 students and local
communities, especially to those from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multicolor fluorescence cell analyzer will be
configured with five lasers covering wavelengths from UV to infrared for
detecting 23 different colors simultaneously. Its high-throughput configuration
will allow the automated completion of 96-well plate analysis within 15 minutes
and with less than 0.5% sample carryover from one well to the next. The addition
of these new capabilities will empower Binghamton University's investigators to
pursue new research directions and to expand their research and education
programs. Furthermore, the acquisition of the cell analyzer will foster
Binghamton University's collaboration with hospitals and industries to
accelerate the translation of health science discoveries into commercial
products. The studies conducted through this project will offer new insights
into fundamental understanding of biological systems, leading to the development
of new technologies for improving human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.