* 1919904
* MRI:  Acquisition of a carbon dioxide isotope analyzer for monitoring real-time carbon fluxes in extreme environments and training the next generation of environmental scientists
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Lixin Jin, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 131,324.00

An award is made to the University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) to acquire an
Ultraportable High Precision CO2 Isotopic Analyzer. This specialized instrument
is used to track the movement of carbon through air, soil, water, and plants
based on the molecular fingerprints (isotope signatures) of CO2 molecules. This
type of capability is essential for managing carbon in the face of rising
atmospheric CO2. This instrument will be used to train the next generation of
carbon cycling experts at UTEP, including both graduate and undergraduate
students from the U.S.-Mexico borderland. Graduate students, in particular, will
benefit from this training, as use of the instrument in their research will
allow them to develop new knowledge about how carbon moves through and is stored
in different ecosystems. The instrument will also be used for demonstrations at
public events as well as in laboratory classes at UTEP, such as Plant Ecology,
Soil Ecology, and a new course focused on carbon cycling. Building on existing
isotopic analysis capabilities at UTEP, this instrument will enhance the
partnership between biological and geological research teams working to solve
environmental problems, including carbon management in farming and ranching
contexts in the Southwest and at Arctic tundra sites. This award is supported by
both the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences and the Division of Earth Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will support a variety of
projects in the UTEP Biological Sciences and Geological Sciences departments
that focus on understanding carbon cycling in extreme environments including
deserts and Arctic tundra. Extreme environments present enticing mysteries in
the study of carbon cycling, and though increasingly recognized as major players
in the global carbon cycle, are understudied. This instrument, which is able to
identify carbon sources within ecosystems, will help UTEP scientists investigate
the underlying mechanisms that drive local and global carbon cycles. In the
desert, the instrument will help determine how plant leaves, plant roots, soil
microbes, and soil carbonates drive the overall carbon balance in natural,
managed, and agricultural systems. In the Arctic, the instrument will be used to
investigate the extent to which changes in ecosystem respiration can be
attributed to higher plant activity or increased soil decomposition. It will
also be used to investigate carbon cycling at the aquatic-terrestrial interface,
which will further understanding of how unprecedented Arctic warming could lead
to rapid changes in carbon cycling. Through these projects, the instrument
enhances UTEP's field research portfolio and creates opportunities for discovery
in the areas of geochemistry, plant-soil interactions, carbon cycling, and
global change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.