* 1919740
* MRI: Acquisition of a Vibration Measurement System for Enhancement of Research and Education at Saint Louis University
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Kasey Fowler-Finn, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2021
* USD 274,850.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art vibration measurement system to enable fundamental research and
education in engineering and biology. The instrumentation will enable
researchers to develop a fundamental understanding of how vibrations propagate
in complex environments, leading to enhanced man-machine interfaces, more
efficient renewable energy sources and new ultrasound-based therapeutic
strategies. The instrumentation will catalyze interdisciplinary research
collaborations among thirty faculty, staff and students and with industrial
partners. The instrumentation will be integrated into coursework and labs and
will enhance outreach activities for K-12 students and underrepresented
minorities. These investigations will support the development of models for
vibration propagation through complex systems and the development of
technologies that use vibrations in novel ways. The projects will acquire high-
resolution, non-contact, full-field data on structures that span size, scale,
and material properties: from microscopic to larger amplitude, from short to
long range, from low to high frequencies, and through varying mediums. These
data will enable researchers to develop better models to understand (1)
ultrasonic vibrations as it relates to surface haptic technologies; (2)
vibrational communication in insects and arachnids; (3) insights into physical
interactions between ultrasound and porous structures for bone healing; and (4)
new designs for nature-inspired wind turbine blades.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.