* 1919475
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Functional myology of the primate head and neck with implications for hominin evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Faye McGechie, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 8,576.00

Humans have unique upright body posture and related anatomy, but paleontologists
are not certain when these features first appeared in the hominin lineage. The
aim of this doctoral research project is to functionally describe the anatomy of
the primate neck to understand how differences in the neck are related to head
posture, body posture, and locomotion in primates. The project will provide data
that may be used for inferring when a human-like neck first appeared and how
this anatomical change was associated with environmental, behavioral and
biological factors. This study will employ a combination of 3D anatomical
methods including CT scanning, digital muscle fascicle tracking, and
biomechanical modeling, which will serve as training tools for future
researchers and health care professionals. The 3D models generated in this study
will be used in K-12 science education and outreach events for discussing human
anatomy and primate conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
study is to both characterize and quantify neck muscle anatomy in primates with
different habitual body postures and locomotor behaviors. Using a biomechanical
framework, the project will compare functional differences in neck musculature
that are key for behaviors such as holding up the head and movement of the arms
during suspension. Novel techniques including contrast-enhanced computed
tomography, muscle fascicle tracking software, and 3D lever mechanics will be
used to develop biomechanical models of how variation in muscle size, shape, and
distribution is related to postural and locomotor behavior across primates.
These biomechanical models will be applied to fossil hominins (Australopithecus
sediba and Homo neanderthalensis) to interpret their neck anatomy and posture to
more accurately understand and reconstruct their
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.