* 1919483
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Benefit Disclosure in Financial Choices Online and Field Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Mark Dean, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2020
* USD 38,000.00

Innovations in consumer finance offering consumers choices in financial products
have not increased consumers' ability to take advantage of these choices.
Surveys show low financial literacy rates among US adults, resulting in
financial mistakes that hurt consumers' financial well-being. Financial
education to improve financial literacy have failed because of the false
assumption that consumers are aware of the benefits of learning to make
financial choices. This research project will use experimental methods to study
how information on the benefits of financial education affects consumers'
financial decision making. Specifically, it addresses three questions: (i) Are
consumers aware of the benefits of learning? (ii) how does awareness (or lack
thereof) affect financial decisions?, and (iii) How can policy-makers complement
consumers' awareness using benefit disclosure with financial education to
improve financial well-being? The results of this research will provide inputs
into financial decision making, which will lead to efficient financial decision
making, increased savings and investment, hence economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposal will investigate how benefit
disclosure affect consumers' financial decision making. The project first
proposes a simple theoretical framework incorporating the cost of incentive
perception to complement the standard costly-thinking approach. The project then
tests the predictions from this framework in two experiments. The first
experiment tests the precise mechanisms using incentivized choices in
hypothetical controlled scenarios. This experiment manipulates three aspects of
the decision environment independently: incentive levels, information about
incentives, and education. While the first two variations are aimed directly at
understanding the cost of incentive perception, the education treatment both
links this project to existing research and more importantly, allows a test of
the potential complementarity of the two information interventions. The second
experiment focuses on information about incentives and education in a randomized
control trial conducted. These two variations allow an investigation into the
applicability of benefit disclosure and education, which are policies derived
from the framework, in affecting naturalistic choices. This results of this
research will improve financial decision making, increase savings and investment
and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.