* 1919334
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU Computing Cluster for UMass institute of Applied Life Sciences
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Matthew Moore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 415,000.00

This effort, acquiring a Graphic Processing Unit (GPU)-enabled High-Performance
Computing (HPC) cluster, enables computation intensive activities with the aim
to leverage fundamental discoveries to enhance translational impacts. The
Institute for Advanced Life Science (IALS) deals with big datasets where
computation plays an integral role. The current cluster provided by the
Massachusetts Green High Performance Computing Center (MGHPCC) is inadequate to
meet current demands to support activities in many areas including atomistic and
coarse-grained simulations, machine learning, and statistical analysis for next-
generation bioinformatics and data science. Providing long-term stability for
operation and management, the GPU cluster will serve 250 IALS-affiliated
research labs across 27 departments and 7 colleges. The GPU facility offers high
speed single and double precision operations as well as extreme parallelism, to
enhance current activities that contribute to the open science
movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This infrastructure contributes to efforts to
integrate regional education, outreach, diversity, and economic activities. The
GPU facilities will be made available to researchers through Internet2 links and
regional computing partnerships at MGHPCC. The hybrid GPU/CPU design, mixed
precision speed, and machine learning-optimized architecture adds resources to
continue development and distribution of powerful molecular modeling, ab initio
dynamics and computational and statistical tools in open source packages,
enabling rapid progress on problems of great societal import. Utilizing the
infrastructure will most likely lead to new developments and discoveries
including novel GPU-enabled modeling and simulation technologies that may
elucidate molecular mechanism of drug delivery, computational design catalysts
for renewable energy and chemical synthesis, advanced computational analysis
tools for next generation informatics and big data, and improved understanding
of risk and resistance to breast cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.