* 1919663
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Socio-genomic Evolution of Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Jason Kamilar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2021
* USD 20,499.00

In this doctoral dissertation project, the investigator will use whole genome
sequencing to examine how genetic networks encompassing hundreds of genes
involved in regulating social behavior have evolved across sifakas, a
behaviorally and ecologically diverse group of lemurs. This research will
provide new insights about the genomic contributions to social behavioral
evolution, and advance knowledge about the complex interplay of genetics,
ecology, and the social environment in shaping primate behavior. The project may
inform public health research, as some genetic pathways investigated in this
project have also been implicated in the development and expression of various
psychiatric illnesses. The project will also support primate conservation
efforts, research and training opportunities, and research infrastructure at the
study locations. The investigator will make all of their data publicly
available, thereby providing additional research opportunities beyond the scope
of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many previous studies into the influences
of genetics on social behavior have focused on examining single or few candidate
genes and often only protein-coding portions of those genes. Here the
researchers will take a whole genome sequencing approach to holistically examine
the evolution of genomic regions involved in the development and expression of
social behavior (i.e. "sociogenomic" regions) in sifakas. The researchers will
generate a whole genome sequence for each of the eight sifaka species without a
current reference genome. They will also sequence a woolly lemur individual to
be able to identify genetic sequences that are unique to sifakas. Subsequently,
they will subset the whole genome sequences to sociogenomic regions and examine
their evolution. The researchers will specifically examine: (1) Whether
sociogenomic regions have been significantly conserved across sifakas,
indicative of evolutionary constraint (2) Evidence of selection acting on
protein-coding portions of sociogenomic regions relative to differences in
sifaka social and ecological environments and (3) The presence of accelerated
evolution occurring in regions potentially involved in regulating the expression
of sociogenomic genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.