* 1919685
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Support Undergraduate Research at High Point University
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Meghan Blackledge, High Point University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 299,500.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Pamela Lundin from High Point University and
colleagues Andrew Wommack, Melissa Srougi and Meghan Blackledge are acquiring a
400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectrometer that replaced an older
low-field spectrometer. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful
tools available to chemists to determine of the structure of molecules. NMR
spectroscopy is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The NMR studies improve understanding of synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research performed by
undergraduate and graduate students and several early career faculty members at
this growing institution. While using the instrument, students gain essential
analytical skills that allow them to become more competitive candidates for
industrial careers and graduate school programs. In addition, the NMR
spectrometer is incorporated into the evolving portfolio of instrumentation
utilized by this institution's Mobile Community Laboratory. NMR is used to
illustrate the concepts of structural chemistry and kinetics to local middle and
high school students and to expand participation in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the characterization of polymerization products such as those
of poly(3-hexylthiophene) and poly(phenylene ethynylenes) and the use of thiol-
ene coupling reactions to generate redox-inert disulfide bioisosteres. The
instrumentation also serves researchers elucidating the mechanism of
antidepresant-dibenzazepine inhibition of protein serine/threonine (Stk1)
kinase, and those designing, synthesizing and characterizing quinone structures.
These research projects benefit the National health and welfare as well as
education and diversity efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.