* 1919228
* PFI-TT: Leakage detection in water distribution systems using routine pressure measurements
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* E. Downey Brill, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,958.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in enabling a new and cost-effective
solution to leakage detection in water networks. Leakage in water pipelines is a
major problem for many water utilities as it leads to significant economic
losses and cause service disruptions threatening public safety. Most utilities
currently use methods that can be expensive, time consuming, and require trained
personnel. This project will perform proof-of-concept studies with two partner
utilities to evaluate the commercialization potential of fast leakage detection
software using routine pressure measurements. If successful, this will transform
the leakage detection industry by providing an operational tool for utilities
that can detect leaks using pressure information collected as part of their day-
to-day operations. If leaks can be identified early, utilities can fix them as
part of planned maintenance operations rather than waiting for them to become
major catastrophic water main breaks. This will not only result in significant
cost and water savings but also reduce associated risks to public health and
safety from major water main breaks. The project will train emerging
professionals in entrepreneurial leadership through focused training with close
interaction and mentoring from commercialization experts and business
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will evaluate the
potential of commercializing fast leak detection methods previously developed by
the project team by integrating these methods into an IoT (Internet of Things)
platform and performing proof-of-concept studies with partner utilities. Most
utilities currently employ intrusive methods based on acoustic or infrared
signals. The leakage detection methods have been to be two to three orders of
magnitude faster and more accurate than existing simulation-optimization methods
for leakage detection using pressure. The major goals of this project are the
following: (a) test and validate the leak detection approaches for real networks
by conducting a series of proof-of-concept studies using artificially introduced
leaks with two utilities, (b) working with an industrial partner, develop an IoT
platform to seamlessly acquire data from multiple sources and facilitate
execution of hydraulic model-based leak detection analytics in real time, (c)
develop plans for commercialization of the IoT platform and the associated leak
detection analytics, and (d) participate in entrepreneurial leadership and
commercialization training. This project is expected to lead to new findings
regarding the commercial adoption of leakage detection technologies that use
hydraulic models and routine pressure measurements enabled through IoT
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.