* 1919061
* MRI: Acquisition of an MC-ICP-MS for Earth, Environmental and Planetary Research at the University of Nevada Las Vegas
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Matthew Lachniet, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 675,292.00

Over the past several decades, isotope geochemistry has proven to be a critical
tool for exploring the geologic history of the Earth, development of the solar
system, past climates, and human interaction with the natural environment. The
Multicollector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) acquired
through this grant will provide high-precision isotope measurements of multiple
elements that may be found in minute quantities. It will support on-going
research in the broad field of Earth, environmental and planetary science.
Projects are currently funded by NSF and NASA. The MC-ICP-MS will allow UNLV
faculty and students, as well as their collaborators in Nevada and throughout
the United States, to explore new research frontiers and foster their success in
current and future projects. The new instrument will be available to the entire
southern Nevada community, particularly colleges and K-12 schools, who would
otherwise not have access to such a state-of-the-art analytical facility. The
instrument will also be used as a teaching facility to educate and train
graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art analytical techniques.
This will help to increase the participation of women and underrepresented
students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past several decades,
isotope geochemistry has proven to be a critical tool for exploring the geologic
history of the Earth, development of the solar system, past climates, and human
interaction with the natural environment. The cutting-edge of these studies
requires accurate and precise measurement of isotope ratios for Sr, Nd, Hf and
Pb as radiogenic isotope tracers, and Mg, Ca, Ti, Fe, Zn and U as stable isotope
tracers. The Multicollector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-
ICP-MS) acquired through this grant will serve as the centerpiece for a
laboratory capable of measuring both stable and radiogenic isotopes at extremely
high precision. Fields of study include, but are not limited to, igneous and
metamorphic petrology, high and low temperature geochemistry, economic geology,
tectonics, high pressure mineralogy, (geo)archaeology, paleoenvironmental
changes across critical transitions, climate change, sedimentary geology, and
planetary science. It will serve both internal and external users, including the
faculty and students at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) and within
the Nevada System of Higher Education (NSHE), as well as their collaborators
from Robeson Community College, the University of North Carolina at Pembroke,
Appalachian State University, University of California, Riverside, and
California State University Fresno. The new instrument will be available to the
entire southern Nevada community, particularly colleges and K-12 schools, who
would otherwise not have access to such a state-of-the-art analytical facility.
The instrument will also be used as a teaching facility to educate and train
graduate and undergraduate students in state-of-the-art analytical techniques
and their applications to Earth, environmental and planetary sciences. This will
help to increase the participation of women and underrepresented students in
STEM fields. UNLV is among the most diverse campuses in the US and is designated
as an Asian-American, Native-American, Pacific Islander, and Hispanic Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.