* 1919563
* MRI: Acquisition of a Benchtop Analytical Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Karen Pearson, Fashion Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2022
* USD 186,635.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the Fashion Institute of
Technology [FIT] with the purchase of a tabletop analytical Scanning Electron
Microscope [SEM] to foster on-campus research and improve undergraduate STEAM
[Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, Mathematics] education. The use of SEM
helps scientists overcome inherent limitation of optical microscopy. The
electron beam in a SEM interacts with the sample and generates signals that are
used to produce images and provide chemical identifications. This instrument
supports in-house qualitative and quantitative characterization of various
materials and enhances greatly the research and curatorial facility at FIT. This
instrument also fosters internal collaborations, spanning from biomaterials and
textile engineering to artistic endeavors. Design and production methods are
becoming more technologically sophisticated. Creative industries therefore
demand that design professionals possess the scientific literacy and
interdisciplinary aptitude necessary to understand new materials and the
underlying science, such as polymers, biomaterials and nanomaterials.
Integrating sustainability into product design, development and manufacturing
are other challenges for which FIT trains students. As a community college
specializing in art and design, FIT is reaching across disciplines to better
prepare students mostly women for the science aspects of their careers.
Integrating the instrument in courses will impact many of the projects that FIT
students undertake to fulfill their hands-on curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope, SEM, at
the Fashion Institute of Technology (FIT) enables interactive, cross-
disciplinary research, and curatorial and industrial collaborations that focus
on materials characterization. The SEM will also enable the study of electron-
beam interactions, to explore nanocoatings on items. In addition to promoting
faculty research, the SEM will enhance the learning experience of FIT students
related to the development and use of materials, and support and expand
interdisciplinary/problem-based STEAM curricula and programs within the Science
and Math department. The SEM will be integrated into current courses and used to
develop new curricula. Students and faculty will have opportunities to work in
well-equipped science laboratories that support materials research and
development with advanced materials characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.