* 1919000
* MRI: Acquisition of a Quadrupole ICP-MS for Multidisciplinary Research, Research Training, and Education at Colgate University
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Karen Harpp, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 297,363.00

This award provides funding to Colgate University Geology Department for a new
geochemical analysis instrument. The new instrument, called an Inductively
Coupled Mass Spectrometer or ICP-MS, measures chemical elements in various
materials. The facility will support research and research training in the
physical and social sciences at Colgate University, as well as at numerous
research programs at predominantly undergraduate colleges in the upstate New
York region and beyond. Projects include studies of the composition of Earth's
interior, formation of volcanic island chains, ice movement in the Antarctic,
the formation of the Adirondack Mountains, volcanic lakes, airborne
contaminants, Roman archaeological sites, the role of climate change in early
human evolution, roadside spring water quality and surface runoff in the Finger
Lakes Region, and identification of Paleolithic art pigments. The new instrument
extends the two-decade history of the ICP-MS facility at Colgate University.
More than 10 faculty and 50-80 student investigators will use the instrument
during the grant period. Users will share their research with the public and the
scientific community, testament to the wide reach of this interdisciplinary
analytical facility. The ICP-MS will also be a cornerstone facility for courses
at Colgate and nearby institutions, providing hands-on experience with modern
instrumentation for many undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new quadrupole
Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) in the Colgate University
Geology Department will support research and research training in the physical
and social sciences across our institution, as well as in numerous research
programs at predominantly undergraduate colleges in the upstate New York region
and beyond. Projects include investigations into mantle compositions and ocean
island geodynamics, magmatic evolution, provenance of Antarctic phonolites and
their implications for ice sheet movement, petrochronology of Adirondack rocks,
banded iron formation analog processes, volcanic lakes and hydrothermal systems,
silt emplacement in the Dry Valleys of Antarctica, formation of glaciovolcanic
ridges, characterization of airborne particulates, tephrochronology in cores
from the Temple of Athena at Paestum, roof tile terracotta provenance from
Italian archaeological sites, paleoclimate variations and implications for early
hominid evolution, multi-year studies of roadside spring water quality and
surface runoff in the Finger Lakes Region, and geochemistry of Paleolithic art
pigments. Users of the instrument will disseminate their research to the
scientific community through publications, conference presentations, and public
outreach, collaborate with scientists at major research institutions, and
receive national funding for their projects, testament to the wide reach of this
interdisciplinary analytical facility. The ICP-MS will also be a cornerstone
facility for courses at Colgate and nearby institutions, providing hands-on
experience with modern instrumentation for many
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.