* 1919896
* MRI: Acquisition of Plasma Enhanced Atomic Layer Deposition (PEALD) for Extremely Conformal Deposition of Metal and Nitride Films on 3D-Nanostructure Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jiyoung Kim, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 274,995.00

This award provides funding to acquire an atomic layer deposition system at the
University of Texas in Dallas to enable fundamental research in three-
dimensional (3D) nanostructure devices. The acquisition of the instrument will
foster a wide range of research activities spanning nanoelectronics, energy
storage, photonics and biomedical devices. The proposed tool will advance the
research capabilities by providing conformal metal and nitride deposition on
complex 3D and temperature sensitive substrates. Metals and nitrides are the
building blocks of many device architectures, and these materials serve to
enable robust performance and integrity in real world applications. The
instrument facilitates highly conformal deposition on high-aspect ratio
structures, that are ubiquitous with novel device structures and could be
tailored to meet the specifications dictated by end usage. This system will be
instrumental in shaping and training graduate and undergraduate students,
researchers, post-docs, and scientists invested in nano-device research,
encompassing a substantial number of underrepresented minority and women in
STEM. A fringe benefit would be the availability of properly trained task force
for employment opportunities in the field of semiconductor technology and device
processing in the rapidly growing Dallas-DFW metroplex area and the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plasma enhanced atomic layer deposition (PE-ALD)
system utilizes a remote plasma to generate high energy radicals while
minimizing plasma damage on sensitive substrates and enabling nitride and metal
deposition at low temperatures. The coating ability is enhanced by increasing
the pressure and exposure time in the reaction chamber using a unique diffusion
enhancer. This system provides unprecedented capability for uniform deposition
on highly porous substrates with aspect ratio up to 1:10,000. It is also useful
in designing next-generation 3D structured nano-devices. For example, advanced
3D stacked semiconductor devices, ultra-high density energy storage devices,
gain-assisted hyperbolic metamaterials for super-resolution imaging, and shape-
morphing 3D elastomer bio/med-devices, etc. require conformal metal and
dielectric coating, that can be deposited by PE-ALD. This new PE-ALD system will
also support the research projects in numerous flourishing and established
electronic/medical device companies nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.