* 1919557
* MRI: Acquisition of a Spatial Light Modulator System for Research and Education in Optical Materials, Bioscience, and Human-Computer Interaction
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Anh-Tuan Nguyen, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2022
* USD 245,599.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
supports acquisition of a spatial light modulator system for research and
training for undergraduate students and faculty in the interdisciplinary fields
of optical materials, bioscience, and human-computer interaction. A spatial
light modulator is a digital optical projector that allows the user to create a
light wave on a pixel-by-pixel basis. Such custom-designed light fields have
features that vary over distances as small as one-millionth of a meter, allowing
College of New Jersey researchers in materials science to probe light-responsive
materials that act as molecular motors, or in bioscience, to selectively
illuminate neurons to study their connectivity. The spatial light modulator also
enables computer science faculty to construct augmented reality systems for the
development of visual interfaces between computers and their users. The
technological impact of spatial light modulators spans all modes of information
display, including cellphone screens, digital projectors and flat screen
displays. Consequently, College of New Jersey students in science, engineering,
and education are immersed in a broad range of training opportunities with the
spatial light modulator system. These activities occur in close partnership with
faculty on a year-round basis, giving students a valuable exposure to an
emerging technology that is rapidly advancing the display and perception of
visual information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The
complete system is comprised of a light source, the spatial light modulator, and
the light projection optics. The central component is the liquid crystal-on-
silicon spatial light modulator. The light source can be interchanged for
specific research tasks. For optical materials research, the source is a blue-
emitting diode pumped solid state laser. This enables researchers to illuminate
novel photoresponsive materials with rapidly reconfigurable light fields,
ultimately providing the design rationale for materials with application-
specific photo-mechanical response. For bioscience, the sources include a blue
and near-infrared laser. The blue source is used in neuroscience research to
precisely target and photoexcite multiple cellular sites, which leads to a
deeper understanding of neural microcircuitry. In bacterial biochemistry
research, the infrared source is used to optically trap and manipulate bacteria,
the first step towards unraveling their signal transduction systems. For human-
computer interaction, a red diode laser provides customizable structured light
patterns for the optical sensing of objects and the generation of projected
holograms for augmented reality systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.