* 1919758
* MRI: Acquisition of Eye Tracking Equipment to Support Behavioral Research at LTU
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Lior Shamir, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 72,142.00

With Major Research Instrumentation support, Dr. Franco Delogu and his
collaborators will acquire an integrated eye tracking system to collect and
analyze comprehensive sets of eye-movement data for research and research
training in the behavioral sciences at Lawrence Technological University (LTU),
a primarily undergraduate institution in the Metro Detroit area. The
instrumentation allows developing a large set of experiments involving the
acquisition of bio behavioral data crucial for understanding a number of
cognitive processes connected to eye movements. At LTU, it will advance research
activities and research training in several different disciplines, and will be
used as a technological bridge able to link disciplines, departments, colleges,
and institutions. Disciplines that will be directly supported by the
instrumentation include psychology, computer science, biomedical engineering,
literary studies, marketing, and architecture. The broader intellectual and
societal benefits of the instrumentation acquisition include educational
initiatives that advance learning experience, community engagement in metro
Detroit and industry partnership. Specifically, the investigators will integrate
eye-tracking methods in the development of Course-Based Research Experience
(CRE) in classes within LTU, at community colleges and high schools located in
socio-economic disadvantaged areas in metro Detroit. The CRE initiative at LTU
is currently adopted as a systemic (more than 30 courses involved) intervention
for increasing retention rates of non-traditional students in STEM. Outreach
activities will also include the use of eye tracking methods in the LTU business
incubator for small companies involved in the next generation robotics, haptics,
and other quantified-self themed consumer devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eye
tracking system consists of a screen-based eye tracker (Tobii Spectrum 600), a
wearable eye tracker (Tobii Pro Glasses 2), and dedicated software for eye
movement analysis (Tobii Pro Lab). The integration of the three components will
allow the establishment of a flexible and complete eye tracking research
facility at LTU. A wide variety of collaborative research projects involving
personnel and students from all the four colleges of the university and external
collaborators will be developed with the support of the eye-tracking system.
Such projects include: 1. Advancing research in the field of multisensory
interactions in spatial cognition; 2. Advancing the understanding of the
experience of art by providing quantitative data in the experimental aesthetics
of visual art, literature and poetry; 3. Understanding biomechanics factors in
daily living activities; 4. Improving control interface design in internet of
things research with a specific focus on the study of indoor lighting and active
shading control as a function of eye pupil size; 5. Providing drivers' state
assessment and understanding factors influencing the level of trust in
autonomous cars in connected and autonomous vehicles research; 5. Understanding
the influence of emotions on visual attention in advertisement; 6. Analyzing
visual scanning of health-related labels; 7. Advancing knowledge on human
behavior in real-world shopping scenarios; 8. Optimization of wayfinding systems
in public spaces; All projects include multidisciplinary teamwork which is
intended to nurture collaboration within LTU departments and colleges and
between LTU and other institutions to increase competitiveness in extramural
funding acquisition and scientific dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.