* 1919231
* PFI-RP: Multifunctional Nanoarray Adsorbers for Low Temperature Automotive Emission Control
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Pu-Xian Gao, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 04/30/2024
* USD 735,237.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project are manyfold. First, if successful, it
will provide a new class of materials to meet needs for diesel emission,
impacting the transportation industry. The global market of heavy duty diesel
catalysts for on-road trucks is projected to reach $2.6 billion in 2020. The
product and technology are expected to help the US sustain its leadership in the
field of low-temperature emission control, supporting a cleaner environment,
through reduced use of certain metals, and enhancing economic competitiveness
through export opportunities. The integration of research and product
development demonstrated in this university-industry partnership program will
form an important model and foundation to help pursue a sustained industrial-
university research collaboration ecosystem. The broad application of this new
technology is expected to produce new jobs and significant economic impact. An
important outcome of this partnership project is the intensive training of
students through the organic integration of academic research, technology
transfer, and entrepreneurship. The team plans to use this unique partnership
model to build a pipeline to demonstrate to student and postdoctoral
researchers, especially women and under-represented groups, how frontier
research can be directly transferred to industry for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project intends to develop
a high-efficiency, durable, and low-cost multifunctional adsorbers for low
temperature and cold-start diesel emission control. Such multifunctional
adsorbers combine the functions of low temperature nanoarray diesel oxidation
catalyst (DOC) and low temperature adsorbers (LTA), forming a total solution at
temperatures as low as 100 degrees Celsius. However, the DOCs that can work
efficiently at temperatures below 200 degrees Celsius are not available in the
current market, and are in urgent demand. In this project, surrounding the
proposed university-industry partnership, the team will integrate the nanoarray
DOCs with LTAs as a new class of multifunctional adsorbers. Scalable continuous
hydrothermal and other processes at temperatures below 200 degrees Celsius will
be used to enable the cost-effective fabrication of large scale stable
multilayer adsorbers. The full-size adsorbers will be processed and validated
for emission control through both lab and simulated field tests, with high
catalytic activity at low temperature, robustness, and low materials
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.