* 1919605
* MRI: Acquisition of a Customized GC-IRMS for Isotopic Analysis of Nitrate and Nitrous Oxide at URI
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 01/31/2024
* USD 390,670.00

The instrumentation project focuses on the purchase of an isotope ratio mass
spectrometer with a gas chromatographic front end. Specifically the proposal
request will customize a new gas source isotope ratio mass spectrometer with a
gas chromatographic inlet (GC-IRMS) for measurement of the stable isotopes of
nitrate and nitrous oxide. Technological advances in analytical chemistry and
instrumentation over the last several decades improved the sensitivity and
precision of these measurements, which in turn expanded the understanding of the
nitrogen biogeochemical cycles. The environmental properties of the N cycle are
in turn key to the health of global agriculture, extra-terrestrial ecology and
marine productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of a customized GC-IRMS
will allow more and improved stable isotope measurements to be made at URI.
Recent technological advances provide enhanced sensitivity and precision, up to
a 3-fold improvement from current capabilities. This should allow researchers to
address questions on samples with limited availability for analysis or that
require greater precision, or both.&lt;br/&gt;The enhanced isotope
infrastructure and expertise at GSO will attract talented new students,
postdocs, and faculty to GSO, providing them with marketable skills in cutting
edge analytical techniques. This will in turn facilitate improved training
opportunities that promote diversity and inclusion in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characteristics of this proposal that
align with MRI and EPSCoR co-funding guidelines include: collaboration with
researchers at other universities in the US and abroad; provides instrumentation
for stable isotope research education; integration of research and education
through training opportunities for students and incorporation in college
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Antarctic
Sciences, Office of Polar Programs (OPP), by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and MRI, the Major Instrumentation
Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.