* 1919337
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and Research Training.
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Cora Lind-Kovacs, University of Toledo Health Science Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 545,650.00

An award is made to The University of Toledo (UT) to do research on a number of
projects that require visualization of very fine detail at very high
magnifications. The award will allow the University to purchase a transmission
electron microscope (TEM) with capabilities that are currently unavailable at
UT. The microscope will be able to construct three dimensional computer images
from many photographs and enable scientists to characterize sample structure
from many angles of view. The instrument will provide undergraduate and graduate
students hands-on opportunities in the electron microscopy laboratory to learn
techniques and apply the technology to classroom and research projects. The new
TEM will strengthen a current outreach program that provides middle, high
school, and students at community colleges with a "remote-controlled" science
experience. This outreach educational program provides area schoolteachers with
an additional resource to enhance the education of their students by exposing
them to the scientific method in action with "live" imaging of research samples.
The TEM will be operated by remote control from these regional classrooms and
lead to conversations about science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and
medical (STEMM) education, research, and career opportunities that they can
pursue. The microscope will also be used by commercial start-up companies in
UT's business incubator, Rocket Innovations, which among its mission goals,
creates a culture of entrepreneurship and innovation among students, graduates
and faculty. The new TEM will also allow UT researchers to study bacteria in
Lake Erie that have threatened Toledo's and Northwest Ohio's drinking water in
recent years; one of these organisms produces a toxin that is a known danger to
people living in the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of the new TEM will
advance UT's innovative, multidisciplinary research in both life science and
material/physical science research and student training. The new TEM will
benefit many biologists that have a common interest to learn how cells develop
internal structures, especially how structures effect cell motility (i.e.,
filaments, fibers, and cilia) or to study how cells react to toxins and the
process of how cells die. The biology projects that depend on this TEM will 1)
revolutionize understanding of animal fertilization and 2) enable improve
understanding of cell metabolism, cell movement, and lysosomal biology. Some UT
scientists study sensitive thin films that are important in developing higher
efficiency solar panels; the new TEM will enable them to map thin film chemical
make-up and evaluate the electrical properties of these samples in virtual 3
dimension computer projections. The new TEM will provide a research tool with
abilities that are not currently available at UT and it will enhance the ability
of UT students and researchers to explore new ideas. The research that UT
students and faculty conduct will include novel results that will be
communicated with both the general public and scientific communities in local
high school classrooms, at local, regional, national scientific, and
international meetings and seminars, and data will be published in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.