* 1919937
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-mix, Low-volume PCB Assembly System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bing Ouyang, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 239,329.00

This project acquires a high-mix, low volume printed circuit board (PCB)
assembly system optimized for a research prototyping environment. This assembly
system forms the basis for a new core facility that will be available to the
university community and its partners, accelerating advancement in underwater
networking, autonomous imaging, robotics, renewable energy, ubiquitous
computing, and other areas. It enhances an existing undergraduate course in
electronics and a graduate course in embedded design. It not only serves as a
valuable prototyping tool in each course, but provides the foundation for
introducing design for manufacturing into the curriculum. Hence, the system
contributes to educating the next generation of scientists and engineers who
will support entrepreneurial activities in South
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument supports industry-sponsored
research projects that include: the design, implementation, and evaluation of a
low-cost, high-fidelity, wireless sensing system for monitoring carbon dioxide
concentrations for demand-controlled ventilation; and a wireless system for
monitoring pressure transients and forecasting leaks in municipal water
distribution systems. The work involves research efforts that include, among
others, underwater networking, water-sensing analysis, marine renewable energy.
The assembly system supports the design, implementation, and evaluation
of:&lt;br/&gt;- A practical solution for underwater localization and
communication;&lt;br/&gt;- A new approach to GPS-free localization and
navigation; &lt;br/&gt;- An autonomous optical and acoustic system for
underwater imaging detection and classification;&lt;br/&gt;- An autonomous
aerial/terrestrial/water robotics platform for large-scale monitoring of
aquaculture fisheries; &lt;br/&gt;- A new hardware platform for battery-free
sensing under dynamic load and energy from ocean
currents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.