* 1919572
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer Cell Sorter for Multidisciplinary Studies at Oakland University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Shailesh Lal, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 445,521.00

An award is made to Oakland University to acquire a Fluorescence-Activated Cell
Sorting (FACS) machine to support and enhance multidisciplinary research and
educational programs at the institution. The FACS machine will allow
undergraduate/graduate students and faculty to participate in research and
educational activities that will enhance the mission of the Departments of
Biological Sciences and Chemistry as well as the Eye Research Institute.
Specifically, the FACS machine will allow for hands-on collaborative research in
the areas of amphibian biology, cancer biology, chemistry, DNA repair,
developmental biology, immunology, molecular biology, plant genomics, and stem
cell biology. The instrument will be incorporated into the science and
bioengineering curriculums, as part of teaching laboratories and design
projects, and will allow for new course development. This instrument will also
allow for student and faculty recruitment and provide a sophisticated service
technology to the surrounding region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow cytometry
combined with cell sorting enables characterizing, defining and sorting of
different cell types and subpopulations by analyzing the expression of cell-
surface and intracellular molecules. Among some specific projects in which this
instrument will be used are the determination of basic biological functions and
signaling directed by cell surface proteins in stem cells, the role of
endothelial cells on anti-apoptotic pathways, the regulation of pre-mRNA
processing in plants, the effects of temperature in amphibian immunology, the
development of tubular organs, and basic understanding of DNA repair mechanisms.
Results from the research using the instrument will be disseminated in peer-
reviewed publications, scientific meeting and to the community throughout
outreach activities in which faculty of this institution
participate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.