* 1919631
* MRI: Development of an Instrument that Performs Behavioral Analysis for Neuropsychiatric Disorders like Tourette Syndrome
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Gail Bernstein, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,863,323.00

This project, developing an instrument to enable a pioneering way to canonically
represent and systematically quantify behavioral manifestations for a suite of
neuropsychiatric disorders, integrates a powerful computer cluster with various
sensor modalities and associated immersive technology components that facilitate
data analysis and perception of physical and virtual experiences. The instrument
will bring together neuropsychiatrists and engineering scientists seeking the
development and deployment of tools that promote discovery and new knowledge in
their respective domains, and innovation with immediate societal impact. It aims
to enable medical experts to explore clinical hypotheses during diagnosis and
treatment. Concurrently, scientists/engineers will explore the implementation of
new computational tools and algorithms that satisfy new requirements utilizing a
set of clinical hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Challenging the current
understanding of a spectrum of neuropsychiatric conditions and triggering the
explorations of new ways to affect them, this instrument should contribute to
our understanding of the presence and evolution of mental states. Its unique
characteristics will help in integrating a range of informational cues (e.g.,
visual, acoustic, haptic) along with virtual simulated information. This
interplay between physical and virtual experiences and stimuli and their
perception in an immersive environment constitutes the ultimate objective which
will unleash creativity in better understanding and treat mental illnesses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tight coupling of hardware and software components
will enhance the various types of interactions such as expert-patient, and
patient-virtual objects. Specifically, the instrument will support the following
research efforts:&lt;br/&gt; - Comprehensive compilation of behavioral
data,&lt;br/&gt; - Development of visualization tools,&lt;br/&gt; - Delivery of
haptic information feedback, &lt;br/&gt; - Creation and interaction of virtual
objects, and&lt;br/&gt; - Enhanced sentiment understanding from audio/visual
signals, facial expression representation and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
enables the creation of communication channels with clinics across the country.
Moreover, it contributes in forming a strong foundation to explore and
understand a broad variety of neuropsychiatric disorders manifested via verbal
and non-verbal communication pathways, aims to form a foundation that promotes
strong collaboration targeting real-world challenges with immediate societal and
economic impact, and offers an environment for discovery via the strong coupling
of data visualization, User Interfaces-User eXperience (UI-UX) design, immersive
perception, data exploration, and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.