* 1919439
* Investigation of RNA-Processing Protein Interactions and Dynamics with Simultaneous High-Resolution Tweezers and Fluorescence
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Matthew Comstock, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 736,703.00

RNA is central to cellular information transfer, acting as the intermediate in
the transformation of DNA-encoded information into protein. Essential for
controlling this information flow is both production and degradation of RNA,
processes that are carried out by energy-utilizing polymerase protein machines
and exosomes, respectively. A third type of energy-utilizing RNA processing
proteins are helicases, which are ubiquitous and modify the structure of RNA by
unzipping RNA duplexes. An emerging theme is that RNA helicases are multi-
functional machines playing additional roles beyond RNA unzipping, including
energy requiring RNA anchoring and directly regulating the activity of other RNA
processing proteins. The Ski2-like helicases are a new family of helicases,
which act in close coordination with polymerases and the exosome to affect a
broad range of RNA processing activities. These helicases have novel activity
coupling RNA duplex sensing and motion. The project will investigate the
fundamental molecular mechanisms of this novel activity to reveal how these
diverse functions can arise from the accessory modification of core, conserved
helicase components. The project will also investigate how these novel helicases
cooperate and compete with other RNA processing proteins, e.g., a helicase and
polymerase. The project will also leverage the optical tweezers developed and
strong science outreach activities at MSU to expand an existing education and
outreach program, which is based on hands-on interactions with biophysical
science experiments at the levels of individual cells and RNA molecules both
within and out of the lab. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate RNA-processing protein dynamics of single proteins and larger
protein machine assemblies by developing and applying high-resolution, multi-
modal single-molecule techniques. The project will specifically investigate the
yeast Mtr4p helicase and the associated TRAMP helicase + polymerase system along
with the related yet functionally distinct yeast DEAD-box helicase Ded1p. Mtr4p
and TRAMP have emerged as key players in nuclear RNA surveillance and processing
in part via precise modification of RNA for degradation by the exosome. While
TRAMP is composed of only three proteins, two are opposing polarity molecular
machines - the 3' to 5' Mtr4p helicase and the 5' to 3' Trf4p polymerase. Mtr4p
performs multiple functions including unwinding RNA, discriminating substrates,
and modulating polymerase activity to achieve precise poly(A) labeling of RNA.
How these machines coordinate or compete to achieve function is controversial in
large part due to their highly dynamic, multi-degree of freedom interactions on
the scale of only 5-10 nucleotides of RNA. The project will be able to address
the fundamental questions regarding how Mtr4p and TRAMP function using frontier
single-molecule methods simultaneously combining high-resolution optical
tweezers and fluorescence. The project will investigate: (1) How the recently
discovered RNA-duplex-sensing translocation mechanism of Mtr4p is achieved via
comparison to mutants, in particular one where the loss of a key domain
dramatically alters activity, and to the related Ded1p helicase. (2) How the
TRAMP polymerase activity is modulated in turn by Mtr4p via direct, simultaneous
measurements of helicase and polymerase activity using fluorescence and
tweezers. (3) How the related RNA helicase Ded1p unwinding mechanism occurs at
the same mechanistic resolution as the Mtr4p studies. Advanced techniques
combining high-resolution optical trapping and multi-color fluorescence will
apply broadly across all biophysical molecular dynamics investigations towards
the emerging need for tools to investigate protein-nucleic acid interactions
beyond the individual molecule scale towards multi-protein, multi-degree of
freedom complex systems. The project provides strong science outreach activities
at MSU to expand an existing education and outreach program, which is based on
hands-on interactions with biophysical science experiments at the levels of
individual cells and RNA molecules both within and out of the
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.