* 1919491
* MRI:  Acquisition of an ultra-centrifuge by the Natural Sciences department at UVa-Wise
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Aubrey Cahoon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 82,826.00

An award is made to the University of Virginia's College at Wise to purchase a
JXN-30 hybrid ultra/high-speed centrifuge from Beckman-Coulter. This machine
will offer a wide range of capabilities to a diverse department that houses
multiple scientific disciplines. This centrifuge facilitates and improves an
existing strong research environment at a rural public liberal arts college that
serves a population with few opportunities to participate in the scientific
process. It is an investment in a region where unemployment is increasing as the
coal-based economy declines. Benefits to society include potentially
transformative educational opportunities for the Appalachian region of far
southwest Virginia, which are investments in the talented students choosing to
pursue higher education at UVA-Wise. When we teach these students how to ask
open-ended questions and then allow them to use high-end equipment and
resources, we show them they have the potential to complete much larger and more
transformative projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UVa-Wise is a rural liberal arts
college dedicated to providing outstanding research experiences to its students,
and regularly has more than 10% of full time students involved in research
projects with faculty. The three faculty included in this award specialize in
Biology and Chemistry. This centrifuge will further expand the research
capabilities of two researchers in molecular and cellular biology who address
basic questions related to essential cellular processes such as DNA repair and
RNA processing. The chemistry faculty will use the equipment to aid in the
production and testing of organometallic compounds that may become anti-cancer
therapies. More specifically, these scientists and their students will be able
to 1 - perform ultra-centrifugation on-site for crucial polysome analysis
experiments that help define basic RNA processing events in organelles; 2 -
concentrate novel metallo-pharmaceuticals to be tested for anti-tumor or anti-
microbial capabilities; 3 - process water samples for environmental eDNA and/or
detect numerous pharmaceutical contaminants; and 4 - process large volumes of
cells expressing recombinant proteins that can help elucidate the mechanisms of
the DNA excision repair process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.