* 1919353
* Interventions for Motivating Residents to Recruit and Coordinate with their Neighbors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Rebecca Niemiec, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 475,503.00

Addressing complex, large-scale, and rapidly growing environmental threats
requires that individuals not only engage in pro-environmental behaviors in
their own life, but also convince others in their social networks to engage in
such behaviors. Motivating individuals to recruit others can increase the scale
and speed at which society adopts a pro-environmental behavior. Existing social
science research, however, finds that people who are willing to engage in pro-
environmental behavior in their own life are often unwilling to reach out to
others on behalf of environmental causes. This research project explores how to
motivate individuals to recruit and coordinate with others for environmental
conservation. The study focuses on the pro-environmental behavior of replacing
grass lawns with native plants on residential properties to reduce water use and
increase habitat for native species. The research leads to the creation of
outreach interventions that could be used by organizations seeking to promote
the widespread adoption of a pro-environmental or pro-social
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the study is both highly
practical as well as contributory to basic scientific research: whether
interventions designed to enhance perceptions of self-efficacy and norms
increase individuals' recruitment and coordination behaviors to promote
environmental conservation. The research team partners with the City of Fort
Collins and Audubon Rockies to apply this objective to enhancing habitat in
peri-urban landscapes in the Colorado Front Range through wildscaping practices.
Stage 1 of the research uses surveys and interviews with over 500 Colorado
residents to test specific hypotheses adapting prior research on normative
influence and self-efficacy in other contexts; the results then are used to
design interventions motivating recruitment and coordination behaviors for
environmental conservation. Stage 2 involves two large-scale field experiments
in collaboration with research partners, involving more than 1000 Coloradan
residents in low-cost outreach programs with controls to assess causal impacts
on individual engagement in recruitment and coordination behavior. The
researchers assess effects based not only on perceptual measures but also on
indicators, collected by partner organizations, of actual recruitment and
coordination behaviors undertaken for lawn
replacements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.