* 1919454
* Collaborative Research: Empirical Analysis of Social Networks with Unreported Links
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Arthur Lewbel, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 182,134.00

In many social-economic contexts, an individual's behavior depend on his own
characteristics, as well as the outcome and characteristics of others. Such
dependence called a link; individuals with links are neighbors and a collection
of neighbors is referred to as a network. A social network consists of linked
individuals. This commonly occurs in applied economic research since links are
often not well measured in the research data. This project will estimate the
effects of social networks on individual outcomes when the links are either
misclassified or not reported in data. The method proposed in this project is
adaptable to a wide range of social networks. It also provide a general method
for comparing various types of social effects given group characteristics. The
project offers an efficient approach for policy analyses that resolves
challenges due to data problems or measurement errors in network links. The
results of this project provides a way to measure the effects of policies when
there is no information on network structure. The results of this project will
have a significant impact on empirical research on social networks and policies
such as education. This will improve efficiency in business and policy decision
making and in the process lead to improved well-being of U.S.
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project identifies and estimates social
network models when network links are either misclassified or unobserved. It
first derives and characterizes conditions under which some misclassification of
links does not interfere with the consistency or asymptotic properties of
standard instrumental variable estimators of social effects. It then constructs
a consistent estimator of social effects in a model where network links are not
observed. This method does not require repeated observations of individual
network members. The project will apply this estimator to data from Tennessee's
Student/Teacher Achievement Ratio (STAR) Project. Without observing the latent
network in each classroom, the research identifies and estimate peer and
contextual effects on students' performance in mathematics. The results suggests
that peer effects tend to be larger in bigger classes, and that increasing peer
effects significantly improve students' average test scores. The results of this
research will help businesses and policy makers account for social effects in
decision making hence improve the living standards of U.S.
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.