* 1919809
* MRI: Development of an Airborne Stabilized Platform for InfraRed Experiments (ASPIRE)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Edward DeLuca, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 831,598.00

The main purpose of this three-year MRI project is to design and build a solar-
tracking platform for the NSF/NCAR Gulfstream-V (GV) aircraft, and demonstrate
its capabilities by flying two focal plane instruments during the 2020 total
solar eclipse across South America. The Airborne Stabilized Platform for
InfraRed Experiments (ASPIRE) builds on the success of the Airborne InfraRed
Spectrometer (AIR-Spec), turning the GV into a solar-viewing platform for rapid
prototyping of solar and atmospheric instruments. By adding a stabilized solar
feed to the GV aircraft, the project team will create an airborne platform for
infrared remote sensing that will be a valuable resource for both the solar and
atmospheric communities. In solar physics, the 20cm feed would enable many
applications on and off the solar disk. During the upcoming eclipse mission, for
example, the ASPIRE will provide enough throughput to make polarimetric
measurements with an airborne version of the Coronal Multichannel Polarimeter
(CoMP). The project team will deliver the ASPIRE interface documentation to NSF
and NCAR in first quarter 2021. The ASPIRE project will provide research
training for at least three REU students at the Smithsonian Institution
Astrophysical Observatory (SAO) over its lifetime. The team will involve a
Boston-based undergraduate in the ASPIRE development and bring this student to
Chile to participate in various EPO activities. Summer test flights in 2020 and
2021 will provide field testing experience for two REU students. Combining a
total solar eclipse with the GV research aircraft is an excellent way to
captivate public interest. As both the 2019 and 2020 eclipses cross South
America, the SAO and NCAR staff will reach out to U.S. Embassy personnel to
arrange tours of the unique GV aircraft and give talks on eclipse
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this three-year MRI project is to
develop the ASPIRE, which will provide a 20cm diameter solar feed, stabilized to
&lt;5 arcsec RMS over a 3 second exposure time. The platform is well-suited for
infrared investigations of the Sun, as it can operate above the influence of
Earth's atmosphere, and for atmospheric measurements of trace gases obtained by
observing sunlight transmitted through atmospheric absorption bands. The ASPIRE
will provide broadband visible and infrared transmission from 0.45 to 10
microns, compatible with all of the GV's IR-transmissive viewports. During its
2020 commissioning flight, ASPIRE will feed a 13cm telescope with two
complementary focal plane instruments: AIR-Spec (an imaging spectrometer) and a
new narrowband imager centered on the AIR-Spec 1.43 micron Si X line. AIR-Spec
was designed to characterize five magnetically sensitive coronal emission lines
between 1.4 and 4 microns and assess whether they are useful probes of coronal
magnetism. It observed all five of its target lines during the 2017 total solar
eclipse, detecting the 2.84 micron Fe IX for the first time. The strong Si X
line was observed up to 0.6 solar radii from the limb and provided line-of-sight
velocity measurements with a resolution of 5 km/s. The larger telescope aperture
enabled by ASPIRE will improve the AIR-Spec SNR by a factor of 1.5 compared to
its 2019 observation (&gt;6x improvement over 2017), allowing the project team
to explore the coronal density and temperature measurements, flows, and
oscillations that are on the edge of detection with the current AIR-Spec
instrumentation. The Si X context imager will reduce the need for rastering the
slit, allowing us to improve SNR by summing 'sit and stare' slit data for more
than a minute. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.