* 1919729
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Training at Millersville University
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Christopher Hardy, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2022
* USD 287,234.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) at Millersville University.
This research tool enables activities that strengthen the research and teaching
abilities at the institution. Millersville University is a public, primarily
undergraduate university. In addition, there are many stakeholders interested in
accessing the instrument. Developing the next generation of engineers and
scientists is paramount to the prosperity of the nation by maintaining our
competitive edge in the development of technology and intellectual capital.
Providing meaningful experiences at all levels of academia is central to
recruiting and retaining talented students in science and engineering. The
project connects various aspects of education and community outreach using the
SEM. This project has been coordinated with faculty at nearby Franklin and
Marshall College and includes support from local industry, K-12 institutions,
and community outreach groups. By offering access to this equipment and
providing assistance in using it, the investigators strengthen the ties within
this local network, advance scientific inquiry and discovery, support the local
economy through business development, develop new pathways for youth to learn
about science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines, and draw
more students to pursue careers in these areas. Because there is a lack of
access, a strong demand, and a detailed plan for implementing these activities
at various levels within the local community, it is anticipated that the impact
will be felt deeply across the region, and it will result in the advancement of
STEM education and opportunities in the area.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award
to Millersville University (MU)supports the acquisition of tungsten-filament SEM
with energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy capability and provides critical
capability in sample analysis and support on-going research projects in
materials science, biology, geology, and chemistry, and more. Specific research
projects include research in (1) new solid-state metal foams; (2) far from
equilibrium processing of novel materials;(3) synthesis of nanoparticles of
different shapes and sizes for comparative studies on catalysis; 4) forensic,
and systematic botany. MU will provide technical support for the SEM for the
expanding research on campus, as well as attracting industrial partners.
Outreach and learning activities serve 22 school districts and other educational
centers in the area, and the School District of Lancaster, which is comprised of
87% minority students. Outreach activities are planned through the North Museum
of Science and the Lancaster Science Factory. Furthermore, K-12 students
activities include campus visit during a variety of STEM-related competitions
and events, such as the Science Olympiad and the Made in Millersville student
research conference. The project also includes service to the broader academic
community by joining the Remote Access Instrumentation Network in partnership
with Penn State's Center for Nanotechnology Education and
Utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.