* 1919855
* MRI: CNS: Acquisition of Real-Time Hardware-in-the-Loop Simulation for Verification of Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* ONUR TOKER, Florida Polytechnic University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 350,137.00

This project supports the acquisition of a Real Time Lab system for automatic
simulation and verification testing, including a large-scale hardware-in-the-
loop (HiL) simulation facility for Connected Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs). The
framework enables reasoning and test development in simulation, an abstraction
process to virtualize real-world crashes, and a co-simulation capability for
concurrent design and test. While rapid progress is being made in the underlying
engines for CAVs, this progress will not be useful without a significant advance
in methods to show robustness and safety of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort opens opportunities to replicate and
simulate real-world scenarios and offers the framework for the Advanced Mobility
Institute (AMI) to provide industry and regulators with a technical language to
communicate safety and verification issues. Moreover, other applications can
benefit from the outcomes (e.g., marine, logistics, agriculture), thus enabling
future partnerships. The facility also offers a unique opportunity for students
to gain hands-on experience and attract industrial partners to test their
systems. The institution encourages neighboring universities to use their
facilities on research challenges related to CAVs. Finally, the integrated
instrument enriches the existing curriculum with a simulation facility that
supports HiL and has real-time (RT) simulation
capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.