* 1919870
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometer for Environmental Monitoring and Metabolomics Research and Training
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Joseph Braun, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2022
* USD 482,531.00

Recent instances of human exposure to environmental contaminants include the
situation with lead in Flint, Michigan tap water and per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS) in the Cape Fear River Basin, which serves as a drinking water
supply for Wilmington, North Carolina. These cases have contributed to a public
awakening and recognition about a range of environmental contaminants. This
project supports the purchase of a high-resolution mass spectrometer, called the
QExactive Orbitrap. The unique capabilities of the QExactive Orbitrap mass
spectrometer allow for the separation of thousands of chemicals contained in a
single sample and the identification of these chemicals at trace concentrations.
This instrument will enable research and training on the measurement of organic
contaminants in environmental samples (for example, in soil and water) and
biological samples (for example, in blood and urine). The mass spectrometer also
will help researchers assess changes in human metabolism in response to
contaminant exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a
diverse and active research team to determine the prevalence of contaminants in
the environment and to advance our understanding of the effects of chemical
exposures on human health. The specific research activities supported by the
acquisition of a QExactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer include: (a) identifying
metabolic alterations associated with exposure to environmental contaminants,
(b) detecting contaminants in soil, water and air samples, (c) measuring the
contaminant levels in humans, and (d) identifying biomarkers associated with
adverse health outcomes. These activities will support research conducted by
undergraduate and graduate students, who will receive personalized training
related to instrument operation, data extraction, and analysis. The mass
spectrometer will be available to both internal and external researchers and
will be used to support environmental monitoring efforts affiliated with local
schools, research centers and community organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.