* 1919571
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Cluster for Undergraduate Chemistry Research and Teaching by the Midwest Undergraduate Computational Chemistry Consortium (MU3C)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Keith Kuwata, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,400.00

The acquisition of a high-performance computing system by the Midwest
Undergraduate Computational Chemistry Consortium (MU3C) will enable
undergraduate students and their faculty mentors at a diverse set of 17 colleges
and universities to use computational chemistry to advance our understanding of
multiple basic and applied phenomena in terms of the properties of individual
atoms and molecules. Fundamental research topics will advance prediction of
environmental chemistry, explanation of reaction mechanisms, design of new
materials and new catalysts, understanding of spectroscopy and excited state
dynamics, and the development of new molecular dynamics methods. During the
three years of the grant, MU3C faculty will train over 140 undergraduates to
conduct computational chemistry research and to communicate their results at
professional scientific conferences. Over 5000 undergraduates will use the
computing system as part of their study of general, organic, inorganic,
physical, and biological chemistry. MU3C includes institutions serving large
numbers of first-generation college students, students eligible for Pell grants,
and underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide 40 new CPU-based compute nodes and four new GPU-based compute nodes (32
GPUs) combined with 40 existing CPU-based compute nodes to yield a computer
cluster well-suited to the broad range of research undertaken by MU3C's
collaborative teams of faculty and undergraduate students. The new CPU-based
compute nodes will have 256 GB of RAM, compared to 24 GB in the existing CPU-
based nodes, enabling a variety of demanding quantum chemical (QC) calculations
that cannot be executed on the current MU3C cluster. The new GPU-based compute
nodes will replace existing GPU-based nodes that, because of their age, will
soon be unable to run current versions of computational software. The existing
CPU-based nodes are still useful for a variety of modestly-demanding QC
calculations. The combined power of all three types of compute nodes will
provide enough capacity to support the growing MU3C consortium, which has
doubled in the number of research groups since its last MRI award. The research
projects undertaken by these groups will contribute to a number of fields as
described above. For example, calculations using DLPNO-CCSD(T) and CASSCF/NEVPT
theories will aid the design of new catalysts in which expensive 2nd and 3rd row
transition metals are replaced by inexpensive 1st row transition metals;
calculations using EOM-CCSD(dT) theories will model complex reaction mechanisms
to aid prediction of the evolution of atmospheric peroxides; calculations using
time-dependent density functional theory will help explain the novel enhanced
luminescence of ?magic-sized? quantum dots; and calculations using Monte Carlo
methods will aid the design of new zeolite materials for the selective capture
and sequestration of atmospheric CO2. Over two dozen different projects will
advance our understanding of chemistry while preparing a broad set of
undergraduate students for careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.