* 1919444
* Mechanistic Understanding of Electrocatalytic Bio-oil Hydrogenation Rates: Towards a Cost-effective Electrochemical System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nirala Singh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 530,641.00

The transportation sector of the U.S. economy generates a large portion of
greenhouse gas emissions. Increased use of renewable fuels is one option to
reduce transportation-related greenhouse gas emissions and also to secure
domestic, sustainable resources for fuel. One promising strategy to help meet
transport needs is to synthesize transportation-grade fuels (e.g. liquid
hydrocarbons) from biomass waste using renewable electricity, thereby enabling a
CO2-neutral fuel source. Bio-oil hydrogenation is known to be the most capital-
and energy-intensive steps for biofuel production. One promising approach to
address this challenge is to use electrocatalytic hydrogenation (ECH) of biomass
because it provides a sustainable method of fuel production and enables the use
of renewable electricity. However, improved electrochemical systems and
electrocatalysts are needed to make ECH economically competitive. This
fundamental research project will address energy efficiency, product yield
challenges, and economic analysis of ECH. The project will focus on the
molecular pathways and reaction bottlenecks for hydrogenation reactions on
metals in the aqueous phase. The research project will provide multidisciplinary
training to two PhD students at the University of Michigan and enable them to
conduct cutting-edge research in materials synthesis and characterization,
computational modeling, and electrocatalysis. Underrepresented minority and
female students will be engaged in research and outreach at both the high school
and undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fundamental research project
will focus on the hypothesis-directed study of electrochemical hydrogenation
reactions on platinum group metals and bimetallic alloys in aqueous phase. The
research will advance knowledge of metals and bimetallic alloys for use in
selective hydrogenation of biomass waste using renewable electricity for
sustainable fuel production. The project's goal is to help engender the
widespread use of electrocatalytic hydrogenation by focusing on three main
areas, the adsorption of organics and hydrogen on metal surfaces,
electrocatalytic hydrogenation rates on metals and bimetallics, and using a
combination of theory and experiment to understand the link between adsorption
and reaction rates and selectivity to predict more active and selective alloys.
The team will measure and compute intrinsic reaction rates under controlled
conditions on different metals, and then find correlations with adsorption
energies and reaction intermediates. The project?s guiding hypothesis is that by
starting with metals having moderate activity for hydrogenation and modifying to
create bimetallics (e.g., Pt-alloys), one can tune the oxygenated aromatic and
hydrogen adsorption energies to increase reaction rates and energy efficiency.
To probe the reaction pathway and intermediates, the project will measure
adsorption isotherms and use surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy under reaction
conditions to selectively probe species near the electrocatalyst surface. To
complement the experimental work, the project includes density functional theory
modeling of hydrogen and oxygenated aromatic adsorption energies and ECH
activity at applied potentials in water. Fundamental knowledge will result of
molecular-level reaction mechanisms for electrocatalytic hydrogenation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.