* 1919013
* PFI-TT: Polymer coatings for High-Energy Lithium Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Lynden Archer, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of rechargeable
lithium metal batteries (LMBs) able to meet the cost, safety, and performance
criteria required for large-scale use. Rechargeable batteries that use lithium
metal foil as the electrical energy storage method are of longstanding interest
because they provide lightweight platforms for energy-dense storage of
electricity to meet consumer demands for portable devices that are lighter,
smaller, and more powerful. Commercial availability of LMBs would also represent
an improvement for the electrified transportation and grid storage sectors
because for a given size, these batteries offer 2 - 5 times more storage
capacity than current state-of-the art lithium-ion technology. As a step towards
driving commercial interest, this project will develop, evaluate, and
demonstrate rechargeable lithium batteries in various sizes, and will explore
their manufacturability and market entry requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop cross-linked, ion-conducting polymer membranes
that can be applied as interfacial coatings (interphases) on the metallic
lithium anodes. It is known that the propensity of Li metal to form
rough/dendritic deposits during battery recharge is a key barrier to
commercialization of LMBs. During multiple charge-discharge cycles, the
dendrites grow and proliferate throughout the inter-electrode space, ultimately
causing catastrophic battery failure when they bridge the electrodes to short-
circuit the battery. Research in the project will create cross-linked polymer
coatings on Li electrodes, which preliminary studies by the Principal
Investigator show provide multiple powerful strategies for arresting dendritic
electrodeposition at both low and high ionic currents. At low currents, such
interphases prevent dendrite formation by protecting Li metal against parasitic
reactions with electrolyte components, which facilitates fast and uniform
interfacial ion transport, enabling more uniform deposition. At high currents,
cross-linked polymer interphases impart viscoelasticity to a liquid electrolyte,
which prevent dendrite growth by arresting the hydrodynamic instability known as
electroconvection. With the specific aim of creating scalable processes for
fabricating dendrite-resistant, polymer-coated Li electrodes, the research
proposed will investigate how changes in structure, mechanics, and transport
properties induced by coating chemistry influence the reversibility of Li
electrodeposition processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.