* 1919269
* PFI-TT:  Optical Sensing Patch for Early Detection of Pressure Ulcers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Jamison Kovach, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project, if successful, will be a major
reduction in the prevalence of pressure ulcers achieved through their detection
at the earliest stage. More commonly known as bedsores, pressure ulcers are
debilitating wounds that prevalently affect bed-bound patients and wheelchair
users, estimated at 2.5 million annually. In addition to pain and suffering,
pressure ulcers may lead to infection and increased mortality, and they impose a
$10 billion burden on the US healthcare system every year. The current standard
of care for at-risk patients relies on periodic skin assessments and body
repositioning, but research shows that this treatment has limited impact. This
engineering project will generate scientific evidence of the body's response to
prolonged pressure, which will engage industry stakeholders and investors toward
the commercialization of a smart sensing patch capable of detecting pressure
ulcers, and the project will enable future pre-clinical and clinical validation
studies necessary for FDA clearance and product adoption by hospitals.
Importantly, this project will also provide substantial entrepreneurial training
and field experience to an engineering graduate who will further develop the
commercialization aspects of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will generate groundbreaking knowledge in the field of applied optical
imaging and biomedical engineering by imaging and describing mathematically the
optical changes occurring in human skin and underlying tissues after exposure to
prolonged pressure in a large variety of individuals. To achieve this goal, the
team will use a wearable, non-invasive optical patch applied to the sacral area
that is known to be at risk of pressure ulcer development in bed-bound patients.
No other imaging technology has yet provided quantitative evidence regarding the
response of the body to prolonged pressure that may ultimately lead to pressure
ulcers; therefore, the outcome of this project will solve a significant
technical barrier in this field. Data generated by this study will also inform
the technical features of a flexible and disposable smart patch optimized for
both cost and performance to facilitate future commercialization
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.