* 1919044
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Scaling the Software-Defined Data Center with Network-Storage Stack Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jian Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2024
* USD 438,861.00

Computer data centers today are experiencing a disruptive trend by virtue of
becoming software-defined and programmable. Software-defined networking (SDN)
and software-defined storage (SDS) have been widely deployed in today's data
centers to provide multi-tenant network and storage services. However, due to
the lack of coordination between the network and storage software, there are
still performance, scalability, and reliability challenges in data centers. As
the data center is evolving with software-defined functions (hitherto done
through hardware devices), it is the right time to fundamentally address these
classical challenges. This project leverages a cross-layer research approach to
conduct the fundamental systems and architecture study on the software-defined
network and storage. The proposed research activities will benefit the
infrastructure and platform development for large-scale data centers. The
project will involve active industrial collaborations to carve a path for
technology transition to practice. Furthermore, the project will integrate the
research developments into new courses that center around network and storage
techniques. This project will also recruit and train underrepresented and high
school students through various research programs and summer
camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a new software-defined
architecture that co-designs the system stacks of both SDN and SDS while
refining the functionalities of each component. If successful, the project will
fundamentally advance design principles and techniques of software-defined data
centers. First, the project proposes to refine the functionalities of the
control and data plane in SDN and SDS. Such a new architecture enables
&lt;br/&gt;state sharing between SDN and SDF, which facilitates the global
resource management and I/O scheduling to address the performance challenge.
Second, to overcome scalability challenges, this project rethinks the design and
implementation of concurrency control in the storage stack and proposes an in-
network lock manager to scale the concurrent storage accesses. The project
further exploits the hardware parallelism available in multi-core CPU chips to
speed up the network packet processing. Third, the project analyzes the
limitation of existing data replication protocols and proposes an in-network
conflict detection scheme to achieve both linear scalability and strong data
consistency for replicated storage. Finally, the project applies the proposed
techniques to representative multi-tenant storage services such as distributed
databases and key-value stores, and new distributed
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.