* 1919194
* PFI-TT:  Affordable, Handheld Imaging Device for Skin Cancer Detection
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Negar Ebadi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,931.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes the development of a skin
imaging device which addresses the current clinical need for an affordable
imaging methodology that images the skin over its depth with sufficient
resolutions while offering large contrasts between normal, malignant, and benign
tissues. Such a device will be an invaluable assistance to dermatologists and
dermatologic surgeons and significantly enhance the current state of skin cancer
detection and management. The proposed system will be integrated in a single
framework, resulting in a compact (handheld) and real-time imager at a low
manufacturing cost. This will make the proposed technology comparable in cost to
dermoscopic imaging, facilitating its widespread use and application. Such a
device will be used by dermatologists and dermatologic surgeons prior to biopsy
or tumor excision, facilitating the detection and removal of tumors. The
developed product of a hand-held, real-time imaging tool will have huge
commercial value and widespread applications. The medical imaging industry will
greatly benefit from these integration procedures and the associated cost
reductions. Furthermore, the proposed method could be used to develop portable
imaging and sensing devices for a wide range of applications such as hydration
sensing, blood glucose monitoring, monitoring of healing wounds (including skin
burns and irritations), and dental caries detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is focused on developing a fully-integrated ultra-wideband
millimeter-wave imaging system for the first time, where no high-frequency or
high-power external signal is required for the operation of the transceiver.
This will be realized by employing the synthetic ultra-wideband imaging
approach, where several disjointed, adjacent imaging sub-bands are integrated to
collectively form an ultra-wide imaging bandwidth. Each sub-band contains a
transceiver which operates only within that specific sub-band. The sub-band
transceivers will be integrated on a single chip using the monolithic microwave
integrated circuit (MMIC) technology. The ultra-wide bandwidth of the proposed
imager will result in significantly higher image resolutions compared to the
state-of-the-art millimeter-wave imaging technology. This will enable the
technology to be applied to biomedical setups, in particular skin imaging and
skin cancer detection. The outcome of this proposal will be an affordable skin
imaging device that visualizes tumor profiles over the depth of the skin with
large histopathological-like contrasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.