* 1919084
* PFI-TT: Bringing Open Source Innovation and Resilient Hydraulic Designs to Municipal Drinking Water Treatment Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Monroe Weber-Shirk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2023
* USD 280,400.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will be the availability of advanced,
resilient technologies to U.S. towns and cities that need to upgrade or expand
their drinking water infrastructure. Early prototypes of this technology have
transformed several remote towns by providing reliable, high-quality water on
tap to over 83,000 people. The next generation of water treatment technologies
are less complex than the highly mechanized systems that were developed in the
last century. The new series of municipal-scale drinking water treatment
processes relies on an advanced understanding of the interactions between
particles, fluid, and flow to more efficiently remove pathogens and other
contaminants. The process designs remove particles, pathogens, and some
dissolved contaminants using special adhesive nanoparticles with the most energy
efficient technologies currently available. The benefits to society will be
ultra-low energy, resilient, hack-proof, high-performing water treatment
infrastructure that can easily be operated without reliance on computers or
mechanized systems. The proposed technology will substantially reduce the cost
of maintaining and upgrading water treatment infrastructure and are expected to
propel a new era of competition and innovation in the water treatment
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the understanding
of particle, pathogen, and dissolved contaminant removal mechanisms. The core
drinking water treatment technologies have largely stagnated in the past decades
because the underlying mechanisms were not understood and it was necessary to
rely on empirical designs. This created an opportunity to develop the science of
the core drinking water treatment processes and then dramatically improve those
designs. The proposed research and development will build on the recently
developed hydraulic flocculation model and new insights into the dominant
particle removal mechanism in upflow fluidized floc filters. The goal of the
research is to use the new insights into the treatment processes to begin to
optimize their design. A pilot scale facility using a surface water source will
be configured to test: 1) new designs for the upflow fluidized floc filter
(UFFF) inlet diffuser and jet reverser system, 2) the UFFF depth, 3) a more
compact tube settler system, and 4) stacked rapid sand filter extraction system.
Performance will be measured using particle counters, turbidimeters, a UV meter
to measure dissolved organics, and a pathogen panel to measure pathogen removal
efficiency. The goal is to develop design recommendations for the next
generation of water treatment technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.