* 1919574
* MRI: Acquisition of an Illumina NextSeq 550 System to Support Genomic Research and Research Training at University of Nebraska at Omaha
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* William Tapprich, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 278,750.00

An award is made to the University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO) to acquire an
Illumina next-generation sequencing (NGS) system in order to improve its
research infrastructure. UNO is an emerging doctoral/research institution and is
committed to supporting the acquisition of this NGS system and the subsequent
establishment of a genomics facility. Utilizing an internal machine that is
staffed by a trained technician will allow significant cost savings and
ultimately increased utilization of the facility across the campus, within the
Omaha area and beyond. The facility will provide training on instrument usage to
UNO researchers and external users in the form of workshops, learning modules,
and annual symposia. The research and career opportunities to students from
underrepresented groups will be offered through well-established, community-
serving programs within UNO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested instrumentation
will support basic research through the application of NGS technology to a broad
spectrum of collaborative and interdisciplinary projects. Researchers from
across the UNO campus, as well as neighboring institutions, will be able to
utilize the NGS system to address a wide range of fundamental scientific
questions regarding 1) neural and behavioral systems, 2) conservation genetics
and systematics, 3) microbiology and molecular genetics, and 4) molecular
interaction and gene regulation. These studies will lead to a better
understanding of how genomes regulate complex living systems at cellular or
organismal levels and will likely result in new discoveries in areas such as
biodiversity and cellular function. The acquisition of the Illumina system will
significantly advance a broad array of leading-edge research projects involving
high-throughput sequencing and greatly strengthen the university?s research
training capacities in genomics and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.