* 1919078
* PFI-RP: Accelerating the improvement of US cotton fiber quality
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Andrew Paterson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 09/30/2023
* USD 549,904.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project will be to restore the leading role of US
cotton by conferring superior quality that distinguishes US cottons in world
markets. One of the world's most important crops, cotton enjoys many
opportunities to participate in a competitively priced bio-based products
industry. Increased durability and strength of cotton fiber offers the
opportunity to replace synthetic fibers that require ~230 million barrels of
petroleum per year to produce in the USA alone - but fiber quality improvement
has been extremely slow. The team expects to accelerate fiber quality
improvement by using chemically-induced mutants to bypass the lack of natural
genetic variation in the cotton gene pool. The team anticipates addressing the
long-standing problem where fiber quality increases at the cost of decreasing
yield by identifying and separating the genetic factors causing this effect.
Even a small improvement, leveraged over the ~$6 billion value of the US cotton
crop alone with an estimated aggregate influence of ~$120 billion/yr on the US
gross domestic product, represents a major commercialization
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project builds on the
demonstration that we can obtain cotton mutants with useful improvements in
fiber quality, and that assembly of multiple mutants results in highly superior
lines. Here we broaden the pool of superior lines toward a 'pipeline', also
determining the impact of these fiber quality traits on fiber yield, identify
diagnostic DNA markers that can be used to expedite manipulation of these genes,
and narrow the locations of the genes themselves to small intervals in the
genome. This project will provide a test of the new hypothesis that genomic
regions (quantitative trait loci, QTLs) that determine fiber quality include not
merely single genes as long expected, but dozens of genes that function in
coordination with one another -- and therefore that the inverse relationship
between yield and fiber quality can be overcome by creating and identifying
mutations in single genes that change quality traits with minimal disturbance to
yield components. The project will identify prototype cotton 'lines' that are of
immediate potential commercial value, as well as a 'pipeline' of ongoing
improvements, addressing the 'Red Queen' challenge that we will need to continue
to increase our fiber quality as commercial standards
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.