* 1919942
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Low Voltage Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Needs at The University of Georgia
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Sergiy Minko, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 997,499.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
high-resolution low-voltage electron microscope at the University of Georgia
(UGA) that enables the research, training, teaching, and outreach efforts of
investigators across the physical sciences, geological and environmental
sciences, biological sciences, engineering disciplines, and allied fields. The
unique technical capabilities of this microscope allow the imaging and chemical
analysis of samples under conditions that mitigate electron beam damage. These
capabilities lead to the study of diverse materials including nanostructures,
polymers, fibers, and biological specimens, which encompass research being done
by 29 major users across numerous colleges, centers, departments, and
laboratories at UGA. This instrument is integrated within the Georgia Electron
Microscopy (GEM) core facility at UGA to permit inter- and transdisciplinary
usage and collaboration. Beyond research applications and the associated
training of student users, the new microscope enables the inclusion of state-of-
the-art electron microscopy content in course offerings and outreach efforts.
These activities are accomplished in part using GEM's Electron Theater, with an
emphasis on nanoscience in the environment. In addition, the instrument is used
to acquire data sets suitable for integration into K-12 STEM lesson
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI award supports the acquisition
of an electron microscope capable of low-voltage operation (defined as less than
or equal to 30 kV). The technical highlights of this instrument include ultra
high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (UHR-SEM) imaging at low voltages;
high resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) mode, including
high-angle annular dark field (HAADF) imaging and additional detectors, all
operating at a low beam voltage; and analytical tools that provide quantitative
composition and structure data, including electron diffraction, elemental
mapping by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and electron energy-loss
spectroscopy (EELS), all at low voltages. Research projects enabled by this
instrument span four thematic areas: (1) inorganic nanomaterials, especially 2D
nanosheets and functional materials for energy storage, electronics
applications, biomedical imaging, and drug delivery applications, (2)
nanogeoscience and environmental soil science, (3) new frontiers in developing
high-resolution low-voltage methods for imaging biological specimens, and (4)
high-resolution low-voltage imaging of nanostructured hybrid systems and soft
materials, including beam-sensitive samples like polymers and fibers. In
particular, the application of electron microscopy to beam-sensitive materials
will provide new detailed information about sample composition, heterogeneity,
structure, phase purity, and properties at the nanoscale. Additionally, the
superior contrast in STEM brightfield and HAADF imaging modes, compared with TEM
imaging, will allow investigators to resolve detailed organic components, such
as the ligand coronas of inorganic nanostructures and interfaces between
biological structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.