* 1919588
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning/Transmission Electron Microscope for Materials Research and Education
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Brett Lucht, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,610,000.00

Materials play an important role in the areas of biopharmaceuticals, medicine,
the environment and energy storage. The structure of materials at the nanoscale
play an important role in how these materials behave at more macroscopic,
physically relevant scales. Thus, it is important to get high fidelity images of
materials at the smallest possible scales. A state-of-the art
scanning/transmission electron microscope (S/TEM), acquired through this grant,
will enable visualization and chemical characterization of a broad variety of
materials at the nanoscale. This information will be used to understand material
functionalities, as well as develop new materials for applications in
diagnostics and targeted drug delivery, pollutant capture and batteries. The
instrument will serve several universities and industries through existing and
new interactions. Dozens of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
undergraduates will be trained to use this cutting edge analytical tool,
preparing them to contribute effectively to the fast-paced advances in materials
science and engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transmission electron
microscope will be used to image (a) biocompatible polymer beads loaded with
drugs and magnetic nanoparticles for combined therapeutics and diagnostics (b)
silver nanoparticles exposed to bacteria to uncover the causes behind their
biocidal properties (c) bioengineered proteins and cell surfaces, to get a
fundamental understanding of protein function (d) evolving structures in lithium
ion battery electrodes, to be able to design higher energy density batteries
that are safe and long lasting (e) nanoparticle formation and evolution in
solution, to further the design of softeners for hard water, and for consumer
products. The S/TEM will be a key enabler for all of these
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CBET-MRI
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.