* 1919037
* PFI-RP: Commercializing innovations in design and manufacture of fine pharmaceutical powders for cheaper and better medicines
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Changquan Sun, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 631,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is in making technologies available to
improve manufacturing of powder-based products in a variety of industries,
including pharmaceutical. These industries are increasingly dealing with fine
powders, desirable because they improve product performance. Unfortunately, fine
powder-based products pose significant difficulties in manufacturing and cause
product failures due to their intrinsic poor processability and tendency to form
large lumps. The innovation comes through scientific understanding of why fine
powders behave poorly, and determining how their surfaces could be modified via
novel mechanical processes to drastically and predictively improve their
behavior. Significant commercial impact is expected from shorter drug product
development times and reduced pharmaceutical product failures, as well as from
increased profits in manufacturing tablet-based drug products. Societal impact
comes from making available higher quality medicines to patients at lower costs.
It will have a positive impact on the professional development of students
participating in the project, through training in cutting-edge research,
innovation and entrepreneurship. In addition, the proposed science teacher
training will impact K-12 participants from school districts with large
underrepresented minority populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will fundamentally advance understanding of how fine powders behave and
why they lead to significant manufacturing challenges. The Intellectual merit of
the project stems from physics-based models explaining why fine smooth
particles, as well as rough particles (less than third the diameter of human
hair), flow and pack poorly. However, when they are nano-rough, i.e., having
surface asperities 500 times smaller than the diameter of human hair, they flow
and pack significantly better. The understanding and development of mechanical
processes to economically create nano-rough surfaces offer commercialization
opportunities for the pharmaceutical industry. These include benefits from novel
fine engineered drug powders flowing as well as those 5-10 times their size, and
development of fine excipients that outperform their larger commercial
counterparts in flow, packing, and tablet forming capability. The proposed novel
advanced models should also help design the powders and their blends that form
the building blocks of pharmaceutical products, such as tablets and capsules. If
successful, these models will eliminate excessive time and material-consuming
experimentation that increases manufacturing costs. Associated simulations will
enable computer-assisted design of tablets, leading to better and cheaper drug
products. Additional intellectual merit of the project is through the
participation of students with industry partners and mentors while engaging in
research targeted for commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.