* 1919780
* Comparative age-related dynamics of primate brain epigenetics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Chet Sherwood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 429,062.00

Our species is distinguished from other primates and mammals by our large brains
and impressive cognitive abilities. Prolonged brain growth through development,
along with a particularly long life, are essential to the emergence of human
cognition, but may also lead to greater susceptibility to psychiatric and aging-
related neurodegenerative disorders, like Alzheimer's disease. This project will
characterize molecular changes in the brains of humans and other primates across
the adult lifespan to identify features that distinguish the human pattern of
brain development and aging. The results of this project will help pinpoint the
genetic mechanisms underlying dynamic lifespan changes that are unique to human
neurobiology and may improve our understanding of common medical conditions. The
project will involve mentoring and building the analytical skills of trainees at
different career stages (postdoctoral, graduate, undergraduate), and
communicating results of this study to members of the public through accessible
educational programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic and physiological
basis of human brain development and aging are not fully understood. Changes in
methylation are important in development and aging, and plasticity of
methylation appears to play a key role in the brain, contributing to processes
like the formation of neuronal connections. Previous studies have identified
differences in brain methylation patterns among primate species, and the
investigators' prior work suggests that genes acting in the nervous system
undergo alterations in methylation with advancing age. This project will
specifically investigate DNA methylation in four brain regions. The work will
build on existing research by taking a comparative approach to identify
differences in the trajectories of methylation change in several distinct brain
regions across adulthood among four primate species, including humans.
Identifying differences among primate brains in age-related change could help us
understand the origins of traits distinguishing human brains, including aspects
of neurobiological aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.