* 1919486
* MRI: Development of a Multiuser Instrument for Attosecond X-Ray Probing of Correlated Quantum Dynamics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Oliver Monti, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 873,639.00

Since their discovery in 1895, x-rays have found numerous applications in
medical technologies and in the elemental and structural analysis of materials
and proteins. With the advent of new laser technologies, it has become possible
to produce x-ray bursts of duration less than a millionth of a trillionth of a
second (an attosecond). These novel ultrashort x-rays pulses can provide a
window into the inner workings of complex molecules relevant to light harvesting
and catalysis and guide the development of novel materials for quantum
information processing. Researchers working on this project will create new
x-ray research opportunities by developing an instrumental platform that
integrates the x-ray pulses with state-of-the-art detectors, such as transient
x-ray spectrometer and electron imaging. The goal of this effort will be direct
observation, manipulation, and real-time control of quantum processes in
molecules and materials, the pursuit of which is vital to energy, information,
and security interests of our nation. The project will thus enhance US
scientific competitiveness and train the next generation workforce in new x-ray
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project aims to develop a
tabletop instrument for time-resolved multifunctional attosecond x-ray
spectroscopy, which will realize the ultimate time-resolution to probe the
dynamics of charge redistribution in molecules and materials with chemical
sensitivity, atomic resolution, and orbital selectivity. The instrument will
cover the soft x-ray range from 100 to 1000 electron volts using a high-power
mid-infrared laser for harmonic generation. The combination of attosecond
resolution, high flux, and elemental specificity will extend the x-ray
spectroscopic capabilities into a new regime, leading to a unique multiuser
instrument for novel insights into fundamental electronic processes, especially
those involving correlated electron dynamics. The instrument will offer easy
access and research training opportunities for students and early career
researchers. The development project integrates transient x-ray absorption
spectroscopy, photoelectron spectroscopy, streaking capabilities, and coincident
charge particle imaging to serve a broad user base at the University of Arizona,
as well as other scientists at the national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.