* 1919361
* Collaborative Research:  MRI Consortium: Development of Fiber-Coupled Stimulated Emission Depletion Microscopy (STED)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Emily Gibson, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 401,170.00

An award is made to the University of Colorado Boulder, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus and the University of Denver to develop a unique
miniature optical fiber-coupled microscope that will enable flexible imaging at
unprecedented spatial resolution. Developed with a diverse team that includes
engineers, physicists, and neuroscientists, this cutting-edge microscope will
not only provide new fundamental and practical insights across research areas,
but will also yield far-reaching impacts through intellectual property
development and future commercialization and deployment in industry. The
research team will use the new instrument to expand ongoing efforts to mentor
and inspire young students from groups underrepresented in Science Technology
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Real-time in-
brain imaging has made tremendous advances in the past few years, allowing
unprecedented inquiry into how dynamic structures such as dendritic spines
enable brain functions such as learning, memory, cognition, and behavior.
However, future advances in observation-based understanding of the function and
response of these cellular structures are limited by the blur inherent to
light's fundamental properties that obscures these features. Based on the
established and Nobel Prize-winning principle of Stimulated Emission Depletion
(STED) microscopy, the instrument developed in this collaborative project will
be capable of a 5X increase in spatial resolution. This miniature microscope
will enable, for the first time, imaging of small structures such as synaptic
spine dynamics and changes in myelination underlying behaviors and social
interactions in behaving animals. It will also enable lithography in 3D
materials at unprecedented spatial scale aimed towards the next generation of
electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.