* 1919610
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tip-Enhanced Nano Raman Spectroscopy (TERS) Microscope for Soft Matter Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Linda Schadler, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The
acquisition of a tip-enhanced nano-Raman spectroscopy instrument at the
University of Vermont (UVM) will create a nexus for convergent materials
research, addressing fundamental cross-disciplinary questions related to
chemical behavior and structure-properties relationships in materials ranging
from large biomolecules and organic small-molecule semiconductors to geological
formations and minerals. Recent investments by UVM in the Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics building complex, including a shared microscopy
research laboratory space, have created an effective location for the
instrument, which is operated as part of a user research facility. UVM has a
group of cross-disciplinary researchers with expertise and scientific interests
that make full use of the instrument, while simultaneously attracting regional
collaborators. The microscope is incorporated into an advanced two-semester
instrumentation Materials Science (MATS) course for graduate and undergraduate
students. High school and middle school students learn about the research
enabled by this instrument through events organized in collaboration with the
student-led local chapter of the Materials Research
Society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Tip-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy is a new technique that facilitates rapid advances in
exploring complex soft and hard materials systems because it enables
simultaneous multi-imaging techniques with high spatial resolution. The
characteristics of the instrument include less than 10 nm spatial resolution and
the ability to measure ultra-low frequency Raman shifts. Using this microscope,
UVM researchers address one of the greatest challenges of soft matter research:
reliably and efficiently mapping the structure-property relationships at small
scales, which can ultimately lead to predicting, controlling and tailoring
advanced carbon-based materials for specific uses. Research thrusts
significantly benefiting from this instrument include a) probing and controlling
the coupling between collective dynamics (phonons) and electronic transport in
organic semiconductors, b) fundamental understanding of the coupling between
vibrations and coherence phenomena in soft matter systems, and c) mapping strain
and disorder of thin films on the nanoscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.