* 1919640
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  ALIVE, a platform for facilitating Authentic Learning   In Virtual tropical Environments
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Ann Russell, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 07/31/2021
* USD 72,186.00

Tropical biomes play major roles in global water, carbon, and nutrient cycling
and support a large proportion of the Earth's biodiversity. Despite their
ecological importance, tropical ecosystems receive scant coverage in
undergraduate biology textbooks and courses. Researchers in tropical ecology
have developed a rich set of learning materials that could be adapted for the
classroom, but a means for networking with undergraduate biology educators to
disseminate these learning materials does not currently exist. The goals of this
Incubator project are to 1) begin developing the Authentic Learning In Virtual
tropical Environments (ALIVE) network by organizing and conducting a two-day
workshop that brings together researchers in tropical ecology, educators, media
specialists, and database engineers; and 2) write and submit a review/concept
paper about authentic classroom-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs)
in tropical ecology. The long-term vision of the PIs is that the ALIVE network
will develop a web-based platform to disseminate the tropical ecology learning
materials it develops and that facilitates direct communication between students
in the classroom and tropical field researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Incubator project aims to enhance undergraduate biology by integrating two
practices, the use of CUREs and internationalization of curricula. Although
CUREs can address the challenge of providing students research-based
experiences, their development is often beyond the reach of many faculty,
especially for CUREs based on international research. There is thus a need for a
platform that integrates research in tropical biology with best practices in
pedagogy. New educational materials and a community that fosters communication
between students, educators, and tropical field researchers will enhance student
engagement in undergraduate courses and broaden cultural, ethnic, and geographic
perspectives. Although study-abroad programs can introduce students to tropical
biology, only a relatively small proportion of students can participate.
Students from underrepresented and/or socioeconomically disadvantaged groups may
be the least able to participate, thus widening the opportunity gap for these
students. Incorporating authentic research in tropical ecology into classroom-
based activities will level the playing field, enabling all students to gain
experience in international research in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.