* 1919462
* RCN-UBE: Equity and Diversity in Undergraduate STEM (EDU-STEM)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sehoya Cotner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,385.00

To promote the progress of science, it is necessary to ensure that barriers to
full participation by women, first-generation college students, and racial and
ethnic minorities in STEM are identified and removed. Equity and Diversity in
Undergraduate STEM (EDU-STEM) is a Research Coordination Network that will
include higher-education faculty, initially in the natural sciences, from a
growing network of institutions across the United States. Through regular online
discussions, a monthly newsletter, small workshops, and larger, annual meetings,
EDU-STEM will begin by coordinating the efforts of participants to construct a
data-management platform to better understand barriers to equity in STEM across
regional and institution types. Possible barriers include, but are not limited
to, large class sizes, reduced sense of inclusion, stereotype threat, a lack of
role models, and test anxiety that disadvantages underrepresented groups.
Working from these baseline data, EDU-STEM faculty will develop collaborative
classroom-level experiments designed to reduce these barriers to success in
STEM. EDU-STEM will impact society broadly by: (1) identifying barriers to
inclusion in STEM; (2) implementing and testing educational interventions
designed to increase participation, and (3) increasing the number of faculty
engaged in reflective research on inclusion in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaps
- between males and females, and between ethnic and racial groups - are well
established as challenges for STEM educators, yet less is known about the
barriers to full participation in STEM or targeted strategies that instructors
can overcome, in order to promote learning for all students. Equity and
Diversity in Undergraduate STEM (EDU-STEM) is a research coordination network
that will integrate research and teaching in evidence-based classroom
experiences, across life sciences curricula, using a multi-pronged approach.
Specifically, the network will (a) coordinate efforts to identify metrics to be
used across the network; (b) collect data on science courses at participating
institutions (including research universities, community colleges, and minority-
serving institutions); (c) construct a shared data-management tool to promote
regional and institutional comparisons; (d) test and assess, in collaboration
with an educational psychologist and small cohort of network partners, in situ
interventions to minimize documented barriers; and (e) disseminate network
findings via presentations at disciplinary meetings, publications, and the EDU-
STEM website and newsletter. Also, EDU-STEM will involve institutional teams in
a testable leadership model to promote cultural shifts in how science faculty -
at both the departmental and institutional levels - approach evidence-based
teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.