* 1919310
* MRI: Acquisition of a Computer Cluster for the Study of Fluids, Heliophysics, and Astrophysical Plasmas
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Joachim Raeder, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 602,942.00

A homogeneous high-performance computing cluster for the simulation of fluids,
heliophysics, and astrophysical plasmas will be built at the University of New
Hampshire (UNH). The fluid and plasma simulations performed at UNH share very
similar hardware requirements, making it possible to design an instrument with a
high expected usage rate and broad scientific applications. The cluster will
play a critical role in the formation of UNH graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows to modern computational methods and parallel computing, as well as for
the recruitment and retention of a diverse
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical simulations of fluids and plasmas play
a critical role in the study of a wide range of problems in astrophysics,
heliophysics, and geophysics. Modeling nearly-collisionless plasmas is necessary
to understand the generation of the solar wind, its propagation, its interaction
with the Earth's magnetosphere, and its effects on, for example, the Earth's
climate or artificial satellites. The same physics governs the evolution of
accretion disks around many of the supermassive black holes at the center of
galaxies, including the soon-to-be imaged black hole at the center of our own
Milky Way. Magnetohydrodynamics simulations, on the other hand, help us
understand the evolution of the Earth's atmosphere and its oceans, as well as
some of the highest-energy events observable in the Universe: the collisions of
black holes and neutron stars that power gravitational wave signals. This grant
will enable new understanding in all of these research areas through building a
new computer cluster for numerical simulations of fluids and plasmas. The
cluster will have 1760 compute nodes with Infiniband communication, and 283+ Tb
of storage/archival space. This award was co-funded between the Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences and the Division of
Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.