* 1919784
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rhesus macaque canine dimorphism in evolutionary context
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Shara Bailey, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 14,112.00

In many primate species, males have much larger canines than do females, a
character known as canine sexual dimorphism. In humans, the canines of males and
females are very similar in size (monomorphic). This doctoral research project
investigates the evolution and function of large male canine teeth in a model
primate species to better understand potential selection pressures for
dimorphism, and to use as comparative data to understand why the loss of this
feature evolved in humans. This project provides training opportunities in both
fieldwork and data analysis for undergraduate and graduate students in New York
and Puerto Rico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will integrate morphological,
genetic, and behavioral data to test the hypothesis that large male canines are
a sexually selected signal and/or weapon in primates. This project also explores
mechanisms of canine size evolution (heritability and selection). The Co-PI will
collect data on canine size to investigate how canine size is inherited and
whether canine size predicts reproductive success. She will also conduct field
experiments to determine if males and females attend to differences in male
canine size. Finally, she will integrate canine size data with behavioral data
to assess whether canine size predicts the occurrence and outcome of fights
between males. The results of this project will contribute knowledge about the
mechanisms behind both the evolution of canine dimorphism and the loss of this
character in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.