* 1919850
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer at Miami University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Michael Crowder, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 295,750.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Christopher Hartley from Miami University in
Ohio and colleagues Michael Crowder, Meredith Erb, Dominik Konkolewicz and Wei
Liu are acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
equipped with flow monitoring accessory to monitor kinetics and an automatic
sampler. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those
that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well
as facilitating studies of biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The NMR studies improve understanding of synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research. This broadly accessible instrumentation
strengthens the regional NMR analytical infrastructure and help advance the
scientific careers of many regular users of undergraduate and graduate
researchers and postdocs. The spectrometer enriches the education and training
experience of underrepresented undergraduate students in several NSF supported
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs and several
hundred undergraduate students in chemistry and biochemistry laboratory classes
at this institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. The spectrometer is especially useful for
studying o-phenylene foldamers and non-equilibrium systems and for monitoring
flurorination reactions. It is also essential or studying kinetics of
polymerization and small-molecule reactions and metallo-beta-lactamase enzymes.
The spectrometer aids researchers exploring coordination compounds of high-spin
cobalt(II) and those studying enantioselective catalysis. It is also in
exploration of heterogeneous electrocatalysis of carbon dioxide and
methane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.