* 1919785
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer to Enhance Undergraduate Research and Education in South Florida
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Arsalan Mirjafari, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 165,000.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Gregory McManus from Florida Gulf
Coast University and colleagues Arsalan Mirjafari, Gregory Boyce, Daniel Paull
and Xiaofei Zhang are acquiring a single crystal X-ray diffractometer. A
diffractometer is a powerful tool used to determine the detailed structures of
crystalline chemical compounds. X-rays are passed through a crystal of interest
and a diffraction pattern is produced. The pattern is analyzed to obtain the
microscopic structure, that is, the distances and angles between atoms in the
material. This structural data provides insight on the properties and possible
uses of materials. The researchers are investigating materials that can be used
to store gases, such as methane or hydrogen for fuel applications. Another
investigation focuses on electrode materials for energy storage devices such as
the lithium ion battery. The diffractometer supports a network of chemistry
faculty committed to undergraduate research and education in south Florida
including: Florida Gulf Coast University, Florida Southern University, New
College of Florida, Ave Maria University, St. Thomas University and Barry
University. The instrument is used to train undergraduate students in research.
The instrument is also used in lecture and laboratory courses preparing students
for the modern workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a single
crystal x-ray diffractometer at Florida Gulf Coast University is used to support
a wide variety of research projects including the synthesis of metal-organic
materials for gas adsorption applications and the development of low-melting
ionic liquids with high crystallinity which can be used as solvents in organic
synthesis and separations. Metal-organic framework systems are being studied for
possible development as lithium-ion battery electrode materials. The
diffractometer is used to investigate the structure of palladium catalysts for
possible use in synthesizing bioactive natural products. Serpentine, a silicate
mineral with three different types of crystals called polymorphs, is under study
as a material for mineral-carbon dioxide sequestration. The diffractometer is
used in studies to identify which polymorph is present in various
samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.