* 1919614
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Creating a Multi-Institution and -Disciplinary STEM Network to Improve Undergraduate Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Lawrence Hobbie, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 07/31/2021
* USD 74,327.00

The Sustainable, Transformative Engagement across a Multi-
Institution/Multidisciplinary STEM, (STEM)^2 ("STEM-squared"), Network will be a
regional group that aims to increase the academic success of biology majors
including those who transition from community colleges to four-year
institutions. The (STEM)^2 Network will bridge the disciplines of biology,
chemistry, and math, as well as the barriers that exist between the
participating two- and four-year institutions. The multidisciplinary nature of
the Network's approach will extend its impact beyond biology, while the
inclusion of public two-year and private four-year schools will ensure that
outcomes are applicable across institution types. The network will be unique
among the organizations that exist to support STEM education reform because 1)
the focus will be on identifying areas for interdisciplinary curricular and
educational collaborations; and 2) the multilevel approach will target
individual classroom behaviors, curricular collaboration across disciplines, and
institutionalization of innovations. As such, it will empower faculty to be
change agents for STEM reform, creating new directions in research and
education. It is anticipated that student academic success and retention will
increase which, in turn, will help meet the need for a larger and more diverse
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The (STEM)^2 Network will use a series of
collaborative studio workshops to achieve the overarching goals of 1) promoting
collaboration between regional public community colleges and four-year private
institutions; 2) empowering faculty to create change beyond their classrooms;
and 3) creating enduring pedagogical collaborations across STEM disciplines
encountered by undergraduate biology majors. The theoretical foundations of the
network include systems design for organizational change, an emergent outcomes
model for diffusion of STEM innovations, and the principles underlying
Communities of Transformation. Participants will align the guiding educational
documents of the disciplines of biology, chemistry, and math to encourage cross-
disciplinary collaboration. They will directly enhance undergraduate biology
education by developing institutional systems maps to strategically identify
opportunities for sustainable change. The (STEM)^2 Network will contribute to
knowledge generation by documenting the development of the network from an
industrial/organizational psychology perspective and assessment of
interdisciplinary communication and collaboration, institutional structures, and
faculty attitudes to catalyze change in undergraduate biology education. Co-
funding for this project is being provided by the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education (IUSE: EHR) program in recognition of the project's alignment with the
overarching goals of the IUSE: EHR program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.