* 1919608
* MEMS High Voltage Triboelectric Levitation: A Generactuator
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Shahrzad Towfighian, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,134.00

This grant aims to obtain new knowledge regarding the multiphysics of a novel
self-operated mechanical shock switch system. The mechanism merges two
transducers, one which converts mechanical shock to voltage and another which
converts voltage to motion to open a micro-switch. The result is a self-operated
sensor directly operated by mechanical shock when the shock goes beyond a
threshold. Currently, shock sensors such as those in air-bag deployment devices
need a processing unit to engage the device, which requires a complicated
control system having risks of software and component failures. The system
eliminates the need for signal processing units by synergistically connecting
two transducers that overcome the limitations of each system. There is a gap in
the knowledge of several key aspects of each transducer that this project will
address. The system has promising applications in earthquake detection systems
that need to trigger an immediate response to significant seismic activity such
as shutting off power lines and sounding alarms. Wider applications include
safety switches in the automotive industry and shipment monitors. To familiarize
a broad range of students with transducers, educational activities will be
undertaken that include hands-on experiences for local elementary schools and
structured research projects for undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide a fundamental understanding
of the underlying multiphysics from the integration of triboelectric generators
and levitation actuators. These systems have numerous advantages for energy
transduction and electrostatic actuation, respectively. However, each mechanism
has drawbacks that have not been adequately addressed and cause major
limitations in various applications: triboelectric generators produce high
voltages (~50-70 V) making their use in vibration energy harvesting very
difficult and electrostatic levitation devices require high voltages to operate.
Merging the two systems overcomes the limitations of each system. Despite much
research on triboelectric materials, the coupled dynamic characteristics of
triboelectric transducers and electrostatic actuators are unknown. The combined
system contains mechanical and electrical components causing a sophisticated
exchange of the energies between them that affects their normal behavior. This
project will delineate the nonlinear interactions of the two systems using
mathematical models, prototype fabrication and experimental verification. A
threshold shock micro-switch will be presented that autonomously operates from
mechanical shock to validate the understanding of the underlying physical
phenomenon affecting these devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.