* 1919182
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Scalable Neural Network Paradigms to Address Variability in Emerging Device based Platforms for Large Scale Neuromorphic Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Wujie Wen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Tevfik Kosar
* 12/31/2019
* USD 355,475.00

Future computer data centers are being flooded with workloads requiring high-
levels of computation using power-hungry deep neural network (DNN) models. DNN
accelerators based on processing in memory built with new storage devices can
offer great energy efficiency and performance for data centers. One challenge
faced by these accelerators is their poor stability. This is due to the physical
limitations of the new storage devices. This project aims to address this issue
by developing efficient approaches to neural networks. One impact of proposed
research is to develop more powerful, scalable, and sustainable deep learning
computing systems. This will result in new consumer, business, scientific and
national security applications. It will affect the fields of big data and cloud
computing. This project will lead to new results in Computer Engineering and in
fields that are hungry for deep learning capabilities. It will expose students
to cutting-edge knowledge and hands-on research opportunities and elevate their
competence. It will increase their confidence in facing today's highly
competitive global job market. The education impact includes course integration
of research results and outreach activities. Special attention is given in this
to including women and underrepresented minority groups.

The goal of the proposed research is to address a key issue in existing
processing-in-memory-based neural network accelerators built with emerging
nonvolatile devices, which is the bad stability due to weight uncertainties
induced by the device characteristics. To escalate the stability of these
promising emerging accelerators in a scalable and sustainable manner for future
data centers, the project will include four tasks: 1) the explicitly modeling of
weight uncertainties, which may exhibit spatial correlations extracted from
device non-idealities, as parameterized canonical distributions. 2) a
statistical neural network paradigm, which can be easily integrated into
existing convolutional neural network architectures by replacing their
deterministic operations with the statistical counterparts operating on
parameterized canonical distributions. 3) variability-aware neural network
classifier inspired by error correction output codes and modern neural network
architecture. 4) variability-aware input pre-processing without touching neural
networks. These paradigms will be generic to different software and hardware
platforms, and will be implemented and evaluated with a wide set of real-world
applications including image classification, biomedical image segmentation, and
drone target tracking.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.