* 1919704
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hard X-ray PhotoElectron Spectroscopy (HAXPES) for the Institute for Materials Research (IMR) at Binghamton University (BU)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Mark Poliks, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,232,000.00

The chemical and electronic properties of a solid can be measured non-
destructively by analyzing the velocity of escaping electrons ejected from the
material excited by X-rays. For most commercial laboratory-based soft X-ray
sources, the majority of escaping electrons come from the topmost layers of the
material making it a sensitive probe of the surface chemistry. Although surfaces
are extremely important for many applications in catalysts and electronic
devices, the chemistry at the surface is often distinctly different from the
bulk underneath. Employing harder X-rays increases the percentage of electrons
escaping from deeper within the material, but such bulk studies have thus far
been limited to dedicated National facilities. Recent advances in new high-
performance hard X-ray sources and detectors enable comparable bulk-sensitive
measurements within a university laboratory setting thereby presenting a cost-
effective means of increasing access to this emerging technique. The increased
non-destructive chemical depth-profiling enables new insight into how buried
layers within real device architectures evolve during operation, such as
transistors, solar cells and batteries. The new instrument is accessible for
academic and industry users across the U.S.A. The project integrates the
instrument into various existing recruitment and educational programs at
Binghamton University for increasing STEM retention and developing the workforce
in next-generation technologies for energy harvesting, storage and
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a novel
laboratory-based HArd X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (HAXPES) system for non-
destructive chemical analysis of real materials and devices at Binghamton
University. HAXPES studies at Synchrotron facilities are capable of precise
chemical and electronic measurements at previously inaccessible regions of real
materials and devices. The laboratory-based HAXPES instrument consists of a
novel monochromatic Ga K-edge liquid jet x-ray source (9.25 KeV) enabling core
and valence band studies with sampling depths up to 60 nm. This instrument
dramatically increases access to this technique beyond the handful of
Synchrotron-based HAXPES systems currently operational worldwide. Working with
Federally funded centers at Binghamton and partnering institutions across the U.
S. A. (both academic and industrial) this project is developing in-situ and
operando HAXPES capabilities for studying active layers and buried contacts
within next-generation transistors and (photo-)electrochemical cells during
their operation. The HAXPES instrument is housed in a dedicated user facility
for access to wider scientific community. The HAXPES system is integrated into
several educational and training programs at Binghamton, including an
undergraduate course examining the aesthetics of archeological artifacts within
the context of their chemical and physical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.