* 1919985
* Acquisition of a Powder X-ray Diffractometer to Enhance Multi-Departmental Materials Research and Training at Southeast Missouri State University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Marcus Bond, Southeast Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 228,400.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports the acquisition
of a powder X-ray diffractometer (PXRD) at Southeast Missouri State University,
a primarily undergraduate university with a rural service region. The instrument
will be housed and maintained in the Department of Chemistry and Physics while
serving a broad community of users across a range of disciplines. PXRD allows
researchers to analyze the structure of unknown materials and perform materials
characterization in such fields as chemistry, metallurgy, mineralogy, forensic
science, archeology, physics, and biological and pharmaceutical sciences.
Combined with the existing single crystal X-ray diffraction (SCXRD) facility,
which is in heavy use for research and undergraduate training, the PXRD will
increase research productivity and student training opportunities in chemistry
and physics. It will also engage non-traditional users in agriculture,
geosciences, historic preservation, and anthropology. The equipment will be used
for research training in both faculty-mentored and course-based undergraduate
research, the latter being an equitable and inclusive gateway to broader STEM
participation. Incorporating PXRD techniques commonly used in industry and
academic research will prepare students for careers and graduate school. PXRD
will also be used in STEM courses for K-12 teachers and education majors,
providing them with research experience they can share with their students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PXRD is a leading technique for the rapid, non-destructive
analysis of the chemical and internal structural identity of a sample and
complements the SCXRD capabilities available at the institution. While SCXRD
requires a tiny, homogeneously pure single crystal and several hours for data
collection and analysis, PXRD uses a bulk, multicrystalline sample that may not
be homogenously pure, and a scan can be completed in minutes with pattern
matching against a standard library to provide rapid identification. The
properties of molecules and materials are exquisitely dependent upon the
structural arrangements of the atoms that make up these systems. These
structural arrangements are readily studied using XRD techniques. In synthetic
applications, PXRD provides evidence that the bulk sample is homogeneously pure
and allows a researcher to proceed confidently with other characterization such
as SCXRD, magnetic or electrical measurements, thermal analysis, catalysis, or
spectroscopy. The technique is also suitable for studying the structure of non-
crystalline materials such as thin films and amorphous solids. Additionally,
PXRD provides a means of rapid identification of the chemical identity of
heterogeneous or mixed samples from the field, such as soil composition for
agriculture, mineral composition for geosciences, or building material
composition for historic preservation. Existing projects supported by the PXRD
include 1) the preparation and development of novel magnetic materials, such as
multifunctional, magnetocaloric, and hard magnetic materials, 2) the activity
and stability of heterogeneous oxygen evolution electrocatalysts operating in
low pH conditions or in the presence of a magnetic field, and 3) the synthesis
and structural characterization of hybrid organic/metal halide compounds that
exhibit thermochromism, polymorphism, and interesting magnetic properties. The
PXRD and SCXRD facilities together will promote structural science in an
underserved region and enable mutually beneficial collaborations with
neighboring universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.