* 1919789
* MRI: Acquisition of a Supercomputer to Enable Advanced Computational Science and Engineering Research and Education in Missouri
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Stephen Gao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,960,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) project will acquire and deploy a
heterogenous high performance computing (HPC) system. The instrument enables the
dramatic expansion of a HPC capabilities in the state of Missouri. Located on
the campus of the Missouri University of Science and Technology in Rolla, the
center connects several partner institutions, and thus will have a
transformative and broad regional impact on research and training activities
across the state of Missouri. Partners include the full four-campus University
of Missouri (UM) System, and other institutions including Missouri State
University, Southeast Missouri State University, historically black Lincoln
University, College of the Ozarks, and others. The facility will enable over a
dozen research groups to advance state-of-the-art science in a variety of
science areas. The project will also promote collaboration, training and
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investment provides new
computational infrastructure (with a peak performance of more than 400 TFlops)
necessary to advance science in several core areas relating to the study and
design of advanced materials, spanning many length scales and ranging from
fundamental to applied. Projects in the fields of Physics and Chemistry depend
heavily on computation to understand and predict the quantum dynamics of systems
of particles leading to the interpretation and prediction of the existence and
behavior of exotic states of matter. Computational modeling in Mathematics and
Statistics includes studying and optimizing charged plasma propulsion in space;
it also extends into Biological investigations of DNA methylation which
increases our understanding of a variety of diseases in plants (food sources)
and humans (including cancer). Another area that will see immediate benefit is
that of computation and data-driven Geophysics which involves the development of
tools that are essential for the well-being of human society, including
predicting and mitigating natural hazards such as earthquakes and volcanoes, as
well as exploration and development of petroleum and other natural resources.
Other projects include computational hypersonic fluid dynamics contributing to
the design and optimization of high-speed aircraft and space vehicles. In
addition to enabling and greatly enhancing a number of specific research
projects, each of which benefits broad communities and society in general, a
significant part of the broader impact of this project comes from the areas of
training and education and increasing participation of communities
underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.