* 1919919
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope to Enhance Research Collaborations and Educational Needs among Colleges and Universities in the New England Area
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Robyn Hannigan, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 426,500.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Niya Sa from University of
Massachusetts Boston and colleagues Robyn Hannigan, Michelle Foster, Nolan Flynn
(Wellesley College) and Sarah Soltau (Bridgewater State University) have
acquired a high resolution, scanning electron microscope (HRes SEM) with the
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) capability. A SEM/EDS focuses a beam
of electrons at a sample. The electrons interact with the surface to produce a
visual image of the material and identify its chemical elements. These images
reveal details of the material such as the size and shape of nanoparticles on
the surface or surface roughness. Such images help to understand the properties
of the material. One application is investigating the use of silicon as a
potentially better anode material for a lithium ion battery. Another study is
investigating titanium dioxide, a semiconductor, which is used in dye sensitized
solar cells to improve their efficiency. The instrument is in a shared use
facility available to other institutions in the local region including
Bridgewater State University, Wellesley College, Emmanuel College, Bard College,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, and Bunker Hill Community College. It enhances
the training of graduate and undergraduate students in research course
instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scanning electron microscope is a
powerful analytical tool for identifying chemical composition qualitatively and
semi-quantitatively of various species. It is being used in a number of
important research areas. Energy related projects include investigations of
silicon as an anode material for Li ion batteries and titanium dioxide as a
support material for dye sensitized solar cells. Multivalent ion battery
research is being pursued to learn how magnesium can be deposited from non-
aqueous electrolytes. Research is focusing on the biomineralization of
carbonate-based structures (bivalve and crustacean shells) as temperature and
acidification changes in the aqueous environment. Thin films composed of metal
particles with at least one dimension on the nanometer scale possess novel
physicochemical properties which are being investigated. Potential uses are in
information storage, biosensing and chemical sensing, as well as in
heterogeneous catalyst applications. Other research seeks insights into
distribution and organization of metal nanoparticles in a matrix under
controlled conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.