* 1919539
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Speed Lithography Tool for Research and Education at the University of Hawaii
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Woochul Lee, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2022
* USD 466,902.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art high-speed maskless lithography tool to enable fundamental
research in microscale and nanoscale science and engineering at the University
of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM). The instrumentation will enable new research
collaborations--both within the University and with the broader community--in
microfluidics, sensors, nanosystems, and biomedical systems. Fabrication of
sophisticated, multiplexed, scalable microfluidic and nanofluidic devices will
enable advancement of reconfigurable liquid-metal-based electrical circuits, in
vitro testing of drug delivery, chemical-enhanced oil recovery, and water
purification. The MRI award creates new opportunities for science and
engineering training through hands-on student research projects and enhanced
outreach activities, particularly for Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to generate high-resolution,
controlled mechanical and electrical interfaces is essential for research in
engineering, biosciences, and applied physics. The advanced fabrication pathways
established by this award will enable fundamental research on nanosystems,
energy transport, and manufacturing of reconfigurable devices. Precise
lithographic patterning achieved with the instrumentation allows study of
fundamental energy transport properties and behaviors, which are needed to
expand the library of materials for energy conversion and storage. Patterning of
electrodes and other material structures also offers the means to elucidate
electrical effects on nanomaterial surface properties, which are fundamental to
advancing device miniaturization in nanomanufacturing. Rapid large-scale
patterning of microfluidic structures enables research in manufacturing of
highly deformable structures and advanced optical features that are needed for
wearable biomedical sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.