* 1919282
* MRI: Acquisition of a Standardized Integrated Toolset for Photovoltaics Fabrication and Characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* David Tanenbaum, Pomona College
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2023
* USD 442,960.00

This MRI project has two main aims. The first is to advance knowledge toward the
production of low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell technologies that can produce
renewable energy with minimal environmental impact. Such devices convert light
into electricity and are the most promising solution for providing clean energy
for the future of humanity. The second is to enable training of the next
generation of science and engineering experts for careers in public service and
private industry. Pomona and Harvey Mudd Colleges will obtain and maintain an
integrated tool set for photovoltaic research. This will enable a team of
faculty and student researchers at the Claremont Colleges to efficiently build
and test next-generation solar cells. The three lead faculty each have long-
standing, productive research programs with high-impact journal articles and
technical reports in interlocking areas of photovoltaic research. This project
will enhance their local and external collaborations and accelerate their
studies. Harvey Mudd and Pomona rank highly among U.S. colleges in their
proportion of graduates who later earn graduate degrees in science and
engineering, including many from underrepresented groups. For example, more than
70% of the PI's research students in the past 5 years have been students from
underrepresented groups in STEM. Each investigator is actively developing
community outreach programs with K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficiency
of new solar cell technologies is approaching that of conventional solar cells.
While the cost of conventional cells has fallen sharply, high temperature vacuum
processes on glass plates are inherently more expensive than printing processes
typical in new solar cells. In competing with existing solar cell technologies
there are three key areas for new solar cells: efficiency, cost, and lifetime.
Cell lifetime and failure mechanisms are accordingly a major focus of ongoing
research. Such studies will be advanced by the acquisition and installation of a
integrated tool set for photovoltaic research. Professors Hudgings and Tanenbaum
conduct research on defects and degradation in various types of solar cells,
including organic solar cells using electrical measurements, spatially resolved
optical probing techniques, and lifetime studies both under lamps and true solar
illumination on a rooftop solar tracking platform. Dr. Tanenbaum is now
fabricating and characterizing perovskite solar cells including those made with
mesoporous templates, similar to dye-sensitized solar cells. Dr. Van Ryswyk
focuses on optimizing absorption and charge extraction techniques in dye-
sensitized and quantum dot-based inverted bulk heterojunction cells. While each
research group has independent projects, they hold joint meetings to discuss
their research problems, methods, and results. The Claremont Colleges have a
long history of successful research collaboration and shared facilities, such as
a shared microscopy facility used by researchers across all five colleges,
including these PIs and more than 150 others, mostly advanced
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.