* 1919952
* MRI: Development of a Non-Equilibrium Plasma Coupled Rapid Compression Machine
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Edward Thomas, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 657,627.00

Development of next generation high-efficiency, low-emission engines require
extending the pressure and temperature operation ranges beyond current limits. A
novel approach known as the plasma-assisted combustion (PAC) has recently
demonstrated considerable promise, which can play an important role in enhancing
the basic combustion process. However, the details of exact chemical enhancement
mechanisms remain largely unknown. The main goal of this project is to design,
fabricate and assemble a unique plasma coupled experimental apparatus that will
enable the scientific investigation of PAC at engine relevant conditions.
Additionally, additive manufacturing techniques will be leveraged to fabricate
customized metallic components of complex geometries not possible with
traditional subtractive methods. This project will also include educational and
workforce development activities to train a new generation of engineers and
scientists with the interdisciplinary technical skills. These efforts will
ultimately reduce fuel consumption, ensure energy security, mitigate the
environmental impact of next generation engines, and position the US as a leader
in the development of innovative technologies for transportation/energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This MRI program will allow a multi-
disciplinary group of researchers to develop a unique plasma coupled rapid
compression (PRCM), that is capable of compressing a gaseous fuel and oxidizer
mixture to instigate combustion while under the effects of a non-equilibrium
plasma. Taking advantage of additive manufacturing, the modularity of this
device will allow a variety of different diagnostic measurements to be performed
in order to accurately observe plasma formation, and ultimately interpret auto-
ignition chemistry and physical-chemical interactions with and without the
influence of a plasma. The device also provides well-defined boundary conditions
to compliment experimental studies with numerical modelling approaches. Based on
this instrument, the project aims to elucidate the following scientific
investigations: a) understand the kinetic oxidation scheme of low-temperature
combustion (cool flame chemistry) of hydrocarbon fuels, practical fuels, and
surrogate fuels; b) understand the combustion characteristics of new generation
biofuels derived from algae and non-food source terrestrial biomass; c)
understand the role of plasma chemical effects on the kinetic oxidation scheme
of cool flame chemistry of fuels; and d) demonstrate PAC as a means to enable
advanced compression ignition strategies. Experimental data derived from this
device will be used to develop and validate accurate plasma-specific and low-
temperature chemical kinetic models for use in predictive simulations tools,
thus enabling the design of future engines and improved combustion
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CBET-MRI Program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.