* 1919092
* PFI-TT: Development of Highly Adhesive Hydrogel for Cornea Tissue Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Iman Noshadi, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is a new biocompatible, antimicrobial
and transparent adhesive for corneal repair and grafting that will significantly
reduce costs of extended and secondary treatment associated with current
standards of care. Of the 2.4 million eye injuries yearly in the US, 600,000 are
open globe corneal tears, leading to blindness in 50,000 cases. There are 18
million cases of such blindness worldwide. The annual corneal grafting market is
40,000 procedures nationally and an estimated 185,000 worldwide. The proposed
product is expected to circumvent the limitations of current surgical approaches
and postoperative cost and care in corneal repair. This would result in cost
savings for the entire ecosystem, such as patients, insurance companies
(including Medicare), and hospitals. The commercialization potential in the US
and world markets can potentially generate job opportunities in research and
development, marketing, and manufacturing. Additional technical teaching and
outreach opportunities involving students from underrepresented backgrounds,
women, minorities, and people with disabilities are targeted with this project
work.

The proposed project presents a biocompatible and antimicrobial bioadhesive for
corneal repair and grafting. Current standards of care include suturing and
cyanoacrylate glue, which suffers from additional treatment costs related to
astigmatism, secondary infections, cytotoxicity, and retinopathy. The proposed
product is expected to mitigate these secondary problems with its
biocompatibility, high adhesion, flexibility, and high strength. The adhesive
will rapidly integrate corneal cells to facilitate wound sealing, reducing the
chances of secondary infection and the associated incremental hospitalization
and medication costs. The material transparency will enable rapid vision
restoration. The material is strongly adhesive and antimicrobial, preventing
accidental removal and offering excellent stability and high retention. The
goals of this project will be accomplished with three main tasks. In the first
task, the team will systematically explore the effect of experimental conditions
on bioadhesive characteristics, such as tissue adhesion, biocompatibility,
flexibility, transparency, and antibacterial properties. In the second task,
degradation and retention of the bioadhesive will be determined by investigating
the changes when applied to corneal tears. In the third task, the integrative
capacity of the bioadhesive in vivo will be assessed by studying its effects on
corneal cells, as well as the migration of corneal cells into the bioadhesive
over time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.