* 1919324
* MRI: Acquisition of A Variable Pressure Scanning Electron Microscope with Serial Block-Face Imaging for Bio and Soft Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Paul Katz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 526,915.00

Nano- and micro-structures occur abundantly in both the natural world and in
synthetic materials, and their technological role is growing rapidly. The
imaging of these small structures is difficult, as they are too small to see
with the eye or ordinary optical microscope. Electron microscopes, which employ
electrons instead of light for imaging, can achieve the necessary
magnifications. With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program,
the University of Massachusetts Amherst Electron Microscopy Center is acquiring
a scanning electron microscope with three unique features: (i) no requirement
for exposing specimens to high vacuum, (ii) mitigation of the charge usually
accumulated during imaging, and (iii) an integrated microtome. Amplifying on the
latter, an integrated microtome allows serial sectioning of specimens as a means
to gather a sequence of two-dimensional images that can be combined into a
single, much more informative three-dimensional image. The instrument is a
shared resource supporting research and teaching across campus as well as at
several nearby undergraduate colleges. UMass Amherst has more than 50 vibrant
funded research collaborations with U.S. companies, and many of these
collaborations are being strengthened by the new capabilities to characterize
specimens such as gels, emulsions, composites, adhesives, sensors, biological
tissues, and individual cells. The Center has a strong track record in producing
highly skilled microscopists, and the new instrument plays a central role in
innovative undergraduate and graduate laboratory courses that afford hands-on
training in electron microscopy, an expertise offered at few institutions in the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With this award from
the Major Research Instrumentation program, the University of Massachusetts
Amherst Electron Microscopy Center is acquiring a Variable-Pressure Scanning
Electron Microscope (VP-SEM) equipped with both a cryo-stage and a modular
microtome for serial block-face imaging. The instrument operates at reduced
pressure and provides gas injection for charge compensation, features that
advance the imaging of insulating and/or solvated soft materials and life
science specimens. In conjunction with advanced reconstruction software, the
ultramicrotome will afford mapping in three-dimensions. As a field emission SEM
with an energy-dispersive x-ray spectrometer, an added capability is three-
dimensional elemental mapping. None of these capabilities was previously
available in the Center. Together the new capabilities boost research directed
at diverse topics such as: particle dynamics and structuring on non-volatile and
modestly volatile liquids; morphologies of solvated films, membranes, and gels;
and cell protein localization and neuron mapping. These projects span the campus
and beyond, and users come from 20 or more University of Massachusetts Amherst
departments as well as from 7 to 10 nearby colleges. Placed alongside an
existing High-Resolution Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope and an
Energy-Filtered Field Emission Transmission Electron Microscope, the VP-SEM
complements a strong suite of electron microscopy capabilities, furthering
numerous individual research projects while sparking cross-pollination of ideas
between materials and life science researchers. In addition to access through
undergraduate and graduate courses, the VP-SEM will be available to users from
collaborating U.S. companies, which number more than 50. In conjunction with
other NSF-supported research projects at the University of Massachusetts
Amherst, attractive images are being provided to Ventures in Science Using Arts
Laboratory (VISUAL), an outreach effort that places these images, along with a
laymen's explanation, in high track public venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.