* 1919218
* A Cultural Growth-Mindset Approach to Interest: Implications for Gender Gaps in Computer Science Participation
* EDU,EES
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Sapna Cheryan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,192,434.00

This EHR Core Research award is focused on broadening participation in computer
science by investigating whether reframing academic interest as something
malleable that must be discovered (i.e., a growth mindset of interest) helps
remedy gender gaps in computer science. Despite the overall narrowing of the
gender gap in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields,
the percentage of women computer science majors has remained less than 20% and
has even decreased in recent decades. The near absence of women in computer
science is troubling for several reasons. Technology-focused areas are the
largest and most important STEM fields in which employment opportunities are
growing, and women's exclusion means they are missing out on lucrative and
flexible job opportunities. Similarly, computer science is missing out on
talented women who would make valuable contributions to the discipline and the
technological workforce. The researchers will investigate whether a mindset that
does not seem gendered on its surface - the cultural belief that academic
interest is fixed - contributes to gender gaps in computer science
participation. The research will further examine whether changing educational
environments to foster a growth mindset about interest and pairing it with
information about a welcoming computer science culture reduces gender gaps in
computer science. The findings may suggest relatively simple changes to
educational environments, policies and practices that may encourage women to
more readily consider computer science as an option.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop and test a theoretical model that examines the idea that
students have fixed or growth mindsets not only about intelligence but also
about academic interests. To test the theory that a fixed mindset of interest
limits girls' and women's participation in computer science, two surveys and
three behavioral experiments will be conducted. In Year 1, two surveys will
examine whether university, community college, and high school students endorse
a fixed mindset of interest, and whether endorsement correlates with girls' and
women's lower intentions to pursue computer science. The survey will further
examine whether effects of a fixed mindset are prominent among groups that are
typically disadvantaged in education (e.g., African American women, Latinas,
women and girls from lower SES backgrounds) and how beliefs about the gendered
culture in computer science moderate effects. In Year 2, university and
community college students will learn either a growth mindset of interest or a
control mindset. The research predicts that fostering a growth mindset of
interest will increase women's and girls' interest in computer science. In Year
3, a large-scale field experiment will test whether structural changes to
college advising meetings increases women's computer science course
taking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.