* 1919892
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of dietary fat type on energy gain in the human holobiont
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Rachel Carmody, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 33,800.00

Nutritional and energetic models of human metabolism assume that all dietary
fats have the same caloric value. However, recent developments in gut microbiome
research have challenged this view, with gut microbial communities shifting in
response to different fat-rich diets, and the resulting gut microbiota
differentially impacting energy gain. This dissertation project will examine the
role of dietary fat types on energy gain from a human holobiont perspective,
which interrogates both host and microbial mechanisms of energy harvest from
different dietary fat sources. By assessing the impact of dietary fat type on
host-microbial interactions, the investigators aim to better understand the
process of dietary fat metabolism in ancestral and modern humans, to challenge
traditional models of the isocaloric nature of fats, and to gain insight into
associations between dietary fat intake and increasing rates of metabolic
disease in industrial populations. Apart from contributing to the peer-reviewed
scientific literature, this research will facilitate undergraduate research
opportunities, particularly for women and underrepresented minorities in
science, who presently comprise 80% of the laboratory research staff. In
addition, through connections with the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
and the Harvard Museums of Science and Culture, the investigators have committed
to contributing to programs that make science accessible for a broad public
audience.

The trillions of microbes that reside in the human gut are now understood to
play important roles in digestion and energy regulation. However, to date,
models of past and present human energy budgets have not considered the
microbial contributions to energy harvested from diet. In this research, the
investigators will probe mechanisms of dietary fat metabolism that involve both
host and microbial processes, evaluating the impacts of different dietary fats
on host energy budget, intestinal fat absorption and inflammation, gut microbial
composition, and direct gut microbial contributions to host energy status. To
address these processes, the investigators will use conventional and germ-free
murine models, which are routinely used for studying the effects of microbial
community shifts on human physiology. This research will clarify the role that
different dietary fats have played in the evolution of human energy metabolism,
and will suggest new pathways for targeting the high and rising rates of
obesity, type II diabetes, and other metabolic diseases in the industrialized
world.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.