* 1919307
* Expectations and Choice in Macroeconomics: Causal Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Yuriy Gorodnichenko, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 749,960.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most economic decisions, such as how much to save,
what price to set or whether to hire a new worker, depend on what people expect
about the future. However, understanding exactly how expectations affect
people's decisions has been a challenge since expectations and decisions are
made jointly. This project implements quarterly surveys of households
participating in a consumer spending program to address this challenge and
explore how expectations lead to economic decisions. First, a random group of
participants will receive information on economy such as on monetary policy and
inflation, which will change some of their expectations on the economy. Second,
the survey will help in measuring and tracking those expectations both before
and after the new information is provided to participants. Third, the project
tracks how these changes in their expectations affect their actual spending
decisions through consumer spending program they are enrolled. Jointly, this
will provide unprecedented, large-scale exploration on how households form
expectations with new information and how these expectations affect their
economic decisions. Thus, the project will also help in understanding how
communication strategies of policy makers may affect household economic
decisions through their impact on household expectations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the link between the expectations
of economic agents and their actions in a clear causal framework. The project
will introduce randomized information treatments in a new regular survey of
households whose spending is simultaneously tracked on a daily frequency.
Randomized information treatments provide an exogenous source of variation in
the beliefs of agents. Surveys allow for measuring those beliefs, both before
and after the treatments. Micro-data then allow for assessing how agents?
actions change. Jointly, these tools generate exogenous variation in beliefs
which can then be used to characterize exactly how changes in beliefs translate
into economic decisions. Within this framework, we will be able to study the
specific mechanisms through which expectations affect decisions, how agents form
their expectations about different variables jointly, what communications
strategies policy-makers can use to shape the expectations of agents, and how
these effects can be mapped into structural models of decision-making and their
underlying parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.