* 1919792
* MRI: Acquisition of Single-Crystal X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Matthew Platz, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 264,849.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation and Chemical
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Charles Simmons from the University of
Hawaii at Hilo and colleague Matthew Platz have acquired a single crystal X-ray
diffractometer (XRD). A diffractometer is a powerful tool used to determine the
detailed structures of compounds which can be crystallized. It produces an X-ray
diffraction pattern which is analyzed to obtain the microscopic structure, that
is, the distances and angles between atoms in the material. This structural data
provides insight on the properties and possible uses of a substance under
investigation, for example natural products of local interest. Hawaii is home to
many unique and largely unexplored natural products, and there is much interest
in these substances as pharmaceuticals. The diffractometer is housed at the U.S.
Pacific Basin X-ray Diffraction Laboratory at Hawaii at Hilo. It is serving
researchers at this institution and others in the region including the
University of Hawaii at Manoa, Brigham Young University-Hawaii and the
University of Guam. The instrument is used to train undergraduate and graduate
students in research and in an undergraduate laboratory course preparing them
for the modern workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of an XRD
instrument is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. XRD is
being employed in projects to synthesize cobalt-dioxygen complexes. The
photochemistry products from irradiation of diazo compounds are being
characterized. The structures and absolute configurations of natural products
derived from endophytic fungi and plants are determined along with other natural
products of possible therapeutic value. Metal-organic framework systems (MOFs)
are also synthesized and crystallized for study and characterization - these
materials have many applications in producing clean
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.