* 1919263
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Stochastic Intertemporal Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kota Saito, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 190,311.00

This award funds research on the economic theory of human decision-making. The
first part of this project will address common everyday situations where
individuals make choices repeatedly over time. In many of these cases, people's
preferences over various goods may change from day to day. In other words, their
preferences are stochastic. This research will propose a new theoretical model
to help us understand how these stochastic preferences affect choice behavior.
In particular, people's preferences to consume earlier or later would be an
important factor. The second part of this project will study the welfare
implications of stochastic preferences. When preferences change over time, it is
unclear whether policy interventions would be beneficial and help improve
individual well-being. This research will provide new tools and methodologies
that will inform public policy for stochastic preferences. In general, results
from this project will ultimately aid researchers in developing new insights for
businesses, government agencies and other institutions that will benefit the
U.S. public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study the dynamics of
stochastic intertemporal preferences. Existing models in the stochastic choice
literature have mostly taken probabilistic choice frequencies as given without
explicitly modeling repetition. The first part of this project will provide a
repeated choice foundation for stochastic choice. The aim will be to formalize
repetition and develop a tractable (i.e., recursive) model of stochastic
intertemporal preferences. Existing standard models assume agents are expected
utility maximizers and have standard (i.e. additive time-separable)
intertemporal preferences. However, many experimental studies suggest that these
standard models are too restrictive to accurately describe true human
preferences. This research will take this into account and allow for more
general intertemporal preferences such as Epstein-Zin (1989). From the
perspective of inference and estimation, this will be crucial as not taking into
account the intertemporal structure of the dynamic problem will lead to biased
estimates of agents? preferences. The second part of this project will study
dynamic consistency and stationarity in the context of stochastic choice.
Research on this has been limited partly due to the difficulty of modeling such
concepts for stochastic preferences. For instance, a natural extension of
stationarity to stochastic choice would always be violated whenever preferences
are stochastic. This is important because traditional violations of stationarity
have been viewed as instances of dynamic inconsistency and grounds for policy
interventions. New definitions and characterizations of dynamic consistency and
stationarity for stochastic choice are needed as imprecise definitions would
lead to policy interventions that may be counter-productive or welfare-
decreasing for agents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.