* 1919839
* MRI: Acquisition of a Big Data and High Performance Computing System to Catalyze Delaware Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Cathy Wu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,399,992.00

Cyberinfrastructure (CI) drives progress in science, engineering, and business
in a major way, as stated prominently in the 2015 presidential National
Strategic Computing Initiative. CI - consisting of computer, data, networking
and related resources - enables new ideas and products to be explored
"virtually," without building expensive prototypes and physical experiments. CI
also powers almost all business processes today. This project implements a major
computational and data resource at the University of Delaware (UD), enabling and
accelerating progress in all sciences and addressing grand challenges facing our
society. Through partnerships with regional universities, colleges, health
institutions and the private sector, the new resource will also boost research,
development, and education in the greater Delaware
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired compute and storage system will serve as
a critical and transformative upgrade to Delaware's cyberinfrastructure,
enabling research and educational activities for a large number of faculty
across all UD colleges as well as for users from academic and industrial
partners within the broader Delaware region. The requested instrumentation is
designed to enable research broadly across disciplines with diverse software and
hardware needs including, but not limited to, problems that scale to large
numbers of processors and data sets, involve large data transfers, use advanced
graphics accelerators, and require new operating modes. It will also serve to
train students and researchers on computational and data-intensive methods and
enhance these skills in the greater Delaware region. The acquisition of the
instrumentation, called DARWIN (Delaware Advanced Research Workforce and
Innovation Network), will complement ongoing UD initiatives focused on improving
and enhancing networking, storage, and compute infrastructure. This addition
will also be timely, providing great synergy with the new UD Data Science
Institute and the faculty network in high-performance computing led by the
project investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC), the Office of Integrative
Activities, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.