* 1919908
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer with a cryoprobe for expanding interdisciplinary research and education at the Fresno State
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Viswanathan Krishnan, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,071,023.00

An award is made to California State University, Fresno (Fresno State) to
acquire a 500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer with a
cryoprobe. The instrument will be the centerpiece of the Fresno State NMR
facility, which supports research, teaching, and student training across
multiple disciplines including biology, biochemistry, biotechnology, chemistry,
and physics. Fresno State serves a population with a high proportion of students
that are traditionally under-represented in these disciplines including
minority, first-generation, and socio-economically disadvantaged students. The
spectrometer will be used to train over 50 undergraduate and graduate research
students from diverse backgrounds each semester. The instrument will be used to
modernize undergraduate and graduate laboratory classes and to incorporate
2D-NMR methods and multi-nuclear experiments. The NMR spectrometer will also be
utilized in Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs), which are
being broadly implemented at Fresno State across the curriculum to improve
access to research opportunities. Projects will strengthen ties and
collaborations with the regional agricultural biotechnology industry, government
research laboratories, and local community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will support and enhance research across a broad spectrum of research
areas. These include studies of the structure and dynamics of intrinsically
disordered proteins, development of methods for real-time kinetics measurements,
natural product/medicinal chemistry characterization, and several metabolomics
studies. The project will also enable new projects to be initiated including
characterization of nanomaterials, nanobody-antigen binding studies, and
development of methods to investigate organic radical kinetics and mechanisms.
Evaluations of CUREs will provide insights on embedding NMR-dependent research
into the curriculum at a diverse, comprehensive
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.