* 1919239
* PFI-TT:  Understanding proton conductivity in nanocomposite materials to enable advanced hydrogen energy devices
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Delia Milliron, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable broad adoption of
technologies used for carbon-free production of hydrogen, and fuel cells that
use hydrogen to generate power for vehicles and industrial applications. The
project involves extensive engagement with potential customers for the new
material under development to advance the commercialization pathway. The
economical materials under development will enable conversion of wasted heat
into efficiency gains. This new technology will reduce system cost and
complexity by enabling less stringent requirements on several aspects of the
fuel cell system. Students engaged in the project and the broader community will
benefit from the learning involved in this process through outreach and
mentorship programs involving the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop composite
membranes comprising thermally stable polymers with embedded ceramic
nanocrystals; these composites have been demonstrated to exhibit unusual
protonic conductivity at elevated temperature and low humidity. Considering that
thermal and water management systems impose substantial constraints, complexity,
and cost on hydrogen energy systems, these characteristics offer a substantial
opportunity to more broadly deploy clean energy technologies. The research plan
includes a systematic investigation of the properties of nanocomposite
membranes, varying their composition - including each of the components and the
volume fraction of each - to strategically understand the impact on relevant
properties including conductivity, gas permeability, and mechanical integrity.
To enable these efforts, the research plan also involves development of membrane
fabrication techniques relevant for nanocomposite membranes at the lab scale and
also facilitating the translation to industrial scale, cost-effective
manufacturing. Both the performance metrics assessed and the fabrication
strategies employed in the course of the project will be informed by industry
and commercialization experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.