* 1919944
* MRI: Development of a high-magnetic-field ultrafast and terahertz spectrometer for materials research in the Deep South
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* David Hilton, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 735,087.00

This award to Tulane University from the Major Research Instrumentation program
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences supports the design and building of an
advanced scientific tool for studying how matter and materials behave when they
are placed in very strong magnetic field. This instrument will consist of two
main parts: a very strong superconducting magnet and a set of lasers. Laser
light will be used to probe how materials react to the strong magnetic field and
to very low temperatures. Upon completion of the instrument development, the
instrument will be available to outside user. The major science drivers of this
instrument is in quantum matter, the advancement of our understanding of how
electrons behave inside a wide variety of materials and imbue them with their
properties, such as magnetism or superconductivity. Such basic scientific
understanding underpins many technological marvels such as in medical diagnostic
devices, computing chips in our phones and tablets, magnetic data storage
technology, cell phone cameras, new energy-efficient LED light bulbs, and more.
Through basic physics research, the proposed instrument will promote the
progress of physics and advance national prosperity. This instrument will also
contribute to advanced education of graduate and undergraduate students, thus
building an educated national workforce for the new century. As a priority, the
team of researchers promotes the participation in science and engineering fields
of women and underrepresented minorities from Xavier University of Louisiana, a
local Historically Black College or University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the development of a multi-user instrument for ultrafast terahertz
(THz) spectroscopy in high magnetic fields of up to 17 T. The magnet cryostat
provides the sample temperature control in the 2.5-300 K range and is cryogen-
free. Four high-field experimental modalities will be available in both Faraday
and Voigt optical configurations: i) THz time-domain spectroscopy based on
photoconductive antennas with 0.2 - 3 THz spectral range; ii) time-resolved THz
spectroscopy based on air-plasma THz generation and air-breakdown detection with
0.3 - 10 THz spectral range; iii) second harmonic generation with sample
rotation about the surface normal; iv) optical pump-probe spectroscopy. The
instrument will enable innovative research in magneto-electric excitations and
optical nonreciprocity in multiferroics; search for the optical signatures of
the chiral anomaly and the non-trivial band topology in Weyl semimetals; second
harmonic generation and optical pump-probe studies of topological and magnetic
materials; time-resolved THz spectroscopy of high-temperature superconducting
pnictides. The instrument will become a part of the nationwide advanced research
infrastructure. The instrument is unique, as it far outperforms in its
specifications and capabilities other similar university-based research tools in
the United States. In addition to eleven identified outside groups who have
expressed a strong interest in the instrument capabilities in the nearest
term.The instrument attracts potential local users and from across the Nation.
The project contributes to the training of next the generation instrument
developers. In the long run it will contribute to the education of dozens of
graduate and undergraduate students. The project explicitly promotes the
participation of women and underrepresented minorities in sciences and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.