* 1919364
* MRI: Acquisition of Si(Li) Detectors and Two BGO Compton Suppression Shields for the Development of the La Crosse fIREBAll
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Ani Aprahamian, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 396,747.00

This award provides support for the University of Wisconsin - La Crosse (UWL), a
primary undergraduate institution, to upgrade the existing ICEBall array into
the La Crosse Internal conveRsion Electron Ball Array (fIREBAll) so that it has
the capabilities to probe some of the most important unsolved questions in
nuclear science. One of these questions was identified by the Nuclear Science
Advisory Committee in 2015: what is the origin of the elements? Other questions
include exploring how theoretical models describe light nuclei, low-lying energy
levels, and the various degrees of freedom in deformed nuclei. The new
instrument will be a significant addition to nuclear science and the only
detector array of its type in the USA. In addition, fIREBAll will provide
scientists and students at primarily undergraduate institutions access to
cutting-edge nuclear science facilities and will contribute to the education and
training of numerous US students. This is a unique opportunity to train students
in various research and development skills including using various detectors,
troubleshooting, gathering and analyzing data, and the disseminating results in
a collaborative environment. These skills are transferable to careers which
advance the national health, welfare, and secure national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funds from this Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) grant will create an instrument for the measurements of conversion
electrons in coincidence with gamma rays, while supporting the training of
multiple undergraduate students in advanced detector techniques. The upgrade
includes the purchase of six new Si(Li) detectors, two anti-Compton Bizmuth
Germanate (BGO) shields for two existing Germanium gamma-ray detectors. The new
fIREBAll with Compton suppressed Ge detectors will be a powerful tool to unravel
some of the most outstanding challenges in nuclear structure (the nature of 0+
states in deformed nuclei, testing ab-initio theoretical model predictions in
light nuclei) and nuclear astrophysics (the nature of the Hoyle state and other
alpha cluster components in light nuclei effecting stellar evolution). The new
instrument will be a significant addition to the capabilities of the nation and
will open new opportunities for students from the University of Wisconsin - La
Crosse (UWL) and other primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs), including
Indiana University South Bend (IUSB) and Indiana Wesleyan University
(IWU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.