* 1919965
* MRI: Development of Real-time 3D Social Signal Imaging System (SSIS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Hyun Soo Park, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

This project represents a step toward a computational model capable of detecting
early social behavioral markers in children at risk for autism spectrum
disorder, schizophrenia, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. The real-time 3D
Social Signal Imaging System (SSIS) will be designed to precisely measure social
signals utilizing cameras producing billions of pixels dozens of times per
second. The infrastructure will be designed to enable reconstruction of the 3D
geometry of gaze, face, finger, body, and physical appearance. The system is
expected to be capable of generating a vast amount of multiple perspective
visual data to reconstruct high fidelity 3D signals, needed to enable social
intelligence that can decode every nuance of human
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to discern subtle social signals
(e.g., gaze following) can be computationally modeled by leveraging a massive
camera system. The Social Signal Imaging System (SSIS) facilitates quantitative
measurements of the social signals in 3D at unprecedented temporal and spatial
resolutions. This development involves the following steps: (i) Design a
distributed visual computing architecture to efficiently process the Multiview
visual data streams; (ii) Build a new high-fidelity 3D representation of the
view-invariant social signals (gaze, face, finger, body, appearance); (iii)
Create a novel 3D dataset of social signals for use in discovering behavioral
markers; and (iv) Develop new computer vision algorithms (recognition, matching,
tracking, reconstruction) tailored to social signal imaging that minimize
computational latency while maintaining accuracy. The system provides a unique
characterization of microscopic social signals that enable overcoming
fundamental limitations of existing approaches in behavioral assessment of at-
risk children. This work impacts diverse disciplines such as robotics,
neuroscience, psychology, psychiatry, and medicine. The outcomes will be
disseminated through K-12 students from under-represented groups via workshops,
machine learning and technology summer camps, and other
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.