* 1919090
* MRI: Development of a next generation velocity profiling float
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Zoltan Szuts, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 294,000.00

In the past decades much insight has been made into ocean currents and energy
cycles from a profiling float that measures velocity. This instrument is no
longer available, however, because an essential microprocessor has been
discontinued. To maintain this observational platform, and to improve the
profiler's capabilities and extensibility for future applications, the
researchers will develop a new velocity profiler. It will be used to advance our
observational knowledge of ocean currents and the ocean-atmosphere system. With
its unique sampling capabilities for measuring subsurface ocean velocity, it is
particularly useful for studying oceanic internal waves, ocean mixing, wind
input of energy into the ocean, currents under sea ice and marine glaciers, and
the ocean response to hurricanes, among many other uses. The final instrument
design will be made commercially available through an industry partner, for
broad availability by the oceanographic community. In addition, this project
will transition engineering knowledge to a next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The velocity profiling float to be developed
measures weak electric field in the ocean to infer water velocity, a highly
exacting type of measurement. Largely relying on existing hardware, the
development tasks include updating the internal electronics, inserting a second
microprocessor, and rewriting the firmware and logic that controls the float.
The design goal is to build an extensible system that can easily be modified for
new sampling patterns and can easily be integrated with new sensors, such as
turbulent microstructure and biochemical sensors. The ability to perform
adaptive adjustments to its sampling pattern while underwater will also be
included. Extensive testing on the bench, in tanks, and in the field will be
required to ensure a robust final system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.