* 1919528
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Fundamental Research in Engineering, Biochemistry and Biology at Gonzaga University
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Brook Swanson, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2022
* USD 266,988.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a state-
of-the-art atomic force microscope (AFM) at Gonzaga University, which provides
the ability to accurately measure nanoscale features, deformations and forces,
as well as surface chemical and mechanical properties. These capabilities enable
fundamental scientific investigations in a myriad of multi-disciplinary research
areas at Gonzaga, which include tip-based nanoscale additive manufacturing,
nanoscale tribology and materials science, biological imaging and organismal
biomechanics. The knowledge generated from this research could catalyze
development of novel advanced nanostructured materials and new nanoscale
manufacturing methods for sensors and devices. Research on biophysical
macromolecular interactions could lead to a new understanding of how biological
and ecological systems function. The AFM will be integrated into the curriculum
to involve undergraduate students in multidisciplinary, experimental nanoscience
and hands-on undergraduate research. The instrument will enhance Gonzaga
University's outreach efforts within the greater Spokane and Eastern Washington
area, including collaborative partnerships with regional schools, universities
and local industry. Student involvement through industry partnerships directly
contributes to enhancing skills of future generations of the U.S.
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This AFM is capable of imaging samples of
various sizes while maintaining a lateral and vertical resolution of &lt; 0.1nm,
and a force resolution of &lt; 100pN in both normal and lateral directions. The
AFM is furthermore equipped to allow measurements in static or continuous liquid
flow at precisely controlled temperatures (within 1 degree C and up to 300
degrees C) as well as performing accurate nanomechanical and electrical
conductivity measurements. These capabilities will enable the development of a
fundamental understanding of the mechanisms (physical and chemical) by which
nanoparticles in solution interact with substrates under sliding motion,
resulting in the growth of functional nanostructures. These findings will
accelerate development of novel nano and microscale electromechanical devices
with potential applications in healthcare and automation. Measurements using the
AFM will also help to establish fundamental relationships between mechanical
properties of nanoscale films that form under sliding motion, and their friction
and wear properties. These structure-property relationships will enable the
design of advanced lubricant materials, with transformative impact on efficiency
and reliability of industrial and transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.