* 1919235
* PFI-TT:  Using machine listening for non-invasive monitoring of the status and wellbeing of commercial poultry flocks
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* David Anderson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,999.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enhance the well-being and
productivity of commercially raised chickens in our food supply chain. The
poultry industry is highly competitive, and poultry has become one of the most
efficient animal proteins to produce. Billions of birds are grown in the United
States each year and most are raised by independent farmers in cooperation with
larger producers. This PFI project is aimed at providing non-invasive,
continuous monitoring of chicken flocks to alert the farmer to problems in a
timely manner and aid the farmer in assessing the welfare and needs of his
flocks. The end result is expected to be healthier and better-cared for birds as
well as improved farm productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
makes it possible to use machine learning to monitor audio environments, in this
case chicken farms, without needing extensive labeled training data. The
approaches typically used for audio machine learning require extensive labeled
training sample sets and tuning. However, humans can become familiar with the
sounds in a particular situation, and notice when something occurs that does not
belong, without significant training. By using algorithms that learn the
structure of sounds in an environment and learn the typical variation of those
sounds, the methods used in the proposed project can act similarly to a human
listener to notice significant changes (anomalies) in a soundscape on a farm.
The anomalies are characterized by severity and can be brought to the attention
of a farmer or researchers who can choose to label or ignore the new sound.
Labeled sounds can then be used to automatically label future anomalies. This
project will deploy listening devices into multiple commercial chicken farms,
collect continuous audio recordings and metadata, and use the collected data to
improve the performance and usefulness of the systems for monitoring the
chickens' welfare and their environment. This listening method is non-invasive
and causes no stress to the animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.