* 1919653
* MRI: Acquisition of Nanoscribe Photonic Professional GT2 3D Laser Lithography System for interdisciplinary nanoscience research and training
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2022
* USD 395,434.00

Many technology advances over the last 50 years have been driven by
nanofabrication techniques developed by the semiconductor industry. While
powerful, they are fundamentally two dimensional technologies. In other words,
they can only be used to fabricate "flat" things. The recent development of 3D
printing has allowed custom manufacturing of complex three dimensional objects
at millimeter resolution. Recent advances have enabled three dimensional
printing/fabrication at the micrometer and nanoscale. This project enables the
acquisition of a Nanoscribe Photonic Professional GT system and its deployment
within the user facilities of the Cornell Nanoscale Facility (CNF). The
Nanoscribe is a new type of instrument which allows three dimensional
fabrication of nanoscale structures, opening many new avenues of research. One
exciting development is the application of this instrument to the study of
biological systems. For example, the instrument will be used to fabricate 3D
structures to study cell migration in confined spaces. This project is relevant
to the spread of cancer. Another project will use the Nanoscribe to fabricate
"microswimmers" for targeted drug delivery applications. The instrument will be
available to academic and industrial users from across the country through the
well-developed CNF user program, significantly broadening its intellectual and
economic impact. This instrument will have significant human resources impact in
the target technical areas. The technology of the Nanoscribe is new and the
skilled user base is small. Expansion of the number of users is critical to
realizing its full impact. CNF will also provide new educational materials
including short course lecture material and this new tool will be featured in
outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nanoscribe Photonic Professional GT
system allows 3D nanolithography down to 160 nm using the nonlinear optical
process of two photon polymerization. A near-IR laser beam, operating through a
microscope objective, is scanned under computer control, with polymerization
occurring only at the high photon flux focal point. CNF users will explore
applications of this technology to the following major areas: (1)
Micro/nanophotonics: guiding light in three dimensions and development of
photonic metamaterials; (2) Nanobiotechnology: fabrication of scaffolds and
micromechanical and microfluidic devices to study biochemical processes; (3)
Neural electronics: Interfacing electronics with the brain and nervous system;
(4) Heterointegration: Integration of electronics, photonics, and biologics
through three dimensional structures. The PIs at Cornell are accomplished in the
fields of Materials Science, Mechanical, and Biomedical Engineering. A number of
projects will be impacted by this instrument. New polymer materials suitable for
two-photon 3D printing will be developed, including elastomeric materials for
nanoscale sensors and actuators. 3D nanolithography will be used to fabricate in
vitro models mimicking physiological networks and interstitial spaces to study
the migration of cells in confined spaces related to cancer metastasis. Fluid
motile structures ("microswimmers"), that are self-actuated or remotely driven
by light or ultrasound could be used in vivo to deliver drugs to targeted areas.
Other principal users will use the technology to explore reactions within cells,
to develop 3D scaffolds for cell growth, and for 3D photonic metamaterials. This
will be a multiuser instrument with impact on a broad range of science and
engineering fields. Additionally, through the CNF user program and its highly
developed training process, this acquisition will have significant human
resources impact in the target technical areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.