* 1919153
* Determining the function of sterol lipids in the bacterial domain
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Paula Welander, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 821,788.00

The overall goal of this project is to determine the functions cholesterol-like
lipid molecules have in bacteria. Cholesterol plays many essential roles in the
biology of higher organisms, but the importance of cholesterol-like lipids in
simpler organisms like bacteria is not well understood. The hypothesis to be
tested here is that sterols allow bacteria to sense and react to low levels of
oxygen that adversely affect their ability to grow. The work has the potential
to expand our understanding of a fundamental cellular pathway and can inform
future studies that have broad societal impacts - from human physiology to
response to environmental change. This project will also contribute to the goal
of broadening participation in STEM fields by providing scientific training for
postdoctoral scholars as well as graduate and undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds. Undergraduate underrepresented minority students will
participate in this project through two summer programs at Stanford to undertake
research projects that are directly relevant to the scientific goals of this
proposal. Further, a seminar series that will bring early career
underrepresented scientists to Stanford to present their research and interact
with students and postdoctoral scholars will be developed and executed by the
principle investigators, both of whom are underrepresented minority women
scientists themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a variety of
molecular studies will be undertaken to investigate the functional role of
cholesterol-like lipids, or sterols, in the bacterium Methylococcus capsulatus.
M. capsulatus, an environmentally relevant microbe that grows by consuming
methane and oxygen, was the first bacterium shown to produce sterols over 40
years ago. However, the function of these very important lipids in bacteria
remains a mystery. This project will test the hypothesis that the biosynthesis
of certain sterol structures within this microbe signals to the cell that it is
experiencing low oxygen stress (termed hypoxia), a condition that adversely
affects the bacterium's physiology. To test this hypothesis, the researchers
will: (1) determine how varying oxygen levels affect sterol synthesis in M.
capsulatus; (2) identify and characterize proteins necessary for transporting
specific sterol structures to the outer bacterial membrane under different
oxygen conditions; and 3) determine what genes are turned on and off when M.
capsulatus sterol-deficient mutant cells are grown under oxygen-replete and
oxygen-limited conditions. Together, these studies have the potential to
identify unique sterol-binding proteins and transporters, as well as novel
sterol regulatory mechanisms in bacteria. This type of a regulatory role for
sterols has been shown in eukaryotes but would represent a novel function in the
bacterial domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.