* 1919596
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Undergraduate Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Mary Daub, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 485,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Gregory Springsteen from Furman
University and colleagues Timothy Hanks and Mary Daub are acquiring a 500 MHz
NMR spectrometer equipped with an automatic sample changer. In general, Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The NMR studies improve understanding of synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research. This broadly accessible instrumentation
strengthens the regional NMR analytical infrastructure and help advance the
scientific careers of many undergraduate students from this institution, as well
as those from neighboring Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
community colleges and first generation-serving institutions. Industrial
collaborations are also in place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially aids exploration
of prebiotic reactions leading to new knowledge on the origin of biological
metabolism and for the development of sensors that could be useful for drug-
delivery vesicles built from self-assembled fatty acids. The spectrometer is
used to characterize synthesized compounds using oxidative photocycloaddition
reactions that may have potential use as antifungal and antibiotic compounds and
it is also employed to elucidate structure-activity relationships in the
hibiscone family of natural products. The new instrumentation is being utilized
for studies on solar energy conversion to be stored as chemical energy and for
the study of immobilized surface luminescent materials, and for the study of the
DNA-binding proteins having a motif known as AT hook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.