* 1919670
* MRI:  Development of a Multimodal Instrument for Simultaneous Mechanical and Fluorescence Spectroscopy Measurements of Single Molecules and Molecular Aggregates
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ionel Popa, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 983,741.00

An award is made to the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) to support the
development of multimodal instrument for simultaneous mechanical and
fluorescence spectroscopy measurements of single molecules and molecular
aggregates. This instrument will enable cutting-edge research and education in
the areas of molecular and cellular biology, high-throughput drug screening and
cellular analysis, and development of new biomaterials. This new instrument will
be part of the Biophysical Microspectroscopy Facility and will serve several
laboratories at UWM, as well as other institutions locally, nationally and
abroad. Building on their strong record of involving underrepresented minorities
in STEM and training graduate, undergraduate and high school students in their
research programs, the PIs will use this project to also educate the next
generation of scientists and engineers. During the development phase,
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers will be involved in the
design, custom-manufacturing, computer programming, and development of new
protocols for imaging, single molecule spectroscopy and for data analysis. This
project will also involve middle school and high school students from the
Milwaukee area, and will be used for demonstration purposes and for pilot data
acquisition and analysis, respectively. Once completed, this facility will
provide novel capabilities to the research programs of numerous early-career and
senior investigators; it will also play an essential role in preparing the
technologically literate workforce of the future, through elaborate outreach
programs, as well as teaching and training of undergraduate, graduate, and post-
graduate students that will run during the award period and beyond. The new
instrument design will be made available to other researchers or US companies
interested in bringing this technology to market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument developed here combines magnetic tweezers, a technique developed by
the PI to trap paramagnetic beads and apply mechanical forces to single
molecules and cells with Forster resonance energy transfer (FRET) and
fluorescence spectroscopy, a method developed by the co-PI to study interactions
between molecules and aggregates with spectral resolution. Such a hybrid
instrument is not currently commercially available and will require several
labor-intensive steps, such as design and fabrication of custom parts, optical
alignment and optimization, an integrated control software interface, etc. This
instrument presents some unique features. The parallel implementation of force
and fluorescence spectroscopy will allow measurements of single-molecule
fluorescence with spectral resolution of about 3 nm (over most of the visible
spectrum) under mechanical perturbation with a force resolution of 0.1 pN up in
the nN range and over hour-to-days sampling times. The multidisciplinary team
assembled by the PI is ideally suited to develop and validate this technology,
and combines exquisite technical expertise, facilities, experience with
developing and running an imaging facility, and close collaborations between
physicists, biologists and other life scientists. The instrument will be used
for a variety of research studies that involve lateral interactions between
proteins under controlled static or dynamic force situations and freely
diffusing molecules of a different or the same type, e.g., to study force-
induced ligand binding, folding intermediates, antibody detection at single
molecule level, receptor-receptor association, and receptor-ligand interactions.
The project is jointly funded by the Office of Integrative Activities Major
Research Instrumentation Program and the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.