* 1919714
* EAGER: Investigating the possibility of low temperature (&amp;lt;700 C) melt in silicic igneous systems
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Craig Lundstrom, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2022
* USD 96,876.00

The questions of how Earth's crust was made by silicic magmas, and how large
volcanoes like Yellowstone erupt, have perplexed geologists for centuries. This
project will include collecting new geochemical data from observed volcanic
rocks and performing laboratory experiments aimed at assessing the controversial
hypothesis that magmas at temperatures of 500 to 550 degrees C play a role in
making and erupting silicic melts. The project has potential to make
transformative change on views of how silicic magma systems operate with
potential impacts including how the continental crust forms, why silicic magmas
erupt, and how ore deposits form. This project will train a graduate student,
and develop a new device for thermal gradients in a cold seal system that will
benefit other experimental petrologists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory
project builds upon the recent finding that hydrous peralkaline melts can
coexist with quartz + feldspar at temperatures below the nominal igneous solidus
(700 degrees C). Three tasks aimed at assessing the possibility that this low
temperature melt exists and plays a role in eruption of silicic magmas are
proposed: 1) Assess the role of decompression of low temperature melt in
equilibrium with quartz and feldspar by releasing pressure from 1 kb to 0.3 kb
and comparing to know phase equilibria; 2) Develop a thermal gradient apparatus
using cold seal vessels at 1 kb pressure; 3) Compare the intra mineral isotope
ratios of U, Fe and Si from mineral separates of the Fish Canyon Tuff to assess
if connections between the making of granites and silicic volcanic rocks can be
discerned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.