* 1919499
* Collaborative Research: Productivity, Efficiency, and Distortions in the U.S. Shale Boom
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ryan Kellogg, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 536,738.00

Widespread improvements in the productivity of hydraulic fracturing and
horizontal drilling (fracking) have dramatically reshaped U.S. energy markets,
unlocking nearly $1 trillion of previously uneconomic shale oil and gas
reserves. This project develops a detailed database that links data on mineral
leases and well-level drilling and production in the U.S. The project then uses
this database to document the causes of productivity growth in the U.S. shale
business and measure barriers to further improvements in efficiency. This
research examines how firms? economic and contractual environment shapes oil and
gas productivity and resource allocation. By combining evidence across multiple
U.S. shale plays, the project will provide the first large-scale evidence of how
changes in the efficiency of the industry have affected U.S. oil and gas
markets. Moreover, the construction of the database is a valuable contribution
that substantially facilitates the entry of future researchers into empirical
work on the U.S. oil and gas industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first study
will quantify the economic distortions generated by contractual features in
mineral leases, which are agreements between oil and gas firms and private
landowners. This research studies how primary term and royalty clauses in
mineral leases affect firms? drilling decisions and measures their aggregate
impact on hydrocarbon supply. The second study will measure the effect of oil
and gas price booms and busts on productivity growth. Many industry participants
argue that productivity improvements are greatest during a bust, due to the
freeing up of human capital from day-to-day drilling activity. This argument
runs counter to standard models in which productivity improvements are most
valuable and therefore undertaken when prices are high. This project will
provide the first empirical evidence as to when large productivity improvements
occur in the shale industry. The third study will explore the wide distribution
of firm size in U.S. shale business, which is suggestive of important
differences across firms in productivity, and the scope for misallocation of
mineral assets. This study will measure the productivity of firms and parcels
and then characterize the conditions under which inefficient allocations are
generated and persist. Overall, these projects will advance the knowledge on
economy-wide productivity and misallocation. The oil and gas industry provide an
ideal setting to study these questions because data on both investment and
investment outcomes are available at the level of the individual investment.
Further, the database linking information on drilling, completions, and
production to mineral leases allow for identification in this setting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;---*&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.