* 1919857
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating Genomic and Expression-level Adaptations for Detoxification in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Anthony Tosi, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

Cyanide is a poison that is common among plants and toxic to most animals.
Nonetheless, three species of bamboo lemur focus most of their feeding time on
various parts of Malagasy giant bamboo, which exposes the lemurs to 12-50 times
their estimated lethal dose of cyanide on a daily basis. This project will
examine the underlying physiology and genomics of cyanide detoxification in
bamboo lemurs. In addition to addressing the decades-old puzzle of how these
lemurs are able to consume high levels of cyanide, this study may inform the
development of therapies, antidotes, or prophylactics to cyanide exposure in
humans. During the course of this work, the PI and co-PI will invite and recruit
undergraduates from Kent State University's McNair Scholars Program, whose
mission is to help first-generation, low-income undergraduates matriculate to a
doctoral degree program. The co-PI will also utilize close ties with Northeast
Ohio's public libraries and schools to present this project to students and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central questions of this study focus
on known routes of cyanide detoxification among mammals. Low doses of the poison
can be metabolized by a variety of conserved mechanisms, foremost among which is
a pathway that uses sulfurtransferase enzymes. The limiting factors for this
mechanism appear to be relative expression levels for these enzymes and the
availability of sulfur-donor molecules (e.g., thiosulfate). Therefore, the first
working hypothesis of this study is that H. aureus has adapted to detoxify its
highly cyanogenic diet through positive selection on genes involved in the
metabolism of sulfur or sulfur-containing amino acids. This hypothesis will be
tested by assembling and mining a reference-quality genome for H. aureus and
comparing it to data taken from a proposed genome assembly for Lemur catta, the
most closely related species of dietary generalist. It is further hypothesized
that H. aureus detoxifies its high levels of circulating cyanide through
adaptive changes to the composition of the bloodstream. This second hypothesis
will be tested by transcriptomic and metabolomic methods in order to compare the
expression profiles and thiosulfate levels, respectively, of free-ranging H.
aureus and captive L. catta. Together, these methods will examine adaptive
changes in the H. aureus genome, as well as the whole-blood transcriptome and
metabolome, which are related to the exceptional cyanide tolerance of this
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.