* 1919805
* MRI:  Acquisition of a High Resolution Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for the Advancement of Materials and Biological Research at Oklahoma State University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yolanda Vasquez, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 492,163.00

An award is made to the Oklahoma State University (OSU) to acquire a confocal
laser scanning microscope. The instrument will provide advanced imaging
capabilities to support research from faculty, postdoctoral researchers,
graduate students and undergraduate students in over 10 departments from OSU
Stillwater campus, Tulsa campus, and other institutes in Oklahoma. The proposed
microscope will become part of the array of equipment that the OSU Microscopy
Lab uses for public outreach and engagement, including STEM education at the
K-12 level. This project is also embedded in the OSU research mission and
provides support and training opportunities to students from groups that are
traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. This project will have an
immediate impact on 62 individuals from underrepresented groups. Acquisition of
this instrument will not only impact research and research training but will
also play an important role in development of a diverse, globally competitive
STEM workforce by advancing research at OSU and assisting in the recruitment of
underrepresented minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microscope has
specialized capabilities for high-resolution scanning, live-cell imaging, and 3D
reconstruction. Primary projects to be supported include but are not limited to:
stem cell differentiation modeling, 3D tissue-engineered modeling, virus-like
particles for gene delivery, and innate immune response to viral infection.
Other research areas impacted include host-pathogen interactions, pathogen
detection and mitigation, regulation of signaling pathways, cell
differentiation, plant development, and the characterization of nanomaterials.
New capabilities provided by the award will allow users to expand the scope of
their research, advance current projects and promote new research directions.
The research will be disseminated through professional presentations, peer-
reviewed publications, curriculum development, workshops, and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.