* 1919322
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Behavioral Responses to Taxation of Foreign Personal Income
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Wojciech Kopczuk, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 19,877.00

This is a doctoral dissertation research improvement grant. The coPI will use a
unique data set to quantify the behavioral responses of high-income individuals
to changes in the taxation of foreign personal income and estimate the extent to
which firms engage in tax planning on behalf of their employees. Many countries
offer substantial tax incentives to attract high income foreigners, on the
assumption that these new residents will boost local economic activity and
generate additional fiscal revenues because they consume, work, and invest where
they live. However, multinational firms may implement tax planning strategies to
minimize their employees' tax bills. The project will use a large administrative
data set to understand the behavioral responses of both firms and their
employees to changes in tax policies. The project will help quantify the
benefits and costs of tax incentives offered to attract high income individuals.
The results will help inform policy debates and will demonstrate how large
administrative data sets can offer useful information for tax policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent empirical research shows that certain groups of
individuals are highly responsive to tax differentials in their migration
decisions. However, it is not yet clear what role firms play in migration
decisions. The consequences of these policies on government revenues and the
spillover effects on local economies are also not yet clear. The project will
characterize the behavioral response to taxation of foreign personal income and
estimate the extent to which firms engage in tax planning on behalf of their
employees. The analysis exploits quasi-experimental variation generated by a
series of reforms to a tax break for non-domiciled individuals in the UK. The
policy change gives us a unique data source for answering new research
questions. While previous research focused on taxation of domestic source
income, this work focuses instead on foreign source income and the possible use
of tax planning strategies by multinational firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.