* 1919478
* MRI: Acquisition of a high-performance computing instrument to support deep learning, modeling/simulation, and visualization for STEM
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Roy Turner, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 350,000.00

This project, acquiring an instrument for high performance computing, aims to
support computational needs for deep learning, modeling, and visualization
projects. The instrument is expected to drastically speed up projects that are
now limited by available computational resources, as well as enable projects to
be undertaken that currently cannot be done with existing resources in a
reasonable amount of time, if at all. Deep learning training times can expect
several orders of magnitude improvement, as can simulation and modeling, data
mining, and preparation of visualizations and demonstrations. Deep learning
models and scientific simulations that are too large to be run on current campus
computing resources will be possible with the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following contributions are expected in
this state, which is part of the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR):&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; - Scientific advances - for example, in
understanding the influence of large-scale circulation patterns on physical
structures and ecological habitats; the increased use of deep learning in STEM
projects;&lt;br/&gt; - Emergence of new forms of understanding of data and
models via emerging visualization techniques; &lt;br/&gt; - Outreach to K-16
education and the public through web-based dynamic visualizations; &lt;br/&gt; -
Training of undergraduate and graduate students across science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines using the methodologies
mentioned as well as the use of advanced computational tools; and &lt;br/&gt; -
Enhanced access to computational resources in underserved rural communities
throughout Maine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.