* 1919696
* MRI: Acquisition of an ICP-MS Supporting Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research in Biogeochemistry, Materials Science, Archaeological Chemistry, and Bioinorganic Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Lee Sharpe, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 349,685.00

This award will support the purchase of an inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometer (ICP-MS) with laser ablation and mercury speciation capabilities.
This instrument will enable cutting-edge, interdisciplinary research by
researchers at Grinnell College working in the areas of: 1) pollution control
and prevention, with a focus on water quality; 2) carbon cycling in arid
environments; 3) renewable energy generation and storage; 4) analysis of
archaeological artifacts to reconstruct human history; and 5) novel approaches
to chemical synthesis. The instrumentation will promote faculty-mentored
undergraduate student research and education at Grinnell, giving students and
faculty access to modern, cutting-edge instrumentation for elemental analysis in
both research and active-pedagogy driven coursework. Grinnell College has a
longstanding commitment to diversity, inclusion, and access in the sciences; the
research supported by this MRI award will also help to broaden participation of
historically underrepresented students in the fields of geoscience,
environmental science, and materials science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICP-MS
to be funded is a Perkin Elmer Nexion 2000 ICP-MS with associated autosamplers
for mercury speciation (Brooks Rand MERX-M and MERX-T) and laser ablation (LA)
system (ESI NWR213). Specific applications of the instrument include: 1)
investigations of mercury cycling in aquatic environments (especially
methylmercury production and degradation); 2) investigations into the role of
non-rainfall moisture and associated trace element deposition in carbon cycling
in arid environments; 3) synthesis and characterization of novel thin film photo
and oxygen reduction catalysts; 4) sourcing provenance and trade routes of
archaeological materials from Asia and the American Southwest; and 5)
characterization of interactions between synthetic transition metal complexes
and proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.