* 1919004
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: Personalized Cybersecurity Education and Training
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* David Chan-Tin, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,654.00

The average citizen is often unaware of common strategies to protect themselves
from cybersecurity threats. Consequently, large numbers of computer users are
vulnerable to lapses in security from actions such as choosing weak passwords,
clicking on phishing links, opening attachments from unknown senders, ignoring
security warnings on devices, and falling victim to social engineering or
identity theft. Although there have been many studies on training and educating
people on cybersecurity best practices, the fact that these vulnerabilities are
still being exploited imply that current training is not effective for all
users. The objective of this project is to effectively educate the average user
about common cybersecurity threats so that they are not vulnerable to these
types of attacks. The project will create new education modules that are
personalized to each user, building on the fact that different users have
different personalities and may react to threats in different ways. The result
could be more cybersecurity-aware citizens, which could reduce the number of
"easy" hacks and cyber thefts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has already been shown
that different models are needed to effectively educate individuals with
different personality traits and learning behaviors. There is no "one-size-fits-
all" model. The researchers' aims are to 1) increase cybersecurity compliance
with schema matching messages, and 2) develop and evaluate the effectiveness of
cybersecurity education modules. The researchers have shown that individual
differences in personality traits can be used to predict cybersecurity
perceptions and practices. The research will classify personalities through
analysis of the language of social media. Personalized cybersecurity education
modules will then be developed and evaluated. Users' personalities will be
assigned based on the "True Colors" Personality Categories, which are based on
the Myers-Briggs personality categories, and the Big Five Personality traits.
This personalized education module approach could be applied in other areas such
as management, teaching, and safety training. Moreover, users will become more
security-aware which could lead to a reduction in cybersecurity
breaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.