* 1919716
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laser Ablation High Resolution Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Investigations of Ocean and Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Robert Sherrell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 685,395.00

Fundamental understanding of the geochemistry of the ocean is required to
advance basic knowledge of the world we live in, and to reconstruct aspects of
our past climate from the composition of ocean sediments and fossils. This work
requires sophisticated instrumentation in a modern laboratory. This award
provides the funding for a group of researchers at Rutgers University to
purchase a new mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) and an associated laser ablation (LA)
sample introduction system, so that they can continue their ongoing research
into trace elements in seawater and ocean sediments, and to expand their
measurements in new research directions. Our society is urgently interested in
the role of the ocean in governing earth's climate; the research of the
Principle Investigators will contribute to the fundamental understanding of
physical, chemical and biological processes in the ocean that drive the exchange
of carbon dioxide with the atmosphere. The new instruments will also be
integrated fully into undergraduate and graduate teaching and research: (1) A
combined undergraduate/graduate class entitled "Inorganic Mass Spectrometry for
Earth Sciences" will be taught focusing on ICP-MS theory and practice; (2) The
new facility will offer challenging opportunities for undergraduate research
supported by Rutgers' Aresty, RISE, and the NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates summer programs. In addition, the researchers will work with the
new NSF-funded center Advancing the Impact of Research on Society (ARIS) to
develop learning opportunities emphasizing participation in science. This
project will be modeled on the NSF-funded Rutgers Polar-Interdisciplinary
Coordinated Education (ICE) program, that has been successfully implemented in
twenty-one classrooms across the country. A new educator course is currently
being piloted and will be expanded and offered to a new cohort of educators
interested in using scientific data in their teaching. The Principle
Investigators have an established reputation for research that expands the
capabilities of this type of instrumentation, and have trained many students,
including many women and under-represented minorities, who have used these
skills to qualify successfully for academic positions once they leave
Rutgers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will be used to purchase a high-
resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer with a Laser Ablation
sample introduction unit and standard autosampler and introduction systems. This
instrumentation is crucial to the research of members of the Departments of
Marine and Coastal Sciences, Earth and Planetary Sciences and Environmental
Sciences at Rutgers-New Brunswick, as well as users from associated departments
at Rutgers-Newark and elsewhere. The new ICP-MS will allow analysis of minute
concentrations of trace elements in samples such as seawater, ocean particles,
the tiny shells of marine organisms, and glacial ice. The LA will add new
capability to the laboratory, and will allow tiny regions of solid samples, such
as deep-sea coral skeletons, to be analyzed by vaporizing the solid and
injecting the resulting condensed gasses directly into the MS, without the need
to dissolve the sample in an acid solution. The current projects of the
Principle Investigators include investigation of trace metal dynamics in the
Arctic and Antarctic polar oceans, associated with the large field programs
GEOTRACES and the Palmer Long Term Ecological Research, the development of
geochemical methods to reconstruct past ocean chemistry from trace element
concentrations in fossil deep-sea corals and the shells of fossil micro-
organisms called foraminifera, and paleoceanographic reconstructions through the
International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP). The researchers have been at the
forefront of these fields for more than twenty years, and this award allows them
to continue to innovate in these research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.