* 1919671
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetic Changes During Human Brain Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Abigail Bigham, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 31,039.00

Humans evolved very large brains relative to their body size, with a remarkable
enrichment of neurons in the cerebral cortex. Extensive efforts in anthropology
have focused on delineating the adaptive pressures that led to these changes
during human evolution. However, the genetic changes underlying human brain
expansion have not been fully explored. This project will test hypotheses about
human brain evolution by studying the impact of human genetic variation on brain
development using experimental models. This research has broad implications for
understanding what makes the human brain unique at the cellular and molecular
levels, with translational value for medical treatment of neurodevelopmental
disorders. During this research, undergraduate students pursuing careers in STEM
will be mentored and trained in molecular biology and bioinformatics techniques
in the laboratory. Research findings will be used as 1) an educational tool for
spreading knowledge about human evolution and genetics with the general public,
K-12 students, and undergraduate students, as well as 2) a motivational platform
for the young, future women scientists in the Females Excelling More in
Mathematics, Engineering and Science (FEMMES) Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research takes a multi-disciplinary approach to investigate how human
evolutionary history has shaped the molecular and physiological mechanisms of
human brain expansion. In the laboratory, human and non-human primate neural
cells will be studied to explore how genetic variation evolved in humans to
shape the developing brain. This project uses a combination of gene editing, RNA
sequencing, and immunohistochemistry to determine the functional role of human-
specific genetic sequence during brain development that corresponds to changes
in brain size. These findings will advance the understanding of the molecular
evolution of the human brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.