* 1920127
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution X-Ray Micro-Computed Tomography System for Multidisciplinary and Integrated Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Gregor Eberli, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 329,522.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Award supports acquisition of a high-
resolution x-ray micro-computed tomography system (micro-CT) that enables
nondestructive 3D imaging of materials and their internal structure for a wide
range of applications in engineering, natural, marine, and geological sciences,
and medicine. The proposed instrument will provide critical capabilities to
eight departments across the University of Miami (UM) and at Florida
International University (FIU) and Florida Atlantic University (FAU), to perform
high impact research and foster multidisciplinary research collaborations. The
instrument will be used in a wide range of teaching and outreach activities and
will enhance efforts to attract underrepresented minorities to science and
engineering. The research team will leverage outreach efforts-- such as UM's
National Summer Transportation Institute (NSTI) program-- to introduce imaging
tools to high school students from Miami-Dade County, which has a large
population of Hispanic students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will
permit in-situ studies of the effect of mechanical tension-compression and
temperature on microstructure and material behavior. Understanding the evolution
of material microstructure under varied environmental and mechanical conditions
and its relationships with mechanical, physical, and functional properties is
crucial in the design and durability assessment of materials in civil,
aerospace, mechanical, and biomedical engineering. Micro-CT will enable
investigations into bio-inspired approaches to impart self-healing in
cementitious materials, which will result in sustainable infrastructure and
improved public safety. Micro-CT will aid in gaining a fundamental understanding
of failure initiation and progression in structural alloys, which will lead to
the development of predictive models needed for the safe design of structural
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.