* 1920137
* MRI: Acquisition of A 90 MHz NMR Spectrometer: Initiating a Bioinspired Undergraduate Student Achievers in Research (USTAR) Program in a Two-Year College
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Joseph Rugutt, Missouri State University - West Plains
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 242,790.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Joseph Rugutt from Missouri State University
- West Plains and colleagues are acquiring a 90 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) spectrometer. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful
tools available to chemists for the examination of the structure of molecules.
It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements
of atoms within molecules, and to study the rates of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. The NMR studies improve
understanding of synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research performed by undergraduate students that impacts green chemistry and
recyclable ionic liquids used to accelerate reaction rates. Many students use
the spectrometer in a bioinspired initiative named "Undergraduate STudent
Achievers in Research" (USTAR) that promotes student participation in STEM
(science technology, engineering and mathematics) at the institution and at
neighboring high schools in Missouri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. This
instrument acquisition especially impacts the characterization of synthesized
bioassay-directed chalcones which are aromatic ketones that form the central
core of important biological compounds. The syntheses incorporate nanomaterials
that can be used in green chemistry and molecular modeling and for spectroscopic
studies. The researchers are generating a small library of chalcones that are
tested against biological targets. They are also studying ionic liquids to be
used as catalysts to accelerate chemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.