* 1920742
* Collaborative Research:  Programmable Chip-Scale Quantum-Photonics Platform Based on Frequency-Comb Cluster-States for Multicasting Quantum Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Zheshen Zhang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 05/31/2023
* USD 274,950.00

The field of quantum information science and technology hinges on unique quantum
mechanical phenomena such as entanglement to enable unprecedented capabilities
for communication, sensing, and computing. Among these technologies, quantum
communication is foreseen to create broad near-term impacts as seen in recent
quantum testbeds, teleportation, and entanglement distribution experiments. It
is also envisaged to underpin future's fully connected quantum computers,
quantum sensors, and a global secure communication network. Mainstream quantum
communication platforms, however, rely on expensive, unscalable bulk optics
components that impede their widespread deployment. While recent work on
integrated quantum communication devices opens a new route to the development of
compact quantum-communication systems, an integrated quantum photonics platform
encompassing multiple, functional modules on a single chip to generate and
process large-scale entanglement remains elusive. &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project will develop a room-temperature integrated quantum photonics platform
that incorporates quantum communication modules for scalable generation,
processing, multicasting, and detection of large-scale multipartite entanglement
in a quantum communication network. This project will leverage the
nanofabrication and testing expertise at UCLA and the Interdisciplinary Quantum
Information Research and Engineering (INQUIRE) testbed at the University of
Arizona (UA) to demonstrate the capability of utilizing a highly compact and
mass producible integrated platform to generate, multicast, and detect large-
scale entanglement in a real-world setting. The outcome of the project will lay
the foundation for future's quantum internet comprised of compact devices linked
by large-scale multipartite entanglement. This project will educate and train
the next-generation workforce for quantum information science and technology.
Specifically, undergraduate and graduate students will grasp essential knowledge
and expertise of nanophotonics and quantum information science and technology.
They will gain hands-on experience while undertaking research in the INQUIRE
testbed. This project will also provide opportunities for various industrial
partners to be exposed to state-of-the-art tools grown out of nanophotonics and
quantum information science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The
team will follow a system-level design approach for the integrated quantum
photonics platform. The project will advance knowledge through a new quantum
encoding-and-decoding paradigm that will be seamlessly incorporated into a
physical architecture to offer intrinsic protection against loss. The physical
architecture will consist of programmable quantum sources, processing units, and
receivers using the silicon nitride material system that offer dramatic
functionalities. Through &amp;#55349;&amp;#57164;(3 four-wave mixing in
microring resonators and Mach-Zehnder interferometers, the silicon nitride
chipset section will produce and process quantum signals with high fidelity and
low loss. The silicon nitride section will also provide a classical frequency
comb to serve as the pump for the microring resonators and phase references for
the Mach-Zehnder interferometers. Programming of the quantum sources, processing
units, and receivers will be by modulating the classical comb spectral lines in
an integrated hybrid silicon section. In our frequency comb cluster system, the
quantum signals will be immune to the programming-induced loss and disturbance.
The integrated quantum photonics platform will be programmed to support two
system-level quantum communication implementations: 1) a high-rate secure
communication system based on quantum illumination; and 2) an entanglement
multicasting and purification demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.