* 1920069
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Research and Instruction at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Michael Smith, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 377,259.00

An award is made to Western Kentucky University for the acquisition of a Laser
Scanning Confocal Microscope for research and instruction at a primarily
undergraduate institution. The microscope will build imaging capacity at WKU and
in the Southern Kentucky region. It will not only impact the research projects
of several faculty members who train Graduate (Masters) and Undergraduate
students in their laboratories but also enhance the student learning and
research experience. The students will present their findings at the local
Student Research Conference and at regional and national meetings. They will
also disseminate their findings in the form of refereed publications. The
exposure of students to this routine yet state-of-the-art technique and the
dissemination of acquired data will benefit their research careers by making
them competitive for graduate programs. An existing undergraduate Developmental
Genetics, Cell Biology and Microscopy course will incorporate this technique and
expose students to this state-of-the-art imaging. Additional courses at graduate
and undergraduate level will develop modules for this technique as well. To
engage and attract young scientists into choosing careers in the sciences, we
will offer teachers and students from local high schools opportunities to visit
the facility and learn firsthand the power of confocal microscopy. Additionally,
rising high school junior and senior students from the Gatton Academy of
Mathematics and Science at WKU will also benefit from the availability and
technical capabilities of this microscope as several of these students conduct
research in the laboratories of the PIs who spearhead a variety of research
projects. The microscope will be made available to other regional academic
institutions on a fees per use basis and will be advertised at the regional
conference organized by the Kentucky Academy of Science. Furthermore, professors
and their students within the Kentucky Community and Technical College System
will have opportunities to visit the facility for a demonstration of the
Confocal Microscope and its capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confocal
microscopy is routinely utilized by biologists to understand the localization of
gene products (proteins and RNA) within a cell in space and time. It also
provides valuable insights into the cellular and tissue architecture of
developing living systems at resolutions far superior to conventional
fluorescence microscopy. Acquisition of this state-of-the-art microscope will
impact WKU faculty projects in diverse fields ranging from the Cell and
Developmental Biology of fruit flies, Microbiology, Neurobiology of Zebrafish,
Endocrinology, Plant Biology, Immunolocalization of proteins in Chlamydomonas to
Nanotechnology. The confocal microscope will expand capability and capacity in
the Southern Kentucky region and enable students to be part of high caliber
research projects. Cellular localization of proteins, generation of high
resolution cellular images and understanding mechanisms involved in normal
development will all be possible with this microscope, thereby exposing students
to sophisticated research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.