* 1920977
* Collaborative Research: Judicial Legitimacy in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Amanda Driscoll, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 362,154.00

Political incumbents around the world commonly introduce legislation to
undermine or politicize the judicial branch of government, such as "packing" the
court's membership, or reducing the court's ability to decide certain cases.
Political scientists have long thought that citizens will punish incumbents who
advance these "court curbing" proposals in the next election. Nevertheless,
these attacks continue. This project seeks to understand the conditions under
which voters are both willing and able punish incumbent politicians who
undermine high courts, as well as the circumstances under which politicians may
actually benefit from these interbranch assaults. The researchers will explain
variation in citizens' support for judicial institutions in 12 countries as a
function of their satisfaction with the court's policymaking, their democratic
values, their support for incumbents, and the political context in which they
live. Understanding the foundations and consequences of judicial legitimacy
around the globe is essential for building and maintaining the rule of law
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key intellectual contribution of this study
is the use of an original survey experiment, fielded in 12 countries around the
world, to probe the electoral costs and benefits of interbranch attacks for
incumbent politicians. The experiment relies on a novel dependent variable, a
citizen's willingness to withdraw support from an incumbent who openly seeks to
undermine courts, to examine directly a behavioral manifestation of legitimacy
theory. Because public support is a theoretical antecedent to a willingness to
punish incumbents for court curbing proposals, the surveys will contain
validated measures of individuals' willingness to ascribe institutional
legitimacy to judicial institutions, the first fielding of these items on cross-
national surveys in over a quarter-century. With these original data, the
researchers will test differences in the foundations of institutional legitimacy
across countries. The theoretical framework for this research emphasizes the
role of democratic values, a concept that is often referenced in existing
studies of judicial legitimacy but has not been tested in a systematic fashion.
This project therefore advances beyond earlier attempts to understand judicial
legitimacy in its theoretical focus, experimental design, and the breadth of
data incorporated into the study. Findings from this research will inform
political scientists, legal scholars, policymakers and academics to better
understand the public foundations of judicial independence and the rule of law,
two foundational concepts in governance across
continents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.