* 1920363
* MRI: Acquisition of a metal additive manufacturing system for multi-disciplinary research and education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* David Yan, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Culbertson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 326,960.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funding to acquire a
metal additive manufacturing (AM) system for research and education. The
instrumentation will enable researchers to develop new knowledge on the
production of metals with high fracture and fatigue resistance, which are needed
for the biomedical, defense, aerospace, and automotive industries. The
instrumentation will also catalyze research advances in novel on-demand design
of metamaterials for acoustic cloaking, biomedical imaging, and health
monitoring. The metal AM system will enrich graduate and undergraduate
education, support outreach activities at K-12 schools, and aid teacher
workshops. A new virtual reality metal AM teaching module will be developed and
made available for engineering students, high-school students, and the public.
Research findings will also provide the basis for a new machine learning and
computational mechanics class.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The requested metal AM
system will provide structural information on defects and pores that can be
processed at the micro- and meso-scale, providing insights into the processing
limits of the SLM system. A new SPH model will be developed to understand the
powder-level physics during the SLM process; thus, advancing fundamental
understanding of the structure development during the SLM of hierarchical
metals. Neutron diffraction will be used to reveal the processing/structure
effects on the residual stresses in hierarchical SLMed metals. Mechanical
behavior of the hierarchical metals will be observed via tensile and fracture
toughness tests. Using this new processing-structure-property information, FEM
simulations will be performed to discover the origins of hierarchical toughening
mechanisms in SLMed metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.