* 1920670
* Gendered Pathways: From Florida's Two-Year Institutions to Computing Degrees
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Shouping Hu, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,011,361.00

This EHR Core Research project will conduct research on women's participation in
computing fields, with a focus on community college starters using a
comprehensive dataset from Florida's educational institutions and national-level
comparable data. Despite the growing demand for computer scientists and
engineers, women's representation in this industry remains problematically low
while their share of degree earners has declined nationally. In 2014, the most
recent year for which U.S. national data are available, the share of women
earning bachelor's degrees in computer science was 18.1%, down from 25.1% a
decade earlier. Although women constitute the majority of community college
starters, and community college students often gravitate towards applied
technical and high-growth degree fields, community college pathways have been
under-examined as a mechanism for enhancing women's representation in computing
and technology. Emerging research has begun to identify secondary school,
community college, and baccalaureate curricular pathways as a vehicle to
facilitate science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) student
success, especially for underrepresented women. This project will provide new
insights into how students successfully navigate these career pathways by
focusing on analyses of community college students in computing in the highly
diverse state of Florida. The findings from this study may be used in subsequent
research and in the development of interventions to curb the gender gap in
computing fields, especially among underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged women. The alignment of Florida administrative and U.S. national
data may also have meaningful use for scholarly and practitioner communities
interested in broadening participation in STEM higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fill three critical
shortcomings of current research on the gender gap in computing and technology:
1) it focuses solely on computing, which currently has fewer women than other
STEM fields and has the most prospects for job growth; 2) because of the amount
of data available, the researchers can employ an intersectional approach to
understand how various women navigate pathways; and 3) the researchers will
focus on the community college experiences and pathways often chosen by many
underrepresented groups to enter computing. The research design leverages
Florida administrative data and an existing conceptual model, the Momentum for
Community College Student Success framework, to follow a diverse population of
community college students pursuing computing degrees. The dataset includes
postsecondary transcript data coupled with multilayered measures of demographic
and family backgrounds and academic history, particularly in high school
mathematics and science courses. Administrative datasets offer the advantage of
vast statistical power that facilitates nuanced field-specific and
intersectional analyses while also examining the differences in the secondary
and postsecondary course-taking experiences and outcomes with respect to the
timing and consistency of enrollment in postsecondary programs. To contextualize
Florida findings, the researchers will also engage in complementary analyses of
U.S. national longitudinal data, using the two most recent cohorts of Beginning
Postsecondary Students study data. Three types of outcomes will be analyzed with
respect to postsecondary attainment outcomes: 1) Attainment of an associate
degree in computing-related fields; 2) Transfer to computing related major from
a two-year institution to a four-year institution; and 3) Attainment of a
bachelor's degree in computing-related fields. The investigator team will use
multivariate statistical analyses and quasi-experimental designs to compare the
probabilities for men and women graduating with degrees in computing fields as
compared to other STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.