* 1920660
* Collaborative Research: Social Influences of Math Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Nadia Chernyak, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 414,228.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 19-508. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
learning of mathematical concepts, such as proportions and negative numbers, is
frequently fraught with difficulty because often these concepts do not
structurally align with whole number concepts acquired during the preschool
years. This proposed work investigates how to promote reasoning about such
concepts by capitalizing on recent findings demonstrating young children's
relative competence in social domains that recruit similar mathematical
knowledge. This proposal aims to identify how the acquisition of difficult
mathematical concepts may be readily transferred from informal social contexts
in which they may be first encountered (e.g., sharing) to more formal contexts
in which children are typically asked to apply them (e.g., formal arithmetic).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through behavioral experiments with over 1000 4-9-year-old
children, this work will explore how social contexts may promote math learning.
In Series 1, studies investigate how social framing impacts children's learning
of two traditionally counter-intuitive concepts: negative numbers and
proportions. Series 2 will investigates factors that facilitate transfer of
knowledge between math concepts learned in contextualized, informal scenarios
such as those encountered in one's daily life (e.g., sharing) to more formal,
symbolic-based contexts (e.g., division). Finally, Series 3 will investigate how
socio-contextual influences may, in turn, serve to promote or hinder children?s
learning. These studies investigate how preferences for competition versus
collaboration, and gender stereotypes about academic domains impact children's
decisions to opt in and out of learning opportunities affect their math
learning. The culmination of this work should paint a broader understanding of
social influences on math learning, pointing to new directions for math
education practices. This project will provide deeper insight into how social
contexts may promote or hinder the learning of counter-intuitive math concepts.
The project is supported by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program that emphasizes
fundamental research in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.