* 1920234
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Research and Training at the University of Arizona
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Wei Wang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 07/31/2022
* USD 500,810.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation (CRIF) programs. Professor Jon Njardarson from University of
Arizona and colleagues Wei Wang, Jeffrey Pyun, Douglas Loy and Elisa Tomat have
acquired a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the
basic tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is an essential tool for chemists who are carrying out frontier
research. A typical use by a chemist is to analyze the mixture from a reaction
to determine the products. For example investigations to improve materials used
in battery electrodes to increase their efficiency will involve following the
products by varying the starting materials in a chemical reaction. The
spectrometer is used in laboratory courses to train undergraduate students in
this powerful tool. A sizable cohort are from underrepresented and underserved
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. A variety of research projects are being investigated.
One project explores new synthetic methods used to prepare natural products.
Another investigation probes the engineering of ligand-based redox chemistry in
metal complexes of linear oligopyrroles. Sustainable polymer chemistry through
utilization of waste sulfur to afford a new class of sulfur-based polymers is
being studied. Metallopolymer electrocatalysts for hydrogen production are the
focus of an investigation. Pioneering investigations to construct nano-
engineered, hybrid organic-inorganic materials based on organically bridged
polysilsesquioxanes is a current on-going study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.