* 1920024
* MRI Acquisition: Advanced Computing Infrastructure Driving long-tail Sciences
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jessica Turner, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 899,995.00

ACIDS (Advanced Computing Infrastructure Driving Long-tail Sciences), supports
and enables multidisciplinary research in LTS (Long Tail Science) projects that
are not traditionally supported by large scale computing centers. The system
whose acquisition is enabled by this award is expected to act as a catalyst for
the regional advancement of LTS. The projects combine large collaborations and
research programs requiring advanced computing infrastructure to work with the
data and perform the latest analyses and simulations. The instrument supports
the increase of knowledge in multiple domains since these machine learning
methods are data hungry and computationally expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrumentation advances scientific inquiries to improved antiviral
developments, effective public policy decisions, efficient pathological review,
and large-scale neuro-imaging data mining. The application of deep learning
techniques, structural biology, neuroscience, public health evaluation, language
translation, anomaly detection, etc., constitutes a common theme running through
these projects. All participating faculty, staff, postdocs, and students across
multiple centers and colleges will have access to ACIDS through collaborations
and partnerships. Thus, training, outreach, and education will be supported in
multiple application areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.