* 1920766
* Student Engagement in Mathematics: A Longitudinal Study of Classroom and Psychosocial Processes
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mary Kay Stein, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,744,513.00

Increasing student engagement is an explicit goal of many reform efforts that
address problems of student boredom, alienation, and low achievement. To better
understand the processes linked to math engagement, it is important to study the
trajectories and patterns of student math engagement and differences by race and
gender, the associated motivational and classroom factors, and the impact of
engagement on achievement. Understanding the conditions under which classroom
characteristics are most effective and for whom can lead to the development and
refinement of contextually-relevant interventions and optimal teaching practices
that enhance student engagement and achievement in math. The study aims to
investigate the classroom and psychosocial processes linked to mathematics
engagement from 6th to 8th grade with a racially diverse sample. Understanding
these processes among historically underrepresented groups of students is
particularly important because it will enhance our ability to broaden
participation in STEM and increase the access and involvement of
underrepresented groups in STEM learning. The findings can help to identify
groups of students who are at greater risk for disengaging from math and
potentially turning away from STEM careers and to develop classroom-based
interventions that reflect specific contexts, instructional practices, and
motivational beliefs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study has three specific aims:
1. Identify differential trajectory patterns of student engagement in math
classes and examine how these trajectory patterns differ by gender and race; 2.
Examine how and what instructional and social characteristics predict student
engagement in math classes, which in turn predict math achievement; 3. Examine
how and what psychological beliefs of teachers and students moderate the
associations between classroom characteristics and student engagement in math
classes. To meet these goals, the researchers employ both longitudinal
quantitative and qualitative methods. The quantitative study will investigate
this complex system of interrelations between classroom and motivational factors
and the development over time of these dynamics, while the qualitative study
will investigate the different meanings and purposes that students ascribe to
their math experiences and self-perceptions about math identity. By examining
the reciprocal relationship between classroom characteristics and student
engagement in math and variations through collection of classroom observation
data, coupled with survey and interview data, the project will identify which
classroom and psychosocial predictors are prime targets for raising math
engagement. In addition, this project relies on longitudinal, person-centered
quantitative and qualitative data to track changes in students' engagement over
time, identify engagement trajectories in specific subgroups, and address
questions about the desirability of various patterns of engagement and synergy
among dimensions of engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.