* 1920252
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Gravimetric Analyzer for Materials Research at KU-Lawrence
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* David Fowle, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2022
* USD 376,221.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of an
advanced gravimetric analyzer system at the University of Kansas. The instrument
will significantly accelerate studies on the sorption of gases and vapors into
liquids and solids over a wide range of temperature, pressure, and humidity. The
results from using this advanced gravimetric analyzer system will provide a deep
understanding of the key factors governing the interactions of sorbents in these
materials. Chemical engineers and chemists will be able to study reactions and
separations that operate at high pressure and using reactive gases that require
catalysts and adsorbents to improve productivity. Geologists and geophysicists
will be able to acquire data on how gases and vapors oxidize and reduce rocks
and minerals at atmospheric conditions and at high temperatures and pressures.
Physicists can measure the sorption of gases on various material surfaces, and
pharmaceutical scientists will be able to study various types of interactions
relevant to drug functions. The research project also will broaden participation
in science and engineering by engaging individuals from groups underrepresented
in STEM fields through outreach programs at the pre-college to post-graduate
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Institute of Standards and Technology,
American Chemical Society, American Institute of Chemical Engineers and National
Academy of Engineers have identified a critical need to characterize materials
in complex environments. Thus, there is a need for methods and instruments for
measuring multicomponent phase equilibria and kinetic data. The advanced
gravimetric analyzer system will be the first magnetic suspension balance
capable of measuring adsorption and desorption of mixed gases that simulate
real-world environments. In addition, the microbalance will be mated with an
existing high-pressure calorimeter. The combination of a gravimetric analyzer
and calorimeter will allow the simultaneous measurement of solubility, kinetics,
and heats of sorption/reaction. Such a comprehensive understanding is essential
for the rational development of functional materials such as, catalysts,
sorbents, and biomaterials and to fundamentally understand, model, and simulate
vapor-liquid equilibria and solid-vapor equilibria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.