* 1920103
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Computing Instrument to Integrate Data-Driven Research and Data intensive computing at Johns Hopkins University
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Mark Robbins, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,795,025.00

The project funds the purchase of a high-performance computing and storage
system to create a Data Intensive Scientific Computing (DISCO) environment that
will be located at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). DISCO will support research
in a range of science and engineering areas including wind energy, ocean
circulation, materials by design, additive manufacturing, big data, genomics,
and biological function on membrane to organ scales. It provides a framework for
creating new data from simulations, analyzing data, and making data available
for analysis by remote users. DISCO will also enable the development and sharing
of new code and data analysis methods across institutions. This project
addresses two of NSF's big ideas: Growing Convergence Research and Harnessing
the Data Revolution, as well as the Materials Genome initiative. DISCO will
immediately support over 40 faculty research projects involving over 200
scientists. DISCO will be managed in collaboration with Morgan State University,
a historically black university, which will be allocated at least 5% of
resources to support its educational and computational research programs. Other
users nationally will be offered 20% of the resources to be managed through a
partnership with XSEDE. Opportunities for training on a diverse set of
scientific computing topics will be directly integrated into regular courses
across JHU and Morgan State. Courses on computational chemistry, genomics,
molecular dynamics, machine learning and protein chemistry are planned. Course
materials will be made available through the web and the existing set of Massive
Open Online Courses (MOOCs) at JHU will be expanded. These materials will ensure
training in the proper use of resources, share best practices between different
disciplines and promote interdisciplinary
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) project is to create a Data Intensive Scientific Computing
(DISCO) environment that integrates high performance computing with tools for
generating, analyzing and disseminating data sets of ever increasing size. The
cluster will contain over 5 petabytes of storage and heterogeneous compute nodes
optimized for different research projects and complex, optimized work flows:
standard dual processor nodes, large memory nodes, and Graphics Processing Unit
(GPU) enhanced nodes. An instance of SciServer software will enhance analysis
and provide a platform for disseminating data through a web portal. This robust
capability will become a powerful resource for developing and sharing code and
infrastructure tools used by interdisciplinary data scientists at Johns Hopkins
University, Morgan State University and beyond. DISCO will enable computational
fluid dynamics studies of wind farms, ocean flow and physiological fluid
dynamics. Research in multiscale modeling of materials will use machine learning
to tailor material properties and integrate physical models at different scales
to improve performance of additive manufacturing and connect defects and
microstructures to macroscopic performance of crystals, polymers and other soft
materials. DISCO will also enable sequencing of new genomes, study of variance
within species and research on the microbiome. On larger scales, research on the
dynamics of biological systems will examine function of proteins, membranes,
cells and organs, including the impact of nanoparticles on function. This new
integrated environment will reshape computational research practices and will be
conducive to radical transformative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.