* 1920355
* MRI: Acquisition of a Shared Multi Collector Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer for Ocean, Earth, Environmental, and Geobiological Sciences in Southern California
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* A  Joshua West, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 558,764.00

Metals are necessary to life on Earth, yet they can also be toxic. Measurement
of metals has applications in geology, oceanography, ecology, environmental
science, and medicine. The acquisition of a multiple collector-inductively
coupled plasma mass spectrometer, or MC-ICPMS, will enable new scientific
discoveries in metals analysis to address major scientific questions across many
scientific disciplines. This instrument will be housed at USC; users will
include scientists within the university and at other academic institutions and
government agencies in Southern California. The instrumentation will enable
societally relevant research, increase opportunities for training students and
early career researchers, enhance teaching and community engagement, and support
governmental agencies in their mission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life
depends on elements from across the periodic table, and the availability of
these elements to organisms is often controlled by geochemical processes. At the
same time, some elements, especially metals, can be deadly environmental
contaminants: some of the most widely known public health disasters have
resulted from lead, mercury, and chromium poisoning. The multi-faceted functions
of metals, and their perturbation due to human activities, make them compelling
tracers of biological, environmental, marine, and Earth processes. While metals
in the natural environment and the human body have been researched for decades,
the capability to measure natural variability in their isotope ratios has
emerged relatively recently, primarily since the early 2000s, and has
transformed our understanding of many components of the Earth system. As the
applications of metal isotope analysis spreads from the geosciences to fields
such as medicine and environmental engineering, these chemical tools are poised
to have a growing impact. Acquiring a Multiple Collector-Inductively Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectrometer (MC-ICPMS) instrument at the University of Southern
California (USC) would enable exciting new applications of isotopic analysis,
taking advantage of the expertise and research interests of the principle
investigators, coupled with a wide range of users spanning multiple disciplines
and multiple institutions in the southern California region. Metals will be a
major focus of attention, with elements from Li to U all serving as targets of
interest for the insights that they can provide in research areas including
oceanography, hydrology and paleobiology, as well as environmental health,
medicine, and more. The proposed instrument will be a cornerstone of a new
Southern California Center for Elemental and Isotopic Analysis, which will also
encompass existing, complementary instrumentation. Novel application of MC-ICPMS
technology will be enabled by (i) focusing on analysis of large-scale sample
sets, (ii) widening the intellectual reach of MC-ICPMS techniques, including in
areas such as human biology and public health, and (iii) serving a wide user
base in southern California, particularly enabling novel and exploratory science
that is not possible when researchers are relying on instruments at remote
facilities. Broader impacts will include providing an instrument for training
future leaders in the isotope sciences, enabling science for the public good by
building research-education partnerships with government agencies, and offering
a platform for developing new graduate-level
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.