* 1920008
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Incorporating a short but intensive botanical experience into formal college courses to alleviate plant blindness among undergraduate STEM students
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Javier Francisco-Ortega, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2022
* USD 53,657.00

"Plant blindness" is a cognitive condition in which individuals fail to see or
notice the plants in their own environment, often resulting in an inability to
recognize the importance of plants in the environment and in everyday
activities. In today's world, plant blindness is in a perpetual cycle: children
who are not taught about plants become adults with incomplete knowledge about
the environment and natural resources. In addition, these children remain
unaware of various careers paths relating to plants and plant sciences. One way
to address this lack of awareness about the environment and natural resources is
by providing more hands-on experiences that allow students to connect with
plants and understand their importance in the world. This research proposal will
bring together thirteen leading plant scientists to share information and ideas
about current and potential botanical experiences. Together, these scientists
will design a series of botanical experiences that can be implemented at various
universities and botanical institutions as a way to better educate future
citizens on the importance of plants in human affairs. Special consideration
will be given to including information on how plants are involved in a majority
of careers. This original network will continue to grow and to connect botany-
focused educators, further broadening the research network working to develop
and promote best practices in botany-based science education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate STEM students are usually not attuned to the
intricacies of plant life, nor the dynamic role plants play in ecosystem
function and human society, a phenomenon termed "plant blindness". Left
unchecked, plant blindness has real world consequences, including impediment of
effective plant conservation measures due to lack of public support, resource
allocations, or ill-advised policies. Semester-long botany courses can help
alleviate plant blindness, however, students are less likely to choose such a
course if they do not perceive their career choices to be somewhat related to
plants. Additionally, botany education has been on the decline in the past
decades, both in terms of number of faculty members and universities offering
these courses. As a result, there is a need to offer effective botanical
experiences to engage students outside of a botany course and to alleviate plant
blindness regardless of students' career trajectories. One proposed solution is
to integrate more hands-on botanical experiences into introductory courses, but
what an ideal botanical experience looks like and what students should be
expected to take away from these experiences remains unknown. These questions,
and more, will be examined when thirteen leading plant scientists convene at a
workshop focused on alleviating plant blindness and increasing botanical
literacy among undergraduate students. Specifically, workshop participants will
discuss and define exactly what a botanical experience should include through
collaborative sharing of knowledge and best practices related to botanical
experiences currently taking place at their home institution. This original
network will continue to grow and to connect botany-focused educators, further
broadening the research network working to develop and promote best practices in
botany-based science education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.