* 1920409
* Communication between Probation and Parole Agents and their Clients
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Merry Morash, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,129.00

In recent decades the growth in the number of people on probation, on parole, in
jail, and in prison has required increased public expenditures, often limiting
funds available for other essential services such as education and health care.
Effective community supervision (i.e., probation and parole) offers the
possibility of containing these costs when it keeps people out of jail and
prison, increases their employment, and promotes individual and community health
and welfare. One of the main ways that probation and parole officers can
influence offenders is through the discussions that occur during supervision.
However, compared to knowledge about how doctors and other medical and mental
health professionals interact effectively with patients, little is known about
ways to increase the positive impact that probation and parole officers can have
on offenders. Prior research on women who are supervised in the community has
shown that when supervising officers give offenders the information they need to
establish a prosocial lifestyle (e.g., strategies to find jobs or avoid
substance misuse), it reduces supervision failures and limits costs. It also
showed that having a two-way conversation with offenders increased their
compliance with requirements. The main goal of this research is to determine the
specific forms of communication that are effective for both male and female
offenders. This goal is important because (1) men and women on supervision face
different problems, and (2) research has shown that men and women often respond
differently to the same messages. In addition, because people who are under
community supervision are disproportionately African American, the study also
examines differences in effective communication for men and women from minority
versus majority groups. This knowledge is essential for making efficient use of
community supervision resources and for developing educational and training
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study uses communication and psychological
theories and research methods to gain a better understanding of effective
officer-offender communication. It examines both officer and offender
perceptions of supervision interactions and tests for gender and race
differences in those perceptions. The study addresses the key questions: (1) Do
the content and manner of communication predict subsequent positive and negative
behavior? (2) Is the effect of communication on outcomes different for gender
and racial groups? In particular, the focus is on communication about three
areas critical to reducing recidivism: employment, substance misuse, and contact
with people who break the law. The research also includes an experiment testing
whether, for example, informational-oriented messages are more effective if they
support the offender's autonomy. Finally, the study identifies messages from
supervising officers that have lasting positive effects on offenders' actions.
To address these questions, ninety supervising officers and 300 men and 300
women from their caseloads will be studied. Officers will complete two on-line
surveys and offenders will complete two interviews, both at six-month intervals.
Official sources will be used to gather criminal history data, data on
supervision intensity, non-compliance with supervision requirements, new
arrests, and new convictions. Including both officer and offender perspectives
as well as official data will provide unique insights into the supervision
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.