* 1920825
* Collaborative Research:  Comparative analysis of fern LEAFY genes and their regulatory network
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Julin Maloof, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 148,000.00

Flowers represent a classic example of evolutionary innovation, one that made
the flowering plants the most successful and species rich group of land plants.
Hence, a deep understanding of the genes underlying flowering is an important
topic in plant evolutionary biology. While plants that do not have flowers have
genes that are clearly homologous to flower development genes, their function is
mostly unknown. The research team will investigate the ancestral role of a
flower development gene in a non-flowering plant, the emerging model fern
Ceratopteris richardii. This project will facilitate: 1) Working with national
and local programs to increase the representation of under-represented
minorities in the sciences (by participating e.g., in National Lab Day and UC
Davis Biology Undergraduate Scholars Program); 2) Integrating research and
teaching activities: e.g., UC Davis Young Scholars Program that provides summer
research opportunities for California high school students, and development of
undergraduate bioinformatics lab class for students without previous
computational experience; 3) Incorporating experiments with C. richardii into
teaching labs and into a hands-on workshop on plant evolution for the annual
Burke Museum of Natural History Girls in Science program (UW, 6th-8th graders);
4) Training of the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
growing interest in understanding how transcription factors and developmental
programs are co-opted for evolutionary innovation, and what role gene
duplications play in this process. LEAFY (LFY) encodes a transcriptional
regulator that induces flower formation in angiosperms; it is also present in
mosses, where it governs early cell divisions of the zygote, and in ferns where
it promotes cell division in both the gametophyte and the sporophyte
generations. The conservation of LFY across land plants suggests that it must
have important ancestral function(s) outside of flower development, a hypothesis
supported by recent findings in fern. The fern C. richardii is a representative
of a lineage of vascular plants that lies midway in the evolutionary tree
between mosses and flowering plants. The goal of this project is to investigate
how apical cell activity is partitioned among the two fern LEAFY genes and
determine the gene network that each uses to achieve its cell proliferation
functions. The specific research questions are: 1) What is the function of each
LFY homolog CrLFY1 and CrLFY2 in the fern Ceratopteris richardii? This will be
addressed via locus-specific gene expression and in situ hybridization, loss-
and gain-of-function and pCrLFY-reporter transgenics for each gene; 2) What are
the direct and downstream targets of CrLFY1 and CrLFY2? This will be addressed
using ChIP-Seq and inducible LFY constructs to define targets of fern LFY genes.
Given the nodal role of LFY in angiosperm development and its conservation
throughout land plants, this research should serve as a key example for
evolutionary studies of other master regulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.