* 1920268
* MRI-Consortium:  Acquisition of an advanced mass spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Robert Moritz, Institute for Systems Biology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 769,979.00

An award is made to the Institute for Systems Biology (ISB) to support the
purchase of an advanced mass spectrometry (MS) instrument. Mass spectrometry is
used by researchers to catalogue and quantify many variants of the protein
complement of an organism or organelle system and to measure other metabolites.
Researchers at the ISB will extend their previous work with advanced detectors,
software and lab protocols to improve protein and metabolite profiling in
biological samples. Through training of researchers directly or attending expert
courses given regularly at ISB, this project will enhance the teaching, training
and learning by providing innovative tools to maintain the cutting-edge
curriculum of these courses from PhD students, post-docs to experienced PIs. The
ISB award-winning high school education program will also support inquiry-based
teaching practices at the grassroots. Students and teachers of underrepresented
groups will collaborate with scientists to bring current science concepts and
practices into high school classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new MS
instrument will provide enhanced capabilities of comprehensive high-throughput
discovery and targeted analyses, characterization of post-translational
modifications, and protein interaction analysis. Using knowledge gained from
previous research efforts, as well as computational tools for prediction and
spectral interpretation, the ISB researchers will provide new insights into
multiple biochemical events such as transcription/translation interplay,
organelle biogenesis, metabolic network analysis, novel capture and quantitation
reagent development and their applications. The new system will complement the
computational expertise in proteomics hardware and software development
capabilities among ISB researchers to advance many other projects. The use of
data independent analysis (DIA) with this instrument and interrogation through
new software tools for data analysis will provide users unprecedented
capabilities in molecular ion identification and quantitation. Results from the
studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at regional
and national scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.