* 1920312
* MRI: Development of An Instrument to Measure the Atmospheres of Exoplanets
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Darren DePoy, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 526,289.00

This project will build an instrument to measure the atmospheres of planets that
orbit other stars. The instrument will image a star with a transiting exoplanet
at many wavelengths at the same time. The contents of the atmosphere are
detected by changes in color of the observed starlight. Making use of existing
exoplanet surveys, the instrument will be able to make the first large study of
exoplanet atmospheres. This could identify potentially habitable worlds around
other stars, and show if our solar system is unusual among other star systems
with planets. This project will provide opportunities for training undergraduate
students and a graduate student in astronomical instrumentation. Development
will take place at the Munnerlyn Astronomical Instrumentation Laboratory at
Texas A&amp;M University, which has an established record broadening
participation in astronomical instrumentation research. Results of this research
will appeal to the general public and be disseminated through news and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build an instrument specifically
designed to determine the presence and composition of atmospheres around a large
number of exoplanets orbiting bright stars using existing ground-based
telescopes. The Exoplanet Transmission Spectroscopy Imager (ETSI) will be the
first instrument of its kind capable of operating on medium sized telescopes,
and it will be deployed on the 2m telescope at the Las Cumbres Observatory (LCO)
at Haleakala, HI. Relative fluxes measured in the various bandpasses during
exoplanet transits (relative to the fluxes measured for a nearby comparison
star) will either reveal atmospheric features (Rayleigh scattering, atomic and
molecular absorption, clouds, etc.) or rule them out with high confidence. A
very large number of potential targets from existing and on-going ground-based
transit searches and recent space-based surveys such as the Transiting Exoplanet
Survey Satellite (TESS) are observable with ETSI, so the instrument will be
capable of making the first statistically-significant significant assay of the
existence and characteristics of planet atmospheres in the Galaxy. This study
will be the first to reveal whether our solar system is unique or unusual and it
could identify potentially habitable worlds around other
stars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.