* 1920807
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Indigenous Rights, Government Authority, and Stakeholder Alliances in Rural-Urban Water Conflicts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Carl Bauer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2021
* USD 17,433.00

This doctoral dissertation project will examine how public, private, and tribal
interests are considered and reconciled in the wake of large rural-to-urban
water transfers. The doctoral student will evaluate the decision-making process
about an emblematic water transfer by evaluating more than a century of social,
regulatory, and environmental change. During this time-period, the public,
private, and tribal interests considered by decision-makers have themselves
changed amid drastic shifts in federal Indian policy, expanding public interest
in environmental protection, and emerging coalitions of unlikely allies.
Illustrating how natural resources policy intersects with federal Indian policy
in practice, the research results will be summarized in policy briefs for
government agencies that navigate that intersection when making decisions about
land and water management. Educational and outreach tools will be developed to
raise awareness about indigenous histories and perspectives that have often been
overlooked and marginalized in water policy debates. Research findings will be
disseminated to broader audiences through publication in popular media outlets
and distribution of teaching resources. This project will support the training
of a female doctoral student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated qualitative
methods (ethnography, legal, and archival) will be used to capture the
multifaceted processes that shape decision-making about large water transfers:
legal and policy research to establish the relevant laws and policies on the
books; archival research and agency interviews to elucidate the rationales
guiding decisions in light of those policies; and participant observation and
stakeholder interviews to examine how those decisions are implemented, received,
and reshaped on the ground. Focused on decision-making about the transfer of
water from Owens Valley to Los Angeles, California dating back to the early
1900s, this research will examine (1) how urban control over rural land and
water resources is asserted, maintained, and justified over time; (2) how
federal actions on behalf of the public interest intersect with the federal
government's obligations as trustee for tribal interests; and (3) how indigenous
struggles for water, land, and sovereignty articulate with the efforts of other
rural actors challenging urban resource control and its impacts. In addition to
illustrating how conflicting interests and obligations are weighed in decision-
making about large water transfers, this project will offer insight into how
indigenous and rural communities are working to reshape the frameworks, values,
and objectives underpinning those decisions. The research will advance
theoretical work in legal geography and public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.