* 1920383
* CEDAR: Atmospheric Neutral Density Dynamics through Meteor Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Sigrid Elschot, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 609,557.00

This award is an experimental effort to further develop a new measurement
technique for estimating neutral densities by using radar observations of meteor
trajectories. As meteoroids enter the Earth's atmosphere, they experience
deceleration due to atmospheric drag and form meteors that radar can observe,
providing a source of information that can independently determine the neutral
density of the atmosphere at altitudes of 80 to 140 km. Measurements of neutral
densities in this region are very challenging experimentally and this work will
fill this gap by using a novel technique. Knowledge of neutral densities is
important since low-Earth-orbit satellites experience atmospheric drag that is
strongly dependent on densities. The continued accumulation of data
characterizing this meteoroid population would also provide improved risk
assessment to spacecraft operators and to ground-based users of satellite data.
This work will also provide research topics for new graduate students and
results from this work will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
courses in Aeronautics and Astronautics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The latitudinal
and temporal variation of neutral density in the mesosphere-lower-thermosphere
region between 80 and 140 km in altitude will be studied by conducting a
simultaneous meteor radar campaign at two geographically distinct radar
facilities and applying a novel statistical technique to derive neutral density
values from the detected meteor trajectories. These measurements of atmospheric
neutral density will be compared against existing atmospheric models to
characterize the origins of short time density variations and to assess the
extent that they will couple to density enhancements in the upper atmosphere.
The resulting measurements of total neutral density will complement measurements
of temperature, winds, plasma, and individual metallic species, and provides an
alternative source of data to existing neutral density measurements that are
sparse or that depend on different physical
assumptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.