* 1920020
* MRI: Acquisition of a Heterogeneous Multi-GPU Cluster to Support Exploration at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2021
* Yanzhi Wang, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 399,700.00

This project aims to acquire a heterogeneous Multi-GPU cluster, constructed out
of state-of-the-art GPUs devices, interconnected with emerging NVLink and HDR
networks, network-attached non-volatile memory (NVM) storage for GPU caching,
and interconnected by a smart HDR infiniband switch, to enable, accelerate,
explore, and support applications at scale from different domains that
include:&lt;br/&gt;• Distributed deep neural networks for
retinopathy,&lt;br/&gt;• Wireless network forensics,&lt;br/&gt;• Adversarial
machine learning,&lt;br/&gt;• Computational social science,&lt;br/&gt;•
Mathematical optimization and big data analytics,&lt;br/&gt;• Coastal
engineering modeling, and&lt;br/&gt;• Multi-GPU system (including NVMe
technology to support caching in GPU network and a smart network switch that can
offload collective operations)&lt;br/&gt;These features will enable
computational scientists to exploit GPU parallelism in new ways by programming
the smart network switch and caching selectively to hide memory and interconnect
latency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, graphics processing units (GPUs)
provide high computational throughput by lunching a large number of threads by
overlapping compute and memory operations. Combined with low-overhead thread
swapping, GPUs can hide long memory operations. But underlying system
architectures have not kept up as the size and complexity of GPU applications
grow. The multi-GPU solutions are less programmer friendly and result in lower
scalability when their architectural support is compared with the multi-CPU
systems. Current GPUs systems treat GPUs as discrete devices, with limited
support for a truly shared memory programming model. Since multi-GPU
interconnect bandwidth has become a limiting factor for scaling multi-GPU
systems, exploration of new network topologies, smarter network elements, and
enhanced software layers for caching and prefetching, that meet the needs of
tomorrow’s demanding data applications are necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.