* 1920180
* MRI: Development of the Gemini Planet Imager Upgrade
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bruce Macintosh, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,613,959.00

The Gemini Planet Imager (GPI) is an instrument designed to image giant,
extrasolar planets and rings of asteroids orbiting nearby, young stars. It is
the most advanced exoplanet imaging instrument available to the entire US
astronomical community. GPI uses advanced technologies to correct for the
blurring of stars due to turbulence in earth's atmosphere, to block the light of
bright stars, and to reveal an infrared image and spectra of distant faint
planets. This project will relocate and extensively upgrade GPI to incorporate
the latest cutting-edge technology into the design. These upgrades will enable
GPI to observe fainter, younger stars and study planets earlier in their
formation, to detect planets with masses similar to our own Jupiter, and to
operate more efficiently to support studies by the entire astronomical
community. This project will also support training of graduate and undergraduate
students. An innovative exchange program for graduate students, a mentoring
program as well as professional development programs and activities will be made
available to students participating in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GPI
was originally installed on the Gemini South telescope in Chile in 2013. GPI
uses adaptive optics (AO) to correct for blurring due to atmospheric turbulence,
coronagraphic masks to block the light of bright stars, and an infrared integral
field spectrograph (IFS) to image and study the faint planets that are
discovered by it. This project will improve all three of these components. These
upgrades will improve GPI's contrast, sensitivity, and observing efficiency. AO
upgrades will improve GPI's limiting magnitude to allow observations of
significantly fainter target stars and younger stars to study planets earlier in
their formation. IFS and coronograph mask upgrades will improve GPI's
sensitivity to fainter planets at the peak of the period distribution, have the
potential to significantly increase the number of directly-imaged planets that
can be subject to detailed atmospheric characterization. Along with the
relocation of GPI to Gemini North in Hawaii, these upgrades will enable GPI to
address key questions about planet formation, evolution and atmospheric
composition, as well as open up new areas of high-contrast imaging of other
sources from our solar system to extragalactic scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.