* 1920623
* Manufacturing USA: Computational Screening of Metal Oxides for Alkane Dehydrogenation to Olefins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ioannis Bourmpakis, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 354,954.00

A promising route to olefins that are important building blocks for the chemical
industry is the&lt;br/&gt;dehydrogenation of alkanes on metal oxides. This
reaction occurs due to oxide acid-base surface functionalities, but the
underlying mechanism is poorly understood. This knowledge gap has been impeding
efforts to design active and robust catalysts that efficiently convert natural
gas (i.e. light hydrocarbons) to value-added chemicals (i.e. olefins), optimize
natural gas upgrading, and reduce the cost of the energy-demanding
dehydrogenation chemistries. The proposed research aims to fill this knowledge
gap by elucidating structure-activity relationships on metal oxide catalysts
applicable to the dehydrogenation of light alkanes, using first-principles-based
computational techniques and experimental verification through collaboration
with researchers from the RAPID Manufacturing Institute. The project has the
potential to positively impact the chemical industry by accelerating catalyst
discovery for the efficient conversion of light hydrocarbons from natural gas to
value-added chemicals. The development of efficient processes that reduce the
energy input and associated cost for chemicals production, and utilize the
abundant natural gas reserves, can have a positive impact on society and the US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research plan includes application of
periodic Density Functional Theory calculations, ab-initio molecular dynamics
simulations, multi-scale process modeling and machine learning to develop novel
structure-activity relationships that describe the alkane dehydrogenation
activity as a function of the Lewis acid-base properties of the oxides. These
relationships will enable the rapid screening of a wide range of metal oxides,
different facets on each oxide and a gamut of surface acid-base sites, to
identify the prevailing dehydrogenation mechanism and the most active sites on
the metal oxides, as function of their Lewis acid-base strength. The project
will also create poisoning maps by identifying which surface sites will be
poisoned by strong species adsorption, even at elevated dehydrogenation
temperatures, and will study catalyst surface dynamics under realistic
experimental conditions. The ultimate objective is to advance catalyst discovery
by avoiding trial-and-error experimentation in the laboratory, address knowledge
gaps pertinent to process intensification, and support translational research
being conducted in the RAPID Manufacturing Institute. The educational and
outreach components of the proposal include: (a) engaging graduate and
undergraduate students in research, with a focus on students from under-
represented backgrounds, (b) generating material for relevant courses (Chemical
Kinetics, Catalysis, etc.) and (d) enabling STEM outreach to K-12 students
through the Carnegie Science Center and University of Pittsburgh's INVESTING NOW
program. Students will be trained on computational chemistry, molecular
simulations, catalysis, process intensification, scientific computation, machine
learning and high-performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.