* 1920882
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Domestication and Landscape Management Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Maria Bruno, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 135,885.00

The transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture is one of the most
significant changes in human history, and scholars world-wide, across multiple
disciplines are engaged in understanding how and why this process took place.
The South American Andes are considered to be one of the centers of
domestication providing some of the world's most important foods, including
potatoes and quinoa, and wool from llamas and alpacas support textile
industries. Yet, our knowledge of the processes of domestication and the
commitment to agriculture lags behind other regions due to small number of
studies. Dr. Maria Bruno, of Dickinson College, Dr. Jose Capriles, of The
Pennsylvania State University, and Dr. Christine Hastorf, of the University of
California, Berkeley, will investigate the transition from hunting and gathering
to agriculture in the southeastern shore of Lake Titicaca basin in the South
American Andes. Through new archaeological excavations and specialized analyses,
this collaborative investigation, made up of a multidisciplinary team of North
American and Bolivian specialists, will foster multiple opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students to train and develop skills in
archaeological field and laboratory procedures. The project will also involve
the active participation of local indigenous Aymara communities whose
traditional subsistence and land use practices have been increasingly impacted
by environmental degradation and globalization. Local high school students will
be trained to participate in research and create videos that illustrate research
methods and data interpretation, while documenting the histories of their sites
and communities. In conjunction with local agencies, the project will help to
promote on-going local tourism initiatives based on cultural patrimony. The
project will make educational posters for the museum and high school, and print
and distribute informative pamphlets with updated information regarding nearly
four millennia of cumulative resource utilization by urban, farming, herding and
fishing communities that created a complex socio-environmental system of
dramatic landscape-scale transformations that are still visible today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lake Titicaca basin of the south-central Andes
sustained some of the highest pre-Columbian population densities in the western
hemisphere. It is recognized as a center of crop domestication and early
agriculture. To investigate the onset of food production and landscape
modification in the basin, the researchers will carry out archaeological
excavations focusing on the Early Formative Period (1500-800 BCE) at the sites
of Chiripa, Chiaramaya and Chiripata, located in the Taraco Peninsula, Bolivia.
Specifically, they will seek to answer what was the nature and timing of a
commitment to domesticated plant and animal species and what was the role of
climate change in either facilitating or constraining this process. To evaluate
these questions, a team of specialists will carry out detailed analyses of plant
and animals remains that reflect the changes in their use and management through
time. A rigorous program of radiocarbon dating will permit to compare these
changes to new records of past climate change, in addition to social and
political transformations recorded in the archaeological record, to further on-
going discussion about the transition to agriculture by humans locally and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.