* 1920350
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the relationship between diet and biological age with a primate epigenetic clock
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Kirstin Sterner, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 29,379.00

Unlike chronological age (the number of years a person has lived), biological
age accounts for environmental, genetic and lifestyle factors that influence the
pace of age-related changes. Diet is thought to be one such factor; however, the
relationship between diet and biological aging is not well understood, and
efforts to characterize this relationship have struggled to disentangle the
effects of diet from other variables. This doctoral dissertation project will
examine the effect of diet on the rate of biological aging using a newly
developed epigenetic clock, a biomarker of biological age. This fundamental
research will advance knowledge about human biology, life history, and
senescence. The project may also inform public health and aging research by
quantifying how lifestyle factors like diet "get under the skin" to influence
the aging process and age-related disease. In addition, this project will
contribute to the education, training and professional development of a female
graduate student in a STEM field, and will include science outreach and
education activities to engage with K-12 and public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanisms that regulate the rate of
biological aging are unknown but may have origins in the epigenome, a collection
of chemical modifications to DNA that influence how genes are turned on or off.
The epigenome is able to connect environment to genetics, and therefore plays a
key role in explaining how environment and lifestyle factors can shape the pace
of biological aging at the molecular level. Recently, age predictor models
called epigenetic clocks have been developed that use age-associated changes in
the epigenome to generate estimates of biological age. These clocks can be used
to study the phenomenon of accelerated aging, where biological age exceeds
chronological age. This project will construct a multi-tissue epigenetic clock
and use this clock to test the effect of diet on biological age in a non-human
primate model. The central hypothesis of this research is that an obesogenic
diet accelerates biological aging and caloric restriction slows biological
aging. The researchers will collect and analyze genome-wide methylation data
from banked liver samples using reduced representation bisulfite sequencing
(RRBS) and combine these data with previously collected RRBS data from blood
samples. A comparative non-human primate model with similar life history and
disease risk can provide important insights into human
aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.