* 1920266
* MRI: Development of Grid of Nanogrids (GNG) Testbed
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Behrooz Mirafzal, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2023
* USD 624,404.00

Recent advancements in artificial intelligence and the internet of things will
impact future infrastructure profoundly. One can imagine a smart city with
interconnected transportation, utilities and smart buildings. Each component
would be capable of working independently and able to resist physical and cyber-
attacks. Smart buildings can be considered as a grid of nanogrids capable of
forming a larger network. The potential of grid-based networks has become a
national priority and attracted the attention of many experts in both industry
and academia. This project will develop a hybrid and modular testbed that
represents grid-forming smart buildings. Instrumentation development will be a
collaborative effort between the electrical and computer engineering and
computer science departments at Kansas State University. Although the testbed is
designed for research on electricity infrastructure for future cities, it could
be reconfigured for other applications such as testing marine and emerging
airborne electrical propulsion systems. Hence, it can be applicable to a wide
range of emerging applications and test scenarios. The PIs will develop a new
course on cybersecurity and resiliency of modern power distribution systems. The
wide availability of the testbed, coupled with related coursework, will attract
students from underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
testbed provides the capability to examine various hypotheses and research ideas
on nanogrid controls, hardware, software, communications and security protocols,
and standards, under all possible envisioned operating conditions of the power
distribution grid, including faults and anomalies in both islanded and networked
modes. The "Grid of Nanogrids" testbed features a highly scalable, modular, and
reconfigurable architecture consisting of a real-time simulator platform for
creating customized power networks designed by local and remote users, a single-
phase feeder nanogrid, a three-phase nanogrid implemented in hardware, a modular
self-learning inverter, and the capability of extending the number of hardware-
in-the-loop nanogrids. The proposed testbed will immediately enable the PIs and
their collaborators to advance their research agendas in fields such as power
grid cybersecurity, energy management, supervisory control, and situational
awareness. The testbed will be designed to support remote access for outside
researchers to facilitate advancing current work in the design and
implementation of smart buildings and power networks for smart
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.