* 1920599
* Investigating Whether Online Course Offerings Support STEM Degree Progress
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Claire Wladis, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,988,964.00

This research project will investigate whether online courses provide increased
access to college and STEM degrees, particularly for students typically
underrepresented in STEM fields. Annually, between 28% and 36% of all post-
secondary students in the U.S. enroll in at least one online course. The growth
in online course enrollment contrasts with an overall decline in college
enrollment. Thus, continued online course growth will have an escalating impact
on degree progression and attainment. Online course-taking is widely adopted at
community colleges, which have large populations of first-generation college
students, low-income students, female students, students of color and non-
traditional students. As a result, online courses at community colleges may have
disproportionate impacts on the degree completion of students from groups that
have been underrepresented in STEM fields. To support an innovative and
productive national STEM workforce, access to STEM careers must be available to
the entire, diverse U.S. talent pool. The aim of this research is to explore
whether limited access to online courses hinders degree progress for STEM
majors, particularly those from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The assumption that online courses enable non-traditional students
with work and family responsibilities to enroll in more courses has never been
rigorously tested. This project will: 1) explore the relationship between online
course availability and academic momentum (the number of credits in which a
student enrolls) and STEM persistence, with a particular focus on "non-
traditional" students; 2) explore the role of student time poverty (i.e.
quantity and quality of time available for college) in mediating these patterns;
and 3) explore scarcity of alternate course sections as a potential moderating
variable in explaining these patterns. No large-scale studies to date have
explored whether the availability of online courses increases access to, or
momentum through, college or STEM degrees. This project will collect data on
22,000 City University of New York (CUNY) students and will make causal
inferences by using: 1) a simulated course registration system to create a
within-subjects experimental design; and 2) student placement on course
waitlists to conduct a regression discontinuity design. CUNY's student
population mirrors the groups traditionally under-represented in STEM: largely
non-white, female, and low income, as well as a large proportion who are non-
native English speakers and first-generation college students. This project is
designed to provide critical information to practitioners and policymakers about
how to balance the dual concerns of access and retention when offering online
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.