* 1920546
* Collaborative Research: Fostering Elementary School Students' Visuospatial Skills and Mathematical Competencies through an Origami-based Program
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* David Geary, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 163,557.00

The United States has a severe shortage of STEM professionals, and this gap is
even more pronounced for underrepresented learners. In 2017, the average
mathematics score on the National Assessment of Educational Progress for 4th-
grade English Language Learner (ELL) students was 26 points lower than the
average score for their non-ELL peers. The closing of this gap will require
interventions that focus on mathematics and on the visuospatial competencies
that support mathematics learning. Visuospatial and mathematical competencies
are important in most STEM fields and both are underdeveloped in
underrepresented learners in the United States. Although there are increasing
efforts to develop evidence-based mathematics curriculum and to present
mathematical concepts or problems in a visual way, most visuospatial
interventions were implemented in a lab setting (e.g., video games; training on
mental rotation) and in ways that would be difficult to translate into existing
educational settings. Based on research-informed approaches, this project will
refine and evaluate an innovative origami curriculum and instructional guides to
address the need to enhance students' visuospatial abilities and spatial
language and related mathematical competencies. This project will build on an
NSF-funded project (DRL-1713547) in which elementary-school students rated
purposeful origami as one of the most engaging hands-on STEM activities they
have experienced. The project will refine and evaluate the effectiveness,
durability, and transfer of an innovative origami-based program on visuospatial
skills, with a focus on elementary school low-achieving English Language
Learners (ELLs). This study will provide a unique and comprehensive experimental
assessment of the contributions of an origami-based program on the development
of different types of visuospatial competencies and how the latter contributes
to children's mathematical development. The project is a collaborative effort
between cognitive psychologists, learning scientists, mathematics education
researchers, and origamists that is focused on creating developmentally
appropriate and engaging educational interventions and on better understanding
the relationship between children's visuospatial reasoning and their
mathematical learning. Research results will be disseminated and shared via
scholarly research conferences and through publications in peer-reviewed
research journals. Furthermore, the professional development protocols developed
in the project will provide a straightforward way to scale-up this intervention
and help educators integrate this new approach into their practices. This
project is funded by the EHR Core Research Program, which funds fundamental
research in STEM learning and learning environments, STEM workforce development,
and broadening participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Importantly, this
project extends previous longitudinal correlational studies to investigate the
causal links between the gains in visuospatial skills and students' mathematical
competencies using an experimental design and a 12-month follow-up study with a
group of 240 fourth-graders. This project refines an engaging intervention
through an iterative design-based research process to help identify the learning
and teaching components that can optimally foster children's visuospatial
skills. This project will draw on previous research efforts that have examined
spatial training effects and includes a comprehensive set of validated measures
of visuospatial skills, mathematics competencies, mediators, and confounding
factors, which will allow us to examine the complex relations, for the first
time, between students' visuospatial activities and their emerging spatial and
mathematical competencies. At the same time, the project will identify important
cognitive factors and instructional strategies that contribute to the
development of visuospatial and mathematical skills among low-achieving ELL
students. The focus on this at-risk student group will improve our understanding
of how to construct a more inclusive learning environment and will provide clear
directions for focused interventions, in order to address the broader goal of
preparing more low-achieving ELL student to enter STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.