* 1920672
* Collaborative Research: Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Refutation Materials for Promoting Conceptual Change in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Olusola Adesope, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2022
* USD 257,068.00

Individuals can develop misconceptions from many sources, ranging from incorrect
information in online searches to experiences of everyday life. An example is
the persistence of thinking that winter happens because the earth is further
away from the sun and summer happens because it is closer. (The earth is about
the same distance away in both seasons, but the earth's tilt affects the angle
at which the sun's rays hit the surface of the northern versus southern
hemispheres.) Misconceptions can be very persistent, surviving college physics
courses and other educational interventions. One strategy for overcoming
misconceptions is the use of refutation materials, which include texts,
graphics, videos, and activities. Refutation materials explicitly activate
incorrect prior knowledge, prompting the learner to recall their prior incorrect
conception at the same time as they process the new correct conception. This co-
activation of correct and incorrect models increases the probability that the
learner will notice the discrepancies and strive to reconcile them, thus
influencing learning. However, some researchers have recently called for caution
when using refutation approaches to correct misconceptions because, sometimes
when students are presented with certain refutations, they become more
entrenched in their misconception. This reaction is called the "backfire effect"
and is especially troubling since "just adding knowledge" rarely facilitates
conceptual change. It is difficult to determine whether refutation materials
will promote conceptual change or further strengthen misconceptions. This
proposal aims to enhance STEM literacy by helping STEM educators understand when
refutation might be best used to improve STEM
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research synthesis are to
study 1) the heterogeneity among the average effects of refutation materials on
conceptual change and learning in STEM domains and 2) the factors (design,
contextual, methodological, etc.) that foster or inhibit the effectiveness of
refutation materials. To address this need, the project will use state of the
art meta-analytic techniques to comprehensively search for studies about
refutation, synthesize the findings, and identify factors that moderate the
effects of refutation materials. The project is designed to advance the field
and provide teachers, practitioners, and science communicators with a valuable
resource by determining what type of refutation materials work, for whom, and
under what conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.