* 1920434
* Theories for Novel States of Matter Observed and Constructed in Condensed Matter and Cold Atom Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Cenke Xu, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education on developing theories for new states of matter that appear in
materials and in systems comprised of arrangements of individual atoms at
ultralow temperatures. The quantum mechanical behavior of interacting particles
in these systems generates extremely rich physics and conceptual mysteries that
continue to demand better and even revolutionary understanding from scientists.
Recently, unexpected and exciting discoveries have been made in various
condensed matter systems, such as devices made from two graphene sheets that can
exhibit superconductivity when the two sheets are precisely stacked at a
specific orientation with respect to one another. These systems offer
unprecedented tunability and may represent the beginning of a new era of study
in quantum many-body physics. Related recent progress in cold-atom experimental
techniques allows the exploration of novel physics: under certain conditions,
e.g. illumination by laser light of specific characteristics, these systems
behave as if they exist in a higher-dimensional space than our usual three
dimensions. This PI aims to develop and apply new theoretical concepts and
methodologies to study the interplay of quantum mechanics and many-body physics
in these platforms, and to develop theories for their manifestations in a
variety of phenomena. The research could potentially lead to both new
fundamental understanding of nature, and also to technological innovation from
harnessing these strictly quantum phenomena. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has potential scientific impact beyond condensed matter physics, as the research
is relevant for high-energy physics. The PI expects to interact and collaborate
broadly with scientists from related fields. The project will offer
opportunities for training and mentoring graduate students and of postdoc
researchers, providing them with essential theoretical tools that not only can
be applied in physics research within academia but can also find uses in a wide
range of industrial settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education on
unconventional states of matter in condensed-matter and cold-atom systems. The
goal of this project is three-fold: i) to describe and understand the recently
discovered superconductivity and the weakly correlated insulator phase in moire
superlattices via a formalism developed by the PI's group recently, and to also
engineer more exotic states of matter in related systems; ii) to construct and
understand unconventional states of matter such as strongly interacting
topological states and symmetry-protected topological states in high dimensions
that can be realized in cold atom systems with synthetic dimensions; iii) to use
the exactly soluble Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev physics as the starting point to describe
and understand non-Fermi-liquid states and related phenomena that are
experimentally observed in high-temperature
superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has potential scientific
impact beyond condensed matter physics, as the research is relevant for high-
energy physics. The PI expects to interact and collaborate broadly with
scientists from related fields. The project will offer opportunities for
training and mentoring graduate students and of postdoc researchers, providing
them with essential theoretical tools that not only can be applied in physics
research within academia but can also find uses in a wide range of industrial
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.