* 1920514
* Collaborative Research: Paleoseismology of the M7.3 1915 Pleasant Valley Earthquake Ruptures
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Steven Wesnousky, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 221,449.00

This project to use geology to assess the past size and frequency of occurrence
of large earthquakes on the fault that produced the magnitude 7.3 1915 Pleasant
Valley earthquake in Nevada forms the underpinnings of a collaborative program
of science, education and outreach. It is through the cumulative study of
individual earthquakes that the research community gains observations to
understand earthquake ruptures and their role in active tectonic processes. The
information gained in this project will be incorporated into the National Hazard
Maps designed to reduce failure of building infrastructure and lifelines and
loss of life in future earthquakes. The collaboration of three institutes is
designed to provide the opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students to
learn methods and concepts bearing on earthquake science in the framework of an
active research project, lead to the development of online and classroom
materials for education and research, create links between rural Nevada college
campuses and the University of Nevada, Reno. Principal investigators at two of
the three participating institutions are early career female
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will consider one of the few large
continental earthquakes that occurred in recent history and remove a significant
void in our collective understanding of active tectonics in the Basin and Range
and the Central Nevada Seismic Belt. This research will quantify the timing of
past earthquakes and the average rate of slip on the fault that produced the Mw
7.3 1915 earthquake. The use of modern Accelerator Mass Spectrometry
radiocarbon, Optical Stimulated Luminescence, and Terrestrial Cosmogenic dating
methods in conjunction with paleoearthquake trenching investigations proposed
herein will yield observations to 1) assess the northward extent to which slip
rate is elevated along the Central Nevada Seismic Belt within the interior of
the Basin and Range, 2) to determine whether the past history of events in
Pleasant Valley exhibits repeated clustering of events that is observed in the
Central Nevada Seismic Belt to the south, 3) address whether or not strands of
the 1915 rupture separated by a 4 kilometer step in trace exhibited the same
behavior in past earthquakes, 4) compare geologic rates of slip during the late
Pleistocene as compared to modern geodesy, 5) cross-check multiple dating
techniques applied to the same sediments, and 6) develop quantitative
constraints on the timing of alluvial fan deposition in Pleasant Valley as a
possible tool for assessing fault slip rates on adjacent range fronts exhibiting
the same geomorphic and soil characteristics. In sum, there are few continental
normal fault earthquake ruptures on which to gather observations bearing on the
characteristics of rupture and recurrence. This study will provide the basis to
compare and contrast characteristics of the 1915 ruptures to those that occurred
before, both on the 1915 fault and elsewhere around the globe. The data
collected will place observational bounds on conceptual models of earthquake
recurrence and the physics of earthquake processes that form the underpinnings
of seismic hazard analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.