* 1920714
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Labor Market Prospects of Students Exiting Higher Education
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Margot Jackson, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 24,353.00

Millions of U.S. college graduates, who arrived in the country as young
children, face restricted access to employment. A growing share of the
population may therefore be highly-trained but under-employed. However, there is
scant evidence evaluating whether, how, and why employers screen higher-educated
job seekers for employment with respect to applicants' immigration status. This
project tests the simultaneous effects of several variables, such as immigration
status and ethno-racial identity, on college graduates' employment
opportunities. It also evaluates whether employers' perceptions of job
applicants, as well as employers' interpretation of applicable laws, help
explain employers' decisions. This project provides insights into creating a
better match in resources between the U.S. educational system and the labor
market. This project consists of a field experiment and a survey experiment. In
the field experiment, hypothetical resumes of college graduates are submitted
online to real job postings in eight large cities. Differences in callback rates
are calculated across five applicants, who are matched in all but a small number
of critical respects (e.g., immigration status, ethno-racial identity). In the
survey experiment, the same hypothetical resumes are shown to a national sample
of employers. In addition to answering which applicant they would callback for
an interview, employers also answer questions addressing their perceptions of
the applicants and their knowledge of relevant laws. Employers' answers to these
questions will be analyzed to determine whether they help explain differences in
callback rates. This project advances theoretical understanding of whether and
how laws shape the production of inequality among a growing share of the higher-
educated population. It also makes theoretical contributions to the fields of
law and society and inequality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.