* 1920895
* Collaborative Research:  Acoustic Deflection in Bat-Moth Interactions: Revealing the Mechanism and Evolution of a Sensory Illusion
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Akito Kawahara, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 635,506.00

Predators are under pressure to perform lethal strikes on prey. Prey, in turn,
are under pressure to deflect predators away from vital body parts. To do so,
some animals have evolved traits to take advantage of their assailants' sensory
systems and vulnerabilities therein, creating sensory illusions - that is,
discrepancies between what the predator perceives and reality. Understanding how
prey manipulate sensory processing by their predators will reveal important
driving principles and limitations of sensory systems. This team of researchers
has shown that moth tails divert echolocating bat attack to these expendable
appendages by creating an acoustic illusion. Using arrays of high-speed cameras
and ultrasonic microphones, this research will quantify battles between bats and
long-tailed moths and reveal the underlying mechanism of this illusion. To
provide naturally replicated tests of their hypotheses, the team will study
multiple origins of long tails in moths on different continents and incorporate
this knowledge into a comprehensive phylogeny. In doing so, they will parse the
roles of both constraint and selection on the emergence of convergent traits to
reveal general principles that govern diversification. The team will engage in
activities to broaden the impact of their work. For example, they will live
videoconference from the field into undergraduate classrooms to use the natural
charisma of bat-moth interactions to excite students and increase STEM
retention. In addition, the team will produce a museum exhibit that will include
hundreds of moth specimens, a rendition of the resulting phylogeny and multiple
computer monitors displaying high-speed videos of bat-moth interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tactics adapted to circumvent the sensing strategies of
predators are likely underappreciated defenses in diverse taxa. This project
will determine the mechanism underlying deflection of bat attack by moth tails.
The team will use 3D high-speed videography of bat-moth interactions to parse
mechanistic hypotheses by quantifying precisely where bats strike their prey. In
addition, they will quantify the physical information available to bats in
returning echoes from moths using a 3D ensonification array and then pit those
moths against bats in predator-prey battles to examine auditory object formation
by the predator. The fundamentals of how bats organize and separate the auditory
scene bear strongly on bat and insect ecology and evolution. By quantifying
behavior across silk moth diversity, the team aims to test the evolutionary
route of echoic profile convergence. They will quantify echoes reflected off
hundreds of silk moth species across the world's tropics and build a robust
phylogeny to unfold the pattern of convergent evolution and tease apart the
roles of both historical bias and selection on the independent origins of this
anti-bat defense. Understanding how moth tails alter echoic information to
"fool" bats will reveal the limitations of an active sensing system that has
been honed by millions of years of battling insect counter-defenses and may lead
to an understanding of the fundamental limitations of extracting information
from an echo stream. Further, this project has broad implications for the
evolution of the diverse nocturnal insects, one of the dominant animal lineages
on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.