* 1920358
* Regulation of spindle microtubule organization in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yuh-Ru Lee, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,078,184.00

Cellular organisms propagate by producing new cells through cell division. When
eukaryotic cells divide, they generate the spindle apparatus that ensures the
faithful segregation of the genetic material into two daughter cells. This
biological machinery is assembled by the cytoskeletal filaments of microtubules.
Spindles often have their poles defined by two centrosomes in organisms like
fungi and animals. During evolution, however, the centrosome is no longer
produced in flowering plants. Yet these spindles lacking this structure can
still precisely exercise their essential function in cell division. This
research is aimed at understanding the roles of proteins that regulate the
formation of the spindle microtubule array in plants. The knowledge learned from
spindle assembly in plants also will illuminate how cell division is executed in
other organisms. The work will involve the participation of both undergraduate
and graduate students. High school students will also have an opportunity to
participate in the research during the summers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to understand mechanisms that regulate acentrosomal spindle
microtubule organization in plants by employing two model systems, the basal
liverwort Marchantia polymorpha in which the centrosome is present but not
always used in mitosis and the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana that lacks
the structure. Preliminary studies in A. thaliana were focused on the mitotic
kinase of Aurora (alphaAur) and its regulator TPXL3, the microtubule nucleator
of the gamma-tubulin ring complex (gammaTuRC), and the Kinesin-14 motors of ATK1
and ATK5 that are associated with spindle MTs. When functions of these proteins
were compromised, spindles failed to establish convergent poles, and ultimately
mutant plants showed severe defects in both vegetative growth and reproduction.
The working hypothesis is that alphaAur regulates the functions of gammaTuRC and
Kinesin-14 in spindle assembly. Specifically, the formation of mitotic spindles
with convergent poles requires Kinesin-14-dependent microtubule organization and
poleward accumulation of gammaTuRC. This hypothesis will be tested by employing
1) imaging techniques to determine the actions of essential regulators of
spindle microtubule organization during mitosis; 2) genetic tools to dissect
functions of targeted proteins; and 3) biochemical methods to learn how their
functions are regulated. In vitro and in vivo results garnered from these
studies will contribute to&lt;br/&gt;elucidating mechanisms that regulate
acentrosomal spindle assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.