* 1920545
* Early Emergence of Socioeconomic Disparities in Mathematical Understanding
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Melissa Libertus, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,229,378.00

The math skills of children from high income families have grown faster than
those of children from middle- or low-income families resulting in a significant
and persistent gap. These disparities emerge in preschool and are larger by the
start of kindergarten. As children progress through school, the gap in math
skills persists or even widens. Importantly, SES-related disparities in math
skills have implications for long-term academic achievement and educational
attainment, as well as access to STEM education and professions in adulthood. As
such, there is an urgent need to identify the factors shaping early math
development before children start formal schooling. This investigation will
provide foundational knowledge about the activities and interactions in the home
environment that drive the early emergence of math skills disparities related to
SES. In the long term, findings from this work could inform home visitation
programs and early care and education curricula aimed at strengthening the early
math skills of children living in low resourced communities. The knowledge
generated by this study has the potential to enhance equity in access to STEM
education and professions for all children. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using a
longitudinal sequential study of two cohorts of socioeconomically diverse
30-month-olds (N = 320) and their parents, the proposed study will strengthen
knowledge of the etiology of SES disparities in math skills by addressing three
aims. First, it will examine associations between the home learning environment
(HLE) and early math skills. Second, it will describe SES disparities in HLE and
their implications for math learning. Third, it will test family stress and
family culture as pathways through which SES shapes HLE and early math skills.
Children will complete assessments of early math skills and other general
cognitive abilities at age 30 months and again around 42-47 months. In addition
to the child assessments at 30 months, in-home structured observations with a
parent, parent surveys, and time diaries will measure the quantity and quality
of children's opportunities for math learning at home. To measure family stress,
parents will complete questionnaires assessing general stress as well as stress
specifically related to performing and teaching math. To measure family culture,
parents will complete questionnaires assessing their general and math-specific
parenting beliefs and observations of family interactions will be conducted.
This study will test whether domain-general and math-specific family stress and
culture mediate the relation between HLE and SES. In sum, this study will make
contributions to understanding the early emergence of economic disparities in
early math skills. Theoretically, it will delineate whether domain-general or
math-specific differences in HLE explain disparities in early math skills
related to socioeconomic status. It will advance research by concurrently
considering the roles of stress and culture in shaping disparities in children's
opportunity to learn math in their early home environments. This project is
funded by the EHR Core Research program, which emphasizes STEM education
research that will generate foundational knowledge in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.