* 1920097
* MRI: Acquisition of a VersaLab Physical Property Measurement System at University of the District of Columbia
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Pawan Tyagi, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,210.00

Advances in nanotechnology require the ability to characterize devices such as
magnetic devices for advanced computing and energy harvesting devices such as
solar cells. A versatile physical property measurement system provides this
needed capability. The instrument is an assembly of modules that can measure
magnetic and thermal properties. Its scope can be expanded by adding electrical
and optical property measurement capabilities, increasing its versatility.
Hence, it is a potent resource to perform cutting-edge research on a wide range
of nanoscale materials and devices. This instrument will be placed at the
University of the District of Columbia (UDC), a historically black college and
university (HBCU). The instrument is an economical and highly functional
material characterization resource for UDC to fulfill its mission of providing
21st-century training to a diverse range of students enrolled in bachelors
through doctoral programs. The requested instrumentation will help the highly
energetic and enthusiastic faculty to establish a center of excellence in
nanotechnology. Students will collaborate with national laboratories such as the
National Institute of Standards and Technology as well as regional partner
institutions. This instrumentation will help UDC to attract and retain a diverse
student population by engaging them in highly rewarding research projects. It
will also foster inquiry-based student learning in graduate and undergraduate
courses in nanotechnology. UDC will also provide experiential learning
experiences to the high school teachers and students in the
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The VersaLab Physical Property Measurement System
(VPPMS) will enable cutting edge multidisciplinary research by providing access
to three highly useful modules: (i) vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM), (ii)
heat capacity measurement, and (iii) ferromagnetic resonance (FMR). These three
modules will be utilized for investigating the magnetic and thermal properties
over a 50-400K temperature range. The UDC team will investigate molecular
spintronics devices and magnetic metamaterials by utilizing the VSM and FMR
modules. VSM and FMR modules will be crucial to understanding the role of
magnetic molecule induced exchange coupling between two ferromagnetic
electrodes. They will also utilize the VPPMS to investigate the anisotropy and
damping factor of the ferromagnetic electrodes in order to understand the
mechanism of magnetic molecule based spintronics devices and magnetic
metamaterials. Additionally, the VPPMS will be used to detect the process
induced magnetic phases in the pyrite based solar cell materials and will
correlate the magnetic profile of pyrites with the resulting solar cell
properties. The VPPMS can also map the thermally activated property changes over
the temperature range of 50K to 400K to investigate the science of creating
highly efficient solar cells. In other work, the heat capacity module of the
VPPMS will enhance understanding of the relation between the nanoemulsion phases
and their heat capacity to yield nanoscale materials as a heat exchanger for
advanced cooling. Collaborators from Catholic University of America will use
this VPPMS to create new knowledge about the temperature dependent dynamic
magnetization responses from the novel Heusler alloys. The VPPMS will be used to
enhance the understanding of the impact of magnetic properties of nickel film
based multilayer thermoelectric devices on the figure of merit. Overall, the
research enabled by this instrumentation project has the potential to provide
transformative knowledge in the areas of futuristic nanoscale computer devices,
novel magnetic metamaterials, and materials for energy harvesting and energy
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.