* 1920740
* Physics of Non-Fermi Liquid Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Qimiao Si, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in the many-body physics of strongly correlated quantum
materials. The textbook description of electrons in solids assumes essentially
free electrons, moving throughout the solid independently of what all other
electrons are doing. Research in the recent past has shown that this description
fails in a wide variety of materials, in which electrons in the solid are
strongly correlated with each other. In these quantum materials, strong
correlations can produce unusual states of matter, and lead to phase transitions
between them. These are the quantum analogues of familiar phase transitions such
as ice melting into water, or water boiling into vapor. The PI will develop
theoretical methods to study the collective behavior of electrons near such
phase transitions to understand how novel types of superconductivity can be
generated, and to explore how these states evolve under the influence of
external electromagnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the project, the
PI will bring about understanding about quantum materials in general, which is a
central element of quantum science and technology that has recently emerged as a
top national priority. The PI intends to collaborate with leading experimental
groups worldwide in this area, thereby creating educational opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students involved in the PI's research program. The
advanced theoretical training will help students prepare for future careers in
academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in the physics of strongly correlated quantum materials. Strong
correlations can yield novel phases and unusual excitations. In metallic
systems, an outstanding challenge is to understand how the correlations generate
physics beyond the Fermi-liquid theory. The proposed research will address this
open problem, primarily by using systems with both itinerant electrons and
localized moments as a prototype setting. The research will develop and apply
controlled theoretical methods to study well-defined microscopic and field-
theory models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to gain new insights that
are broadly relevant to the physics of strongly correlated electrons. The PI
will pursue four specific research directions: First, the PI will analyze heavy-
fermion quantum criticality, with a focus on Kondo lattice systems that contain
entwined degrees of freedom. Second, the PI plans to initiate theoretical
studies on the novel phases that emerge near quantum critical points, including
pairing state of multiorbital superconductivity that is driven by quantum
criticality. Third, the PI will explore non-Fermi-liquid physics in heavy-
fermion systems potentially hosting Kondo-driven Weyl nodes, thereby elucidating
quantum criticality in a new setting. Fourth, the PI will investigate real-time
dynamics under driven conditions as a means of probing quantum criticality.
Through concrete model studies, this research direction aims to shed light on
the coherence and dynamics of strongly coupled quantum systems out of
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the project, the PI will bring about
understanding about quantum materials in general, which is a central element of
quantum science and technology that has recently emerged as a top national
priority. The PI intends to collaborate with leading experimental groups
worldwide in this area, thereby creating educational opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students involved in the PI's research program. The advanced
theoretical training will help students prepare for future careers in academia
or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.