* 1920885
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining Different Kinds of Guilty Pleas
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Allison Redlich, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 17,639.00

The ability of defendants to plead guilty while maintaining their innocence
seems like a contradiction. However, in North Carolina v. Alford (1970) the
Supreme Court held that defendants who claim innocence but want to avoid the
risk of conviction at trial can still plead guilty. Based on the Alford
decision, courts must find a sufficient factual basis of guilt before allowing
an Alford plea to take place. However, "sufficient" has never been defined by
the courts and these pleas could be accepted for a variety of reasons with
differential standards applied. Despite the legality of these pleas for nearly
50 years and the controversy surrounding them, very little is known about how
Alford pleas function in practice. This study will provide much-needed insight
about Alford pleas, including whether the type and strength of evidence differ
in Alford plea cases in comparison to traditional guilty plea cases. This
research will also provide a greater understanding of whether these pleas
operate as the Supreme Court intended, which in turn can inform how current plea
bargaining policies and practices may be improved upon.

This project will address the gap in the literature surrounding Alford pleas and
accomplish two specific goals: (1) Compare Alford and traditional guilty plea
cases and examine differences in processing (i.e., the length of time to dispose
of the case) and outcomes (i.e., the differences between the sentences received
by plea type); and (2) Examine whether the strength of evidence differs in
Alford plea cases and how the strength of evidence factors into the process of
offering, negotiating, and accepting Alford pleas. This project will use a mixed
methods approach that involves analyzing Virginia administrative court records
and interviewing court actors to provide more information and understanding
about these unique pleas and how the strength of evidence may impact the
decisions made by legal actors and defendants. Hierarchical Linear Modeling
(HLM) will be used to examine the relationship between the type of plea (i.e.,
Alford or traditional guilty plea) and the dependent variables (strength of
evidence, plea discount, and length of time to dispose of case), while
appropriately controlling for the county-level nature of the data. Additionally,
interviews with prosecutors, judges, and defense attorneys will provide better
understanding of the process for offering, negotiating, and accepting Alford
pleas and how the strength of evidence factors into the process. Findings from
this study can help inform future studies, including what other states are doing
to ensure that the factual basis of guilt is established in Alford plea cases,
and aid in the development of evidence-based practices surrounding the role of
evidence in plea bargaining and the courts' acceptance of all types of guilty
pleas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.