* 1920364
* MRI:  Acquisition of a 7T magnetic resonance system for high resolution imaging of brain connectivity and dynamics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Lihong Wang, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,952.00

An award is made to the California Institute of Technology to purchase state-of-
the-art equipment for a 7-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) instrument for
brain imaging. This instrument will enable cutting-edge basic research, as well
as research-intensive training, at the Caltech Brain Imaging Center (CBIC) aimed
at investigating brain structure and function in a range of animal species. The
research will engage more than a dozen different labs at Caltech pursuing basic
scientific questions, including a large number of postdoctoral fellows, graduate
students, undergraduates and high school summer students. Special emphasis will
be placed on increasing the representation of women and underrepresented
minority students in education and research. This includes Caltech's Ph.D.
programs as well as its Summer Undergraduate Research Fellows program and WAVE
program, which welcome students from outside Caltech and focus on increasing the
participation of underrepresented students in science, technology, engineering
and math. It also includes the Caltech Classroom Connection, a science education
outreach program partnering Caltech scientists with K-12 teachers in the local
public school system to provide summer research experiences for K-12 students.
Additional educational impact will come from the use of this instrument in
connection with courses. In addition, the MRI instrument will be made available
to academic institutions in the Greater Los Angeles area. The insights into the
structure and function of the brain obtained through this research and
communicated through public outreach will contribute broadly to scientific
literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the supported research are
to elucidate fundamental principles of brain structure, function and
dysfunction; to test, develop, and compare synergistic technologies for
investigating the brain; and to train the next generation of students and
scientists in this endeavor. Specific aims will investigate the structural and
functional connectivity of the brain, knowledge that is essential for
formulating and testing computational models of brain function and allowing
comparisons among species. Convergent technologies will also be used to
investigate the brain, including the use of functional MRI, ultrasound and
photoacoustic tomography. The research will develop the next generation of
genetically encoded molecular probes for MRI, and will enable more precise
imaging and manipulation of biological function at the cellular and circuit
level. This research will leverage unique connections to studies conducted on
Caltech's human MRI scanners, enabling novel advances in the study of brain
structure and function across species. Results from the research will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed publications and at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.