* 1920098
* RUI: Fast and Robust Non-Destructive Testing of Cylindrical Composite Components Based on Microwave Measurements
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Reza Khalaj Amineh, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,542.00

Despite the rapid and significant growth in the use of composite and non-
metallic components, fast and robust non-destructive testing of these materials
is still an unfulfilled requirement. In particular, composite pipes are rapidly
replacing metallic pipes in the oil and gas industry to combat corrosion.
However, traditional non-destructive testing techniques cannot be employed for
assessment of these components made of composite materials, due to the challenge
of ultrasonic testing and other methods suitable for metallic components but not
for composite materials. Thus, to bridge this gap, in this project, microwave
imaging technology will be employed for volumetric inspection of cylindrical
composite components and concentric pipes. The imaging technology is fast and
reliable, and it can be employed for inspection of a vast range of composite
materials in various applications. This novel technology can provide crucial
material integrity data that could help reduce costs, increase system safety,
and reduce the risk of component failures. Implementation of this project will
significantly enhance the infrastructure for research and education at New York
Institute of Technology. The equipment acquired for this project will be used to
develop a research and education program in the field of microwave/antenna
engineering. Graduate and undergraduate students, including females and
individuals from minority groups underrepresented in the electrical engineering
field, will receive practical training in antenna and microwave design using
state-of-the-art hardware and software, and thus acquire a unique skill set that
prepares them for the demands of the national high-tech industry. These
activities have positive and societally relevant outcomes for minorities and
women, helping to remove barriers to participation in electrical engineering and
engineering education in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed microwave
imaging technique is based on holographic imaging concepts already proved
successful in security screening and other applications. These techniques are
fast and robust to noise. They will be modified for applications such as non-
destructive testing of composite pipes, in which the objects are in the extreme
near-field of the antennas whose physical size cannot be ignored. In contrast to
previous near-field holographic imaging techniques, the modified techniques
using circular deconvolution concept will address the periodicity of the
functions along the azimuthal direction in a cylindrical imaging setup.
Furthermore, the solution process in near-field holography will be improved to
reduce underestimation of features that are farther away from the antennas. This
improvement will be implemented via an approach originally used for
electroencephalography (EEG)-based brain source localization. Furthermore, novel
microwave tomography techniques will be studied to alleviate the limitations
imposed by the use of Born approximation in holographic techniques. In this
task, holographic techniques will be combined with nonlinear imaging approaches
to devise new microwave tomography techniques that are efficient in terms of
cost and time. This will allow inspection of larger and higher contrast defects.
Two configurations will be studied for imaging: (1) wideband single-receiver
antennas and (2) narrow-band multiple-receiver antennas. Parameters affecting
resolution in each configuration, including number of frequencies, number of
antennas, angular distance between antennas, and radial distance between imaged
surfaces, will be studied. Validity of the proposed techniques will be
demonstrated via simulation and experimental setups. In addition, a compact and
cost-effective imaging setup will be developed using RF data acquisition
circuitry and custom-designed antenna arrays. This new microwave inspection
technology can potentially revolutionize the non-destructive testing of
composite and non-metallic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.