* 1920336
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer and UV Excimer Laser Platform for Trace Element Analysis and U-Th-Pb Petrochronology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* James Crowley, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 405,000.00

An Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer and UV Excimer Laser for Geology
at Boise State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Geosciences at
Boise State University will acquire a state-of-the-art ultraviolet laser probe
and an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer. This acquisition will
enable new and innovative methodologies of trace element and isotopic analysis
of Earth materials. The requested instrumentation is an integral component of
the Boise State University Isotope Geology Laboratory for research projects in
Earth Sciences. The new lab will work with partners including the Boise State
University Office of STEM and Diversity Initiatives, and hundreds of
collaborators to broaden the participation of women and minorities and persons
with disabilities in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Department of Geosciences
at Boise State University will acquire a state-of-the-art ultraviolet (UV)
excimer laser probe with a high-sensitivity, fast-washout, two-volume ablation
cell, fully integrated with a turn-key, fast-scanning, high-sensitivity, large
dynamic range, quadrupole inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (LA-
ICPMS). This acquisition will leverage an existing laboratory infrastructure,
human resources, and a decade of LA-ICPMS experience by the PIs into new and
innovative methodologies of trace element and isotopic analysis of Earth
materials, including applications to magmatic systems, metamorphism and
tectonics, and paleoclimatic, paleobiological, and sediment provenance proxy
records of Earth systems dynamics. The requested instrumentation is an integral
component of innovative tandem in situ and isotope dilution analytical workflows
that the Boise State University Isotope Geology Laboratory applies to the full
spectrum of geochronological and petrochronological problems in Earth sciences.
The new facility will: Foster the next generation of geochronology-expert Earth
systems scientists by mentoring visiting scientists and students who will
receive knowledge and training in analytical techniques that are exported to
other labs and institutions over time; Promote cross-disciplinary training for
non-specialists on the role of laser ablation geochronology through the week-
long IsoAstro summer workshop; Engage a network of partners including on-campus
NSF S-STEM scholarship programs, the Boise State University Office of STEM and
Diversity Initiatives, and a broad base of hundreds of previous and current
collaborators including the NSF AGeS2 graduate research award program, to
broaden the participation of women and traditionally underrepresented minorities
and persons with disabilities in the LA-ICPMS
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.