* 1920245
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Computed Tomography System at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln for Advancing Multidisciplinary Research and Education in the Great Plains Region
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Shield, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2021
* USD 562,803.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
X-ray Computed Tomography (XCT) instrument at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
(UNL) to enable new fundamental research on next-generation manufactured
components. Quality components that embody the latest advances in materials and
manufacturing are essential to state- of-the-art products from aerospace to
infrastructure and biomedical devices. Researchers will use the XCT to develop
new understanding of what causes flaws and voids in components--enabling the
design of higher performing, more reliable products. This award directly
benefits materials engineering research conducted by more than 100 faculty,
staff researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students at UNL. More
than a third of the students involved in this research are from underrepresented
groups. The instrument will be placed in a facility that provides access to
academic and industrial researchers across the Great Plains region. The XCT will
catalyze new multidisciplinary research at UNL and beyond, strengthen UNL
collaborations with partner minority-serving institutions, and stimulate
interest among students from underrepresented groups to pursue graduate study
and careers in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand, model, and
exploit the promise of cutting-edge manufacturing processes, researchers need
information on a component?s external and internal geometry, surface
characteristics, and the presence of flaws, such as voids. The XCT is critical
because it allows nondestructive analysis of the functional and safety-critical
aspects of a sample. Researchers at UNL and its partners will use the XCT to
provide fundamental insight into the 3D internal and external structure of a
wide range of organic and inorganic materials from centimeter to micrometer
scales. The information obtained from the XCT analysis will advance
understanding of the process-structure relationship in several multi-
disciplinary domains, including 1) additive manufacturing for which the process-
material interactions during manufacturing are studied with respect to the
quality of the final part, 2) material science for laser-engineered
functionalized surfaces for which surface characteristics from laser-processing
are quantified relative to their impact on phenomena such as hydrophobicity and
anti-icing, and 3) materials for next-generation infrastructure for which
structural components made from concrete and steel are studied with respect to
their aging and sustainable manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.