* 1920152
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Prevalence and preservation of dental calculus at the National Museum of Natural History: Implications for biomolecular preservation in museums
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Rita Austin, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 28,805.00

This doctoral dissertation research will assess the impact of historical
decision-making processes on the Biological Anthropology collections at the
Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History (NMNH). In addition
to being snapshots of once living populations, biological anthropology
collections are valuable repositories of past anthropologists' collection
management strategies. The legacies and decisions, like ones made by Ales
Hrdlicka at the NMNH, changed how collections of human remains were formed,
accessioned, and cared for in museums. Understanding how collections were
treated in the past will help museums make informed decisions about destructive
sampling requests, allow researchers to optimize study design, and help to
establish museum care standards with modern scientific methods (e.g. DNA
sequencing) in mind. This project will contribute to STEM education by providing
training opportunities for undergraduates through the Smithsonian Fellowship
Program and Co-PI Austin's dissertation research. Additionally, the public will
be engaged at events like the "Expert Is In" talk series at the NMNH,
presentations at the NMNH and department presentations at the University of
Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the impact of changing collection
care strategies on biological anthropology collections, this project will focus
on biomolecular (DNA) preservation in dental calculus (calcified plaque). Dental
calculus from anthropological collections has been used to address important
questions concerning the health, diet, and population dynamics of past peoples.
However, variation in dental calculus development and preservation across human
populations is underexplored. By taking into consideration multiple lines of
evidence (i.e. ancient DNA sequencing, skeletal and morphological data, and
archival information) from temporally and geographically representative
collections, this study will investigate 1) how environmental factors contribute
to dental calculus formation and 2) how collection care decisions by past
biological anthropologists have affected the long-term storage of collections.
As a world-leading museum, the NMNH offers extraordinary collections with
spatial and temporal depth to address these two objectives and will provide
valuable information to other collections around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.