* 1920942
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Theorizing the Sociolegal Incorporation of First Generation Immigrants and their Adult Children
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Vanessa Delgado, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2021
* USD 19,992.00

This project examines how children of immigrants help their parents navigate
social and legal institutions in the US. A long line of research demonstrates
that children of immigrants serve as language and cultural brokers for their
parents. As such, youth can assist their parents by translating documents,
finding employment, learning new norms, and securing housing. However, limited
attention has been dedicated to the role immigration status plays in the
brokering process between young adults and their parents. This project aims to
address three inter-related questions: How do adult 1.5 and 2nd generation
children (age 18+) of immigrants engage in brokering? How do differences in the
brokering process shape the sociolegal integration of 1st generation immigrant
parents and their 1.5 and 2nd generation children? How do sociolegal outcomes
differ by immigration status and gender? This work will have important
implications for scholars, educators, and policy makers interested in
understanding the ways in which legal status complicates the integration of
immigrant families. This is particularly timely given the large-scale number of
undocumented and mixed status families in the US. Findings will also reveal the
positive and negative consequences that arise when these families attempt to
integrate into core societal institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the
research questions, in-depth interviews will be conducted with Latino/a
immigrant families who vary across protected and unprotected immigration statues
(undocumented young adults with undocumented parents, citizen young adults with
undocumented parents, and citizen young adults with parents with permanent
immigration status). Life history interviews will explore how immigration
statuses shape the brokering and the unique integration processes that unfold
among parents and their adult children. To this end, exploring the impact of
immigration status on this process will unveil how children of immigrants not
only broker information but are also uniquely positioned to facilitate access to
vital social, legal, and economic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.