* 1920798
* Distributed Multi-agent Continuous-time Optimization: Unbalanced Directed Graphs and Constrained Networked Games
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Wei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2023
* USD 396,000.00

Multi-agent systems have numerous applications. Distributed continuous-time
optimization algorithms are vital in multi-agent systems and can serve as
continuous-time solvers to provide distributed solutions to optimization
problems. Despite recent progress on distributed continuous-time optimization,
the existing results primarily assume a balanced network topology or graph and
the agents being selfless to aim for team optimality. Simply speaking, a graph
is balanced if for each agent, the number of team members that send information
to the agent is equal to the number of team members that receive information
from the agent. Unfortunately, in reality, the interaction (communication or
sensing) graph is often directed and unbalanced due to heterogeneity, nonuniform
communication/sensing powers, and/or sensing with a limited field of view. In
some real-world applications, the agents might be selfish and desire to optimize
their own cost functions with respect to their own actions in response to their
opponents' actions (noncooperative networked game). Despite some recent results
on distributed optimization over unbalanced directed graphs and distributed
solutions to constrained networked games, they are still at a primitive stage
with unrealistic assumptions and restrictive limitations. Existing results on
distributed optimization over unbalanced directed graphs primarily rely on
communication. However, in some applications, communication might not be
available or desirable (e.g., robots deployed in a communication denied or
unfriendly environment) and the agents have to rely on only local sensing (e.g.,
relative position measurements via onboard sensors) instead of communication.
Existing results on distributed general games with incomplete information about
opponents' actions primarily assume no coupled constraints among agents and a
stationary Nash equilibrium. However, in reality there often exist coupled
constraints among agents in games due to quota restriction, energy balance, or
market discipline, and the Nash equilibrium could evolve with time in response
to real-time changes. These issues pose significant challenges and become even
more challenging when the graph among agents is not only unbalanced directed but
switching. Unfortunately, despite their relevance and importance, these issues
are largely unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to
address the realistic challenges caused by unbalanced directed graphs and
constrained networked games in distributed continuous-time optimization with
only local information and local interaction. The proposal consists three
thrusts. The first thrust is on distributed continuous-time optimization over
unbalanced directed graphs. The PI will design and analyze novel nonsmooth
distributed optimization algorithms that are robust to switching unbalanced
directed graphs and amenable to applications relying on only local sensing
between neighbors without the need for communication. The PI will tackle the
case with general constraints and the case involving both time-varying cost
functions and constraints. The second thrust is on distributed continuous-time
constrained networked games. The PI will design and analyze novel distributed
Nash equilibrium seeking algorithms for general games with incomplete
information about opponents' actions to address coupled nonlinear constraints,
real-time tracking of a dynamic Nash equilibrium evolving with time, and
switching unbalanced directed graphs. The third thrust is experimental
demonstration on robotic networks. The proposed research will solve many open
problems in distributed control and optimization and significantly advance
theory and applications in multi-agent systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.