* 1920834
* RAPID:  Population viability below the quasi-extinction threshold
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Cheryl Schultz, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 01/31/2022
* USD 271,742.00

From time to time, formerly widespread species have declined to extinction. For
example, passenger pigeons were once abundant throughout North America, but no
longer exist. We often know about the factors that cause a widespread species to
decline (in the case of the passenger pigeon, the original cause was hunting),
but we know much less about what causes some populations to recover, and others
not to do so, once that original cause of declines is gone. Monarch butterfly
populations have declined dramatically in North America, and now western
populations may be approaching extinction. In the 1980?s, millions of monarch
butterflies overwintered on the California coast, and bred during the summer
west of the Rocky Mountains. By the 2000?s, the overwintering population had
declined to ~200,000-300,000 butterflies. In 2018, the population dropped to
~30,000 butterflies. This RAPID project will use the unexpected, rapid decline
of western monarch butterflies to test theories of extinction risk. We will
evaluate what changes in this suddenly-small population, through a combination
of carefully controlled experiments and sightings reported by volunteers looking
for monarch butterflies throughout the west, especially in California. We will
use this knowledge to help guide management and recovery of this iconic
butterfly population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will test the hypothesis
that vital rates, like survival and reproduction, decline as populations become
very small, perhaps because individual animals have difficulty finding mates, or
cannot protect themselves from predators as well as they could in groups. If
very small populations decline due to these "Allee effects", there is a fleeting
window of time in which to study population dynamics before local population
extinction. Because we know so little about suddenly-small populations,
ecologists typically base conservation plans on predicting declines to a ?quasi-
extinction threshold?, in other words, a population size below which the species
is unlikely to be able to recover. Based upon estimates of survival on
overwintering grounds and reproduction in early spring, earlier work warned that
30,000 butterflies may be a quasi-extinction threshold for western monarchs.
This project will (1) Test whether winter survival and spring reproduction are
now lower than they were in the past; (2) Calculate rates of summer range
expansion, and compare 2019 to years in the recent past, to evaluate potential
reductions of survival, reproduction, or movement at other life stages; (3)
Combine results of (1) &amp; (2) with existing data to model dynamics of this
migratory population through its full annual cycle. This model will be used to
calculate annual population growth rates in small and large populations, and
also to evaluate the potential of different management strategies to help
western monarch butterflies recover from quasi-
extinction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.