* 1920077
* MRI Consortium:  Development of a Forward Calorimetry Upgrade  for the STAR Detector
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Carl Gagliardi, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,950,000.00

Quantum Chromodynamics, or QCD, is considered a cornerstone of modern physics.
As the fundamental theory of the nuclear force, it describes strongly
interacting matter in terms of point-like quarks bound together via exchange of
massless particles called gluons. Yet despite its remarkable success in
explaining measurements carried out at the highest energies, a detailed
understanding of low-energy phenomena, such as the internal structure of the
protons and neutrons that make up 99% of the visible mass of the universes,
remains elusive theoretically and must be gained through experiment. Over the
last few decades, much progress has been made in this area, but not for the very
low or very high energy constituents within the proton. This project will
upgrade the STAR detector in order to make possible the study of proton-proton
collision products at far-forward angles, a kinematic regime dominated by the
scattering of high-momentum quarks on low-momentum gluons. This study will
provide a unique opportunity to explore how the quarks, gluons, and their spins
are distributed in space and momentum. Using the same techniques in proton-
nucleus collisions will allow for a better understanding of how properties of
protons and neutrons are modified in the nuclear environment. That in turn will
improve the understanding of nucleus-nucleus
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STAR forward upgrade is designed to explore
QCD physics in the very high and low regions of partonic momentum fraction, a
kinematic regime that has thus far remained inaccessible at RHIC. It will
provide superior detection and reconstruction capabilities for neutral pions,
photons, electrons, jets, and leading hadrons over the pseudo-rapidity range
2.5-4. To reduce costs and risk, much of the detector package will consist of
previously used components. The electromagnetic calorimeter will use refurbished
sampling Pb-scintillator blocks from PHENIX. The hadronic calorimeter will be a
sandwich iron-scintillator plate sampling type, designed and prototyped with
separate R&amp;D funds. Both calorimeters will share the same cost-effective
readout electronics, and will use SiPMs as photo-sensors, thereby allowing them
to operate without shielding in high magnetic fields and high radiation
environments, as will be encountered in this location. By design, the system is
scalable and reconfigurable: the EMCal blocks are simply stacked vertically,
while HCal "slabs" will be assembled in place. Integration into STAR will
require only minimal modification of existing infrastructure. Based on detailed
GEANT simulations, the Forward Calorimetry System (FCS) will have very good
electromagnetic (10% / sqrt(E) + 3%) and hadronic (~50% / sqrt(E) + 10%) energy
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.