* 1920293
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Raman Microscope for Research and Training in Analytical/Materials Chemistry, Biochemistry and Geosciences
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Ngee-Sing Chong, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 211,790.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and Chemical
Instrumentation programs. Professor Ngee-Sing Chong from Middle Tennessee State
University and colleagues Beng Guat Ooi, Charles Chusuei and Joe Collins are
acquiring a confocal Raman microscope. A Raman microscope uses a laser to scan
the surface of a sample. The laser wavelengths probe the surface and produce a
spectrum which identifies chemical components in the material. This gives useful
information on the properties of the material. The instrument is used, for
example, to study the chemical pretreatment of cellulose because of the
increasing need for the utilization of plant biomass for bioethanol production.
By incorporating this instrument in coursework both at the graduate and
undergraduate levels, students are trained for post-graduate studies, employment
in industry, academia and national laboratories. Research activities via
industry-university collaborations also benefits from the availability to use
the instrument. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Raman microscope is a powerful
analytical tool for identifying chemical composition qualitatively and semi-
quantitatively of various materials. It is being used in a number of important
research areas. The chemical modification of carbon nanotubes important for
chemical and biological sensors is being studied. How chemical and physical
treatment conditions of lignocellulose in plant tissue influences its
biodegradation is investigated. The study of reaction mechanisms of interfacial
phenomena as a function of temperature is a current project. DNA adduct
formation of aromatic amines in cell organelles is another study underway.
Investigations of how yeasts and fungi metabolize sugars, cellulosic biomass,
and organic contaminants as well as pathways for facile biofuel synthesis are
under progress. Another project is carrying out archaeological studies of shells
and shell-tempered pottery as a proxy for provenance studies. Other
archeological-related research focuses on analyzing fragile, perishable, ancient
materials (residues in pots) at small spatial resolutions using the microscope
because it is sensitive, and non-destructive in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.