* 1920255
* MRI: Acquisition of Multi-Mode Atomic Force Microscopy System for Research, Education and Outreach
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Punit Kohli, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 128,268.00

This award is funded by the Major Research Instrumentation and Chemical
Instrumentation programs. Professor Punit Kohli from Southern Illinois
University Carbondale and colleagues Saikat Talapatra, Kyle Plunkett, Farhan
Chowdhury and Senetta Bancroft are acquiring a multimode atomic force microscope
(AFM). The microscope is a powerful tool for studying the surface of various
materials. It uses an atomic scale probe in which the pointed tip scans across a
surface and measures the force between the probe and the surface. This produces
a high-resolution image of the surface with information on its structure and
properties. It leads to a basic understanding of complicated phenomenon that are
in play at the atomic level. Such knowledge is needed for understanding key
physical properties of nanoscale materials and systems. An example of its use is
in the synthesis of materials effective for treating contaminated water by photo
catalytic methods to destroy organic contaminants such as dioxane or
polyfluoroalkyl substances. The instrument is employed by students in their
research. It is used in classroom and laboratory instruction. Therefore, the
availability of this instrument significantly augments the learning experience
of the students, faculty and staff not only at the SIUC campus but also beyond
at other colleges and universities in the rural Southern Illinois region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels. The AFM is used to investigate the mechanical properties at the
nanoscale of organic, inorganic, and biological materials. The fabrication and
assembly of three dimensional (3D) architectural devices for electronics and
neuron circuits is being studied. Strategic innovations in nanomaterials
synthesis and design are under investigation for improving opto-electronics
devices for energy storage and catalysis. Materials for contaminant
sequestration and bioremediation to improve water quality are also targeted.
Another application addresses engineering a microenvironment for homogeneous
epiblast stem cell renewal. The results have implications in multiple fields
including cell mechanics, stem cell biology, and tissue
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.