* 1920816
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2021
* USD 473,841.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) for R/V
Roger Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel. The ship is owned by Navy
and operated by Scripps Institution of Oceanography as part of the US Academic
Research Fleet (ARF). The ship supports multidisciplinary oceanographic research
in all the world?s ocean basins.

In 2018, REVELLE completed 262 days, 181 (69%) of which were for NSF. In 2019,
Revelle is currently scheduled with 86 days, 72 (84%) of which are for NSF. The
reason there are so few days is that Revelle plans to spend most of the year in
drydock undergoing a mid-life refit. Much of the equipment proposed here would
be installed during this period.

The prioritized SSSE request includes the following:

Science refrigeration machinery $197,492 Intercom & dial telephone $411,854
Public address system $239,030 Wide throat sheaves $121,069 Reduce fan noise on
deck $143,109 Work boat outboard engines $16,240 $1,128,794

Broader Impacts The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.