* 1920858
* RII Track-2 FEC: Consortium for Plant Invasion Genomics (CPING): Combining Big Data and Plant Collections to Understand Invasiveness
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael McKain, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,031,497.00

Invasive species threaten biodiversity, impact crops, restructure ecosystems,
promote disease, and damage infrastructure, costing the US $120 billion
annually. Despite these impacts, understanding of how and why introduced species
become invasive is shockingly incomplete. This knowledge gap reflects a lack of
information about the early stages of invasions and the role of evolution in
promoting invasiveness. The recent revolution in genome sequencing and computing
technology promises to narrow this gap. By comparing genome sequences of
historic herbarium specimens spanning the duration of an invasion, researchers
are able to step back in time and examine the patterns and processes that
promote invasion from initial introduction to present day. The Consortium for
Plant INvasion Genomics (CPING) will harness the Big Data generated by this
genomic revolution for the study of invasive species and train a generation of
scientists in new genomic methods. Through collaborative projects focused on
five invasive species of national concern, CPING initially housed at the
University of Louisiana at Lafayette, South Dakota State University, the
University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, West Virginia University, and Wichita State
University will expand to unite scientists and students at more than 60
institutions in 18 EPSCoR states to better understand how plants become invasive
and provide insights into the management and prevention of invasive species.
CPING incorporates a training program in new genomic methods designed for all
levels of academia (undergraduate students to faculty) comprising 5-day genomics
bootcamps that will train 36 scientists from regional and local colleges and
universities. All participants will contribute to projects on the five CPING
focal species and conduct individual research projects in their own labs,
providing hands-on research opportunities for 39 undergraduate students. By
combining expertise and resources from scientists across many EPSCoR
jurisdictions, CPING will facilitate highly collaborative investigation of plant
invasions, provide training in key genomic techniques, enable EPSCoR researchers
to better compete for funding, and foster genomics and bioinformatics STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite immense investment into the study and
control of invasive species, fundamental questions regarding the genetic basis
and evolution of invasiveness remain poorly understood due to a lack of genomic
resources for most invasive plants. The project initially brings together
scientists from the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, South Dakota State
University, the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, West Virginia University, and
Wichita State University to form the Consortium for Plant INvasion Genomics
(CPING) unites faculty across EPSCoR institutions to examine how colonization,
gene flow, and adaptation shape population dynamics and facilitate invasion in
five high-profile invasive species. For each focal species, CPING participants
will apply cutting-edge methods to contemporary and historical specimens to
build spatial and temporal genomic datasets spanning entire invasions. We will
harness this Big Data to address several long-standing questions regarding
invasions: 1) How do colonization dynamics-the number, location, timing, and
genetic diversity-impact the establishment and spread of species in new
environments? (2) Does hybridization impact invasiveness? (3) Does adaptation
lead to genomic and phenotypic novelty that may facilitate invasion? Together,
the five CPING focal projects will yield a novel, synthetic understanding of the
roles of the crucial population-level processes involved in the spread of
invasive plants, as well as offer species-specific insights on the importance of
asexuality, polyploidy, and genome structure in invasiveness. A parallel focus
of CPING is building a collaborative network of genomics and bioinformatics
literate scientists capable of addressing invasive species as a problem of
national concern. CPING will employ a hub-and-spoke organizational structure to
train faculty and students at institutions in more than 18 EPSCoR jurisdictions.
Direct benefits to participants include expanding their research capabilities,
increasing their competitiveness for funding, and improving their ability to
provide genomics and bioinformatics education. CPING training workshops will
produce a wealth of publicly available training tutorials, laboratory protocols,
and teaching materials. CPING also plans to engage the public on the problem and
prevention of invasive species through local radio programming and interactions
with researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.