* 1920478
* Assessing the Impacts of Coastal Flood-Induced Relocation on Local Jurisdictions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Julie Shortridge, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robin L. Dillon-Merrill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 325,000.00

This interdisciplinary project studies the impacts of relocation in coastal
communities on local jurisdictions. It will provide data about possible
consequences of flood-driven depopulation of coastal jurisdictions, including
the loss of sociocultural identity and economic viability. This information is
imperative to support localities in policy changes that would minimize the
adverse effects of flood-induced relocation on their governance and
institutional performance. This project serves national interests by advancing
science on emerging problems in coastal communities whose resilience is vital
for national security, stability, and welfare. Its societal benefits are also
achieved by including highly vulnerable coastal communities (e.g. rural fishing
villages and urban poor), which are already experiencing various socioeconomic
and environmental challenges that may compound their vulnerability. Results and
supplemental materials will be disseminated via an online web portal designed to
facilitate a community of researchers, practitioners, and other stakeholders
interested in coastal resilience. Outreach will be enhanced by the Virginia
Cooperative Extension, which has a long history of education in rural
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this interdisciplinary project is
to improve the scientific understanding of possible consequences of coastal
flood-induced relocation on local jurisdictions with diverse socio-economic,
cultural, institutional, and historic contexts. It will establish scenarios of
coastal flood-driven relocation over different time scales in both rural and
urban settings to discern potential implications of this process on the
socioeconomic viability of local jurisdictions. This mixed-methods approach will
rely on both quantitative and qualitative data to capture the contextual
influences and complexities that typically shape local decision-making. The
project activities will: 1) examine the risk of coastal flooding and develop
spatiotemporal flood exposure scenarios of potential loss of businesses, real-
estate, and corresponding population; 2) determine preferences for relocation
destination among residents living in flood-prone areas obtained via household
surveys, and 3) discern emergent macro-scale trends in relocation behavior using
Agent Based Modeling (ABM). The analysis will be applied to two contrasting case
study locations with different levels of urbanization on the Eastern Shore,
Maryland, and in Hampton Roads, Virginia. Important aspects of the research
strategy include interdisciplinary integration of geography, coastal and system
engineering, and business analytics, as well as holistic analysis of
circumstances that may affect the extent and progression of relocation from
coastal flood-affected periphery. This project will ultimately lead to improved
understanding of how physical, behavioral, and institutional factors interact to
shape the evolution of coastal communities under increasing flood risks, thereby
leading to more resilient communities in the coastal
zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.