* 1920251
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Confocal Microscopy System for Biological and Bioengineering Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel Warren, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 431,811.00

An award is made to Saint Louis University to acquire a laser scanning confocal
microscope (LSCM) to expand the research and educational capabilities of the
basic science departments located on the Frost Campus. The most highly impacted
departments include Biology, Chemistry, Psychology, and Biomedical and Civil
Engineering. The instrument also services the LSCM needs of the Department of
Mathematics and Natural Sciences at Harris Stowe State University. This
instrument has impacts beyond the research laboratory and is used to prepare our
future STEM workforce through the training of postdoctoral fellows, graduate and
undergraduate students in fluorescence microscopy, both in research labs and in
classrooms. The instrument augments the research experiences of many local high
school students, who gain experience with LSCM through various science
apprenticeship programs that involve many of our campus researchers. The project
also supports an initiative directed at inspiring local middle school students
to pursue careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument is used in
a variety of important research areas, including in studies of cardiac function
with varying oxygen availability, the basic mechanisms of neuronal synapse
formation, eye development, and of novel materials for growing cells in culture.
It is being used to develop unique fluorescent compounds that can be used by
many scientists to study basic cellular functions. Other biologists and
bioengineers use the instrument to study bacteria in water treatment, and the
basic mechanisms of cell signaling, gene expression, and tissue regeneration.
The results of these research projects will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
publications and at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.