* 1920945
* Encoding the pore landscapes of nanoporous materials: a data-driven approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Xiaoli Fern, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 473,745.00

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are crystalline materials, made from metal
clusters tethered together by organic linking molecules, that exhibit nano-sized
pores connected by channels. Gas molecules selectively adsorb into these sponge-
like materials allowing MOFs to efficiently separate or purify mixtures of gases
encountered in industry. Choosing different metals or linking molecules gives
hundreds of thousands of possible MOFs combinations. How does one find the right
match between a desired molecular separation and the type of MOF to do the job?
This project aims to develop a computational approach that uses images of the 3D
pore structures of hundreds of thousands of MOFs to quantitatively describe the
pores inside MOFs. Serving as a fingerprint of pore shape, these descriptions
are useful for (i) grouping together MOFs that have similar pore structures and
(ii) predicting the ability of a MOF to separate chemically similar molecules
effectively. By computationally finding the right MOF for the job instead of
experimentally testing them all (a time- and resource-intensive process), this
proposed research is expected to accelerate the deployment of MOFs for gas
separations, thereby saving energy, making goods cheaper to produce, and
reducing pollution. The investigators will also mentor high school and
undergraduate minority students in summer research programs at Oregon State
University to encourage these students in computational
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoporous materials, such as metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs), have the ability to selectively adsorb gas molecules which
make them industrially relevant to gas separations. Owing to their modular
synthesis, MOFs are highly tunable and offer a vast chemical space in which to
optimize gas separation properties. Because the pore geometry within a MOF
strongly influences its adsorptive selectivity, mathematical characterization
will greatly improve efficiency in investigating MOF structures. This project
will design a deep convolutional autoencoder to encode the pore structures of
MOFs into low-dimensional, information-rich, latent vector representations, i.e.
fingerprints. Three-dimensional, computational images of the porosity of over
200,000 MOFs will serve as training data for the autoencoder. This research will
determine the optimal architecture, regularization scheme, and loss function to
coax the autoencoder to extract the salient features of pore structures in MOFs
in a translation- and rotation-invariant manner. The machine-learned
fingerprints of MOFs will be practically useful for (i) building a
classification or regression model of adsorptive selectivity and (ii) by
defining a meaningful distance metric, identifying candidates exhibiting the
most similar pore structures to a promising but suboptimal "lead" material to
fine-tune its adsorptive selectivity in a "lead optimization" strategy for
materials discovery. To demonstrate the practical utility of the latent vector
representations, the predictiveness of simulated adsorptive selectivity for
several industrially-relevant separations will be assessed. Deployment of the
trained autoencoder to encode the salient features of pore structures of MOFs
into fingerprints will accelerate the discovery and deployment of nanoporous
materials that display the optimal pore structure to target the adsorption of a
particular gas species, thereby enabling separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.