* 1920512
* Automatic profiling of science assessment items to model item parameters: A natural language processing approach
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mari Ostendorf, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 19-508. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EHR Core Research project investigates the use of
natural language processing (NLP) to automatically identify characteristics of
assessment items and explore their utility for analyzing patterns of student
performance. The project investigates three central categories of assessment
items: cognitive, linguistic, and context; and evaluates how they influence
students' test performance. This research will contribute to the science of
test-item development in secondary science education by addressing the lack of
systematic research in constructing contextualized items to assess students'
conceptual understanding.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary research
project will strengthen the theoretical and empirical basis for item development
that accounts for cognitive, contextual and linguistic needs and helps improve
assessment tools and methods for measuring valuable constructs in science
learning. The investigators will address four research objectives: (1) define
and operationalize the targeted dimensions of science assessment items based on
literature reviews, cognitive interviews, and inter-coder reliability study; (2)
develop and empirically test machine learning algorithms that can be used to
automatically profile a large and diverse set of items; (3) provide evidence
about the possible main and interaction effects of item characteristics on item
parameters and differential patterns of student performance at grades 7 and 8;
and (4) for variables with significant effects, develop interpretable variants
of the automatic algorithms that provide guidance for improving assessment
items. Project outcomes will include: i) development of a parameterized model
that contributes to the understanding of how assessment items vary along
cognitive, context, and linguistic dimensions by leveraging machine learning to
incorporate large scale data analysis; ii) publicly available software tools for
profiling contextualized assessment items, together with a catalog of items that
have been profiled; iii) empirical evidence about the effectiveness of the
automatic approaches for profiling items that align with the vision of the Next
Generation Science Standards Framework for K-12 Science Education; and iv) a
monograph describing the approach and procedures required to develop and
evaluate contextualized items for content review, analysis of cognitive demands,
and alignment to standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.