* 1920119
* Teaching Students to Reason about Variation and Covariation in Data: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Find Out?
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Susan Kowalski, BSCS Science Learning
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2023
* USD 383,775.00

Because data are so much a part of modern life, making sense of data is a skill
that benefits all members of society. Reasoning about data has been described as
one of the most important cognitive activities and making sense of data is
essential for a public's informed civic participation. But the public's ability
to make sense of data is not what it should be. There is an important role for
educators to play in supporting students' ability (and ultimately the public's
ability) to be savvy consumers of data. But education researchers lack a
coherent vision of the current best practices for supporting students in
analyzing, interpreting, and reasoning about data. Existing research focused on
supporting students in learning to analyze, interpret, and reason about data
tends to reside in silos by grade band and by math or science domain. The
purpose of this project is to gather, analyze, and synthesize mathematics and
science education research studies published from 1988 to the present that have
investigated different approaches to supporting students in grades 6-14 in
learning to analyze, interpret, and reason about data. The researchers will
carefully examine the nature of each education intervention and what the
researchers found in each case, looking for patterns across studies. The
findings of this study can inform mathematics and science education developers
in the production of instructional programs for teachers and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will gather, analyze, and synthesize
studies in mathematics and science education from 1988 to the present that
examine instruction related to variation and covariation in data. The team will
first conduct a descriptive synthesis including a wide array of studies
(qualitative, single group pre/post, and experimental/quasi-experimental) and
examine the nature of interventions in the field. Next, researchers will conduct
a statistical meta-regression of experiments and quasi-experiments using Robust
Variance Estimation (RVE) to examine how effect size estimates from primary
studies depend on intervention characteristics, study design, outcomes of
interest, and demographic characteristics of participants in the studies. The
project will help researchers across math and science education build on each
other's work and ultimately develop and refine highly effective approaches for
supporting students in the life-long skill of making sense of data in a complex
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research K-12 program (DRK-12) seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.