* 1920780
* IUSE/PFE: RED Innovation: Using Scrum to Develop an Agile Department
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Massood Towhidnejad, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,998,684.00

The next generation of engineers will need essential technical and professional
skills to solve the complex problems facing society. Changes to how departments
operate, the curriculum, and teaching practices in engineering programs are
required to better prepare students for the profession. Efforts to implement
these kinds of changes are often slowed down by department cultures or faculty
attitudes about the amount of time and work that would be involved. In this
project the Electrical, Computer, Software, and Systems Engineering (ECSSE)
Department at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University will implement an innovative
approach to become a department that responds quickly to student and industry
needs. This approach will apply agile development methods typically used in
industry to deliver the best products faster. Agile methods involve working on
teams in short cycles which allow shared work responsibility, frequent feedback,
and adjustments between cycles. The ECSSE Department will use the Scrum agile
method to organize how the department carries out its normal operations. The
department will also embed Scrum agile product development into courses across
the curriculum. The new approach will allow faculty to achieve quicker changes
and implementation of prioritized items for the department. Examples of
prioritized items will include incorporating more evidence-based practices in
courses such as just-in-time teaching, case-based teaching, active learning, and
peer instruction; fostering inclusive learning environments; updating course
materials; revising department procedures; and recruiting diverse students and
faculty. Consequently, both faculty and students in the department will gain
expertise with this agile professional skill. The project will investigate how
the changes to department operations enhance faculty and student experiences.
The findings would help inform other engineering departments about practices to
improve the education of a diverse student population to be well-skilled
engineers for the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project will be to radically transform the ECSSE department into an agile
department that: 1) develops students into engineers with agile skills desired
by industry, and 2) develops an agile faculty culture which models the use of
agile practices for students. Faculty will work collectively in Scrum teams to
innovate the practices, policies, and culture of the department. Students will
use Scrum in individual and team projects throughout the middle two years of the
curriculum to progressively build their expertise for the culminating capstone
courses in the senior year. The research study will use an explanatory case
study design guided by social cognitive theory. Quantitative and qualitative
analyses will be performed using data from interviews with faculty and students,
feedback from stakeholders, and artifacts from Scrum teams. Research results
could lead to transformations in engineering education by offering a model on
the novel use of Scrum as an agile organizational practice and its influences on
the collective efficacy of faculty. This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Undergraduate Education and the Division of Engineering Education
and Centers reflecting the alignment of this project with the respective goals
of the divisions and their programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.