* 1920965
* RII Track-2 FEC: Collaborative Research: Harnessing Big Data to Improve Understanding and Predictions of Geomagnetically Induced Currents
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Amy Keesee, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,997,879.00

Recently, the Office of Science and Technology for the President recommended
that we take steps to prepare our nation's infrastructure to withstand the
hazardous space weather impacts. Geomagnetically induced currents (GICs), caused
by the geomagnetic disturbance during space weather events, can produce power
outages, train system failures, and pipeline corrosion. Although the risk of
GICs are widely acknowledged in the industry and space science community, the
occurrence patterns and the space/ground conditions responsible for GICs are
poorly understood mainly because power companies are hesitant to provide their
GIC data due to a possible legal dispute over the power outages and any other
technical problems. The project will take advantage of the wealth of expertise
in space physics and data science within the University of Alaska Fairbanks and
the University of New Hampshire to understand and predict the GICs. This project
specifically focuses on the geomagnetic disturbance, the trigger of GICs, and
the possible sources of such disturbance in our geospace environments. We will
apply the state-of-the-art machine learning techniques to over two decades of
space/ground-based observations and develop two prediction models for the
geomagnetic disturbance and the GIC-risk, both of which will be provided to NOAA
Space Weather Prediction Center at the end of project. Additionally, we will
improve our GIC predictions in Alaska and New Hampshire, the two high GIC-risk
states, via the Space Weather Underground (SWUG) program. Under this program,
high-school and undergraduate students will build and deploy magnetometers,
measure geomagnetic disturbances, and analyze the data. By varying the spatial
distance between the magnetometers, we can investigate the optimal number and
distribution of ground magnetometers for accurate GIC modeling and prediction.
The project team includes early-career and under-represented scientists and will
provide research projects and relevant course content to high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, including those at a minority serving
institution and regional colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the Office of
Science and Technology for the President recommended that we take steps to
prepare our nation's infrastructure to withstand the hazardous space weather
impacts. Geomagnetically induced currents (GICs), caused by the geomagnetic
disturbance during space weather events, can produce power outages, train system
failures, and pipeline corrosion. Although the risk of GICs are widely
acknowledged in the industry and space science community, the occurrence
patterns and the space/ground conditions responsible for GICs are poorly
understood mainly because power companies are hesitant to provide their GIC data
due to a possible legal dispute over the power outages and any other technical
problems. The project will take advantage of the wealth of expertise in space
physics within the Geophysical Institute at the U. of Alaska (UAF) and the Space
Science Center at the U. of New Hampshire (UNH) combined with data science
expertise at both universities to understand and predict the GICs. This project
specifically focuses on the geomagnetic disturbance, the trigger of GICs, and
the possible sources of such disturbance in solar wind, magnetosphere, and
ionosphere. We will apply the state-of-the-art machine learning techniques to
over two decades of space/ground-based observations and develop two prediction
models for the geomagnetic disturbance and the GIC-risk, both of which will be
provided to NOAA Space Weather Prediction Center at the end of project.
Additionally, the UNH Space Weather Underground (SWUG) program will be expanded
within New Hampshire and to UAF. Under this program, high-school and
undergraduate students will build and deploy magnetometers and analyze the data.
By varying the spatial distance between the magnetometers, we can investigate
the optimal number and distribution of ground magnetometers for accurate GIC
modeling and prediction. Additionally, the SWUG dataset will improve the GIC
predictions in AK and NH. Alaska is in a region of high latitude with increased
GIC risk. New Hampshire is at lower latitudes, but includes coastal areas as
well as bedrock with high resistivity, which forces the currents to flow through
structures such as power transmission lines. Thus, these two states provide
ideal conditions for collaboration and comparison of results and would benefit
from improved predictive capabilities for GICs. The proposed project would open
new funding opportunities for project participants within NSF and elsewhere by
supporting new interdisciplinary and inter-jurisdictional collaborations and
building capacity for future big data science in space weather
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.