* 1920920
* RII Track 2 FEC: Multi-Scale Integrative Approach to Digital Health: Collaborative Research and Education in Smart Health in West Virginia and Arkansas
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Xintao Wu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,999,998.00

One potential approach to improve overall health outcomes and reduce healthcare
costs is through the use of artificial intelligence techniques that can exploit
the enormous amount of information embedded in huge and diverse health-related
datasets. To leverage this large amount and large variety of information the
project will develop new methods to address core research questions in
artificial intelligence. Specifically, this project will develop and disseminate
computational methods to maintain privacy while analyzing large datasets,
develop and disseminate measures and methods to increase the transparency of
data analysis and thus increase trust in the analysis results, and develop and
disseminate methods to measure and reduce bias in big data sets. While privacy,
transparency and bias reduction are important aspects of artificial intelligence
in general, addressing these topics is especially urgent for health-related data
and applications. The long-term goal is to accelerate decision making for smart
health applications, through the development and application of advanced
artificial intelligence techniques that can take advantage of available massive
heterogeneous health-related datasets in an unbiased way. Successful realization
of this goal will have significant broader impacts by spurring economic activity
through improved workforce development in key technology areas of data science,
artificial intelligence, and smart health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes a collaboration involving five partner institutions in West Virginia
and Arkansas, and seven target primarily undergraduate institutions across the
two states. Innovation in the project stems from the proposed techniques
addressing difficult research challenges in artificial intelligence and data
analytics, such as privacy-preserving data analytics, novel explanation-centric
artificial intelligence techniques, multiscale approaches to exploiting diverse
and massive health datasets using heterogeneous information network embedding,
and implementation of new multi-view patient profile algorithms. Further
innovation comes from the proposed non-trivial adaptations of these techniques
for rapid and accurate decision making in smart health, by using large-scale
computational deep learning techniques. High school students will be involved in
STEM-related activities, while undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained on leading-edge artificial intelligence and big data techniques and how
these can be adapted for smart health applications. Workshops and summer schools
will be used to educate students and faculty on research topics being studied in
the collaboration, and to provide practical hands-on training on popular
artificial intelligence platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.