* 1920958
* Natural Disasters, Resilience, and Transformation: Understanding Household Recoveries
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Andrew Gerkey, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 405,538.00

Natural disasters can have devastating impacts with cascading effects that can
persist over years and decades. Recovery is multidimensional. Ethnographic
research after natural disasters can uncover the dynamic, diverse ways that
communities understand and respond to extreme events. It can also document how
populations adapt and learn through experimentation and innovation. Previous
disaster recovery research has been primarily descriptive, focused on localized
case studies and human agency rather than the theory building needed to enable
the lessons learned in one post-disaster context to be applied to other
contexts. It has also rarely collected and analyzed information encompassing
both the initial aftermath and longer periods that are essential for fully
understanding recovery and transformation. The research funded by this award
will build on a prior NSF RAPID grant and analysis of extensive quantitative and
qualitative data collected at about 9 months, 1.5 years, and 2.5 years after a
natural disaster. It will collect data and solicit feedback in years five to
seven following the event using an integrated human-natural systems approach,
longitudinal design, multiple sites, mixed quantitative and qualitative methods,
and outreach to diverse stakeholders. The research combines the broader
theorization of interdisciplinary, quantitative modeling in the resilience and
regime shift research with the textured qualitative approaches and critical
perspectives of the anthropology and social science of disaster. The results
will highlight the potential pitfalls of "one size fits all" relief and
reconstruction interventions that overlook cultural and spatial diversity. The
findings will also move beyond more-common metaphorical explanations of
resilience and transformation to illustrate empirical relationships between
variables and household changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
conducted in Nepal where there was a devastating series of earthquakes in the
spring of 2015. This case study addresses two overarching research questions:
(1) what factors contribute to the resilience of rural mountain households to
natural hazards during the recovery phase? and (2) at what point do households
maintain their condition or undergo transformation to an alternative state after
natural disasters? The study examines critical recovery indicators and five
household domains of adaptive capacity developed through long-term ethnographic
research, pilot studies, and literature: accessibility and hazard exposure,
institutional context and power, livelihood diversity, connectivity, and social
memory. These domains will be explored inductively, along with household
demographics, settlement demographics, and recovery indicators, through a series
of information-sharing meetings, household surveys, in-depth interviews, and
focus groups in years five to seven after the earthquakes. The project will re-
identify 400 households in four catastrophically impacted communities. An
additional 40-60 individuals will be contacted for in-depth interviews and focus
groups. The results will be disseminated to diverse stakeholders in Nepal and in
the U.S., in formats accessible to scholars, practitioners, and public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.