* 1920756
* Transformative Undergraduate Self-regulated STEM Learning and Education Research
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Abigail Panter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 934,485.00

This project, based at the University of North Carolina, will seek to advance
fundamental knowledge about self-regulated learning (SRL) and, critically, how
to assess it. SRL is a rough construct that includes cognitive strategy choice,
metacognitive monitoring, motivation, and affect. SRL has been associated with
STEM learning success; students benefit most from innovative instructional
envirionments -- such as online learning -- when they are adept at regulating
their own learning by actively and thoughtfully capitalizing upon these
innovative learning environments. Research on SRL has slowed, in part because
current measures of it are in need of improvement as they rely either on self-
report measures or on Think Aloud Protocols, both of which are labor-intensive
and therefore not amenable to the collection of large sets of data. The
researchers will develop methods for identifying successful self-regulated
learning by doing computational modeling of digital trace data. Such data are
generated as students use learning management systems in active pedagogy STEM
classrooms. The project team will collect data from students using data derived
both from more established research methodologies such as Thinking Aloud
Protocols as well as those derived from digital trace methods in order to
validate their digital trace assessment models. The investigators hope
eventually to be able to derive data at such a scale as to allow for refinement
in SRL theories, which In turn, will lead to the next-generation large-scale
investigations needed to help students self-regulate more effectively and
efficiently. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two decades of intensive study have implicated
self-regulated learning processes and their effects on learning. This project
seeks to refine what is known about SRL and in so doing hope to maximize the
benefits of active learning pedagogies in terms of STEM learning, retention, and
career success. The investigators will develop a new methodology for assessment
of SRL that they hope will replace the dominant methodologies, such as self-
report and Think Aloud Protocols. They will capture digital trace data from
undergraduates engaged in online learning tasks commonly featured in university
coursework in STEM domains. Concurrent think-aloud methods will be employed in
laboratory studies to validate the modeling of simultaneously-collected the
digital trace data and support inferences about their meaning. The proposed work
will then seek to advance aspects of SRL theory. The investigators will test the
assumptions of contingency and adaptation in self-regulated learning models that
have proven to be intractable using analyses based on self-report data. It is
hoped that findings will enable SRL theory to account for contingent,
sequential, and dynamic self-regulated learning processing. It is expected that
these advances, eventually, will shed light on real-time models of student
learning, and afford new ways of designing instruction to promote adaptive
learning, including how to develop interventions that bolster success in
authentic STEM learning contexts such as introductory large
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.