* 1920026
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz State-of-the-Art Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Nicola Pohl, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 667,915.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Michael Brown from Indiana University and
colleagues Nicola Pohl, Amar Flood, Jeremy Smith and Silas Cook are acquiring a
500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as facilitating studies of
biologically relevant species. In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. The NMR studies improve understanding of synthetic
organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This
instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as research. This broadly
accessible instrumentation strengthens the regional NMR analytical
infrastructure and help advance the scientific careers of many undergraduate and
graduate researchers, postdocs and visiting scholars in several research groups.
The spectrometer enriches the education and training experience of
underrepresented undergraduate students in several NSF supported science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs and is used to enrich
activities at a local children's museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The spectrometer is
especially used for developing reactions for the preparation of organic
molecules to be further studied for potential therapeutic activity and for
determining the affinity of host-guest complexes. It is also employed by
researchers interested in obtaining mechanistic insight into electrochemical
nitrogen oxides reduction which is relevant in the production of ammonia and
other industrially and physiologically important products as well as for
carrying out natural product structure determination on microscale. The nuclear
magnetic resonance spectrometer and associated instrumentation is also used for
characterization of products obtained from high-throughput microscale reactions
involving biocatalytic carbon-hydrogen functionalization and for studying NMR in
catalytic design. It is also used by researchers carrying out high-throughput
evaluation of glycosylation reactions which are controlled enzymatic
modifications of organic molecules (especially proteins) by addition of sugar
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.