* 1920340
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) System to Enable Research and Enhance Undergraduate Education at Western Washington University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* John Antos, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,946.00

An award is made to Western Washington University (WWU) for the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) system. This
instrument, which will be housed and maintained within a centralized instrument
facility, will provide a core institutional resource for a broad range of
research and teaching activities at WWU's main campus and Shannon Point Marine
Center (SPMC). As a primarily undergraduate institution, WWU is committed to
providing the highest-level of classroom instruction, while also offering
authentic research experiences for undergraduate and masters-level graduate
students. The LC-MS will directly support this mission. First, it will be
incorporated into multiple courses in the STEM curriculum, providing meaningful
exposure to mass spectrometry for hundreds of undergraduates every year. The LC-
MS will also become a key component of a collaborative project involving
laboratory courses at WWU and a local community college. Finally, outside of the
classroom, students involved in faculty led research will be afforded new
opportunities for hands-on training in modern mass spectrometry techniques,
providing them with a skill set that will be valuable when seeking employment in
the scientific workforce or for pursuing advanced graduate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to impacts on teaching and student
training, the LC-MS will be transformative for numerous research programs at WWU
and SPMC. Mass spectrometry is a foundational technique in the biological and
chemical sciences, and is often the preferred method for confirming molecular
structure or for measuring the abundance of specific compounds in complex
biological and environmental samples. Examples of research efforts that will be
enabled by the LC-MS include the engineering of proteins with unique biological
properties, structural studies of proteins involved in blood coagulation or the
maintenance of cell shape, identification and quantitation of signaling
molecules and other natural products that are involved in ecological
interactions and responses to environmental change, fundamental investigations
of protein and gene regulation systems, and the synthesis of novel compounds. In
all cases, the results of these studies will be disseminated to the broader
scientific community at appropriate scientific conferences and through peer-
reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.