* 1920218
* MRI: Acquisition of microscopy equipment to enhance histological research in Forensic Anthropology, Biology, and Bioarchaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Daniel Wescott, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 255,140.00

With Major Research Instrumentation support, Sophia Mavroudas and her
collaborators will purchase an integrated microscopy imaging and data analysis
suite that consists of a Leica DM6M compound microscope and Leica M205C
Stereoscope, both with internal cameras that are connected to a central
workstation with an associated Leica Aperio ScanScope CS2 slide scanner. This
will enhance Texas State University's research and outreach programs in forensic
anthropology, biology, and bioarchaeology. This microscopy imaging suite is a
user-friendly system that will impact the large group of students and
researchers, from the undergraduate through to the postdoctoral level, who are
part of the Forensic Anthropology Center at Texas State (FACTS) at Texas State
University, a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). As an asset of FACTS, this
equipment will foster synergistic collaborative research and interactive
teaching. The addition of the microscopy suite will elevate the new PhD in
Applied Anthropology Program and enhance faculty and student federally funded
research in forensic anthropology, biology, and archaeology. The associated
activities include the scientific training of women and underrepresented groups
in histology and surface imaging, undergraduate STEM training, graduate student
research and professionalization, and the expansion of FACTS workshops to
include histology and surface imaging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
microscopy suite will allow for fast imaging of a variety of samples from
1x-1000x at one workstation which consists of the DM6M compound microscope,
M205C stereosmicroscope, and Aperio ScopScan CS 2. This will be used to capture
evidence from skeletal trauma, zooarchaeological samples, and artifact
assemblages. Combined with existing FACTS resources, this equipment will support
innovative experimental studies including controlled human decomposition
experiments that can model the microscopic diagenesis of human bone throughout
the post-mortem interval, as well as macroscopic trauma investigation from
vulture scavenging. The associated stereoscope with imaging software will also
allow for novel and detailed 3D modeling of skeletal trauma and pathology from
documented collections as well as forensic casework and bioarchaeological
samples. The acquisition of this equipment will help build and make available to
researchers the first ever referential catalog of histological human variation
from the rapidly expanding Texas State University Donated Skeletal Collection
(TXSTDSC). The microscopy system will enable FACTS to build on existing research
programs that focus on bone histology in various contexts including the
investigation of human vs nonhuman bone differentiation, histological mammal
species identification, human ageing, dental histology season-of-death
estimation, dental histology studies of pathology and stress, the application of
GIS technology to study bone histomorphology, and histological human
variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.