* 1920938
* RII Track-2 FEC: Resilience Informatics for the Convergence of Critical Capacities to Address Regional-scale Environmental Change
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Craig Allen, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,953,265.00

Major advancements in technology, data computation power, and theory are
converging in the ecological profession at a time of great uncertainty for
humanity. Many ecosystems are experiencing rapid and sudden collapses and
transitioning to less productive ecosystem states, threatening fundamental
ecosystem services upon which humanity relies. Food and water security, rural
economies, water rights, wildfire disaster avoidance, even funding for public
school education are all threatened as a result of simple transitions in
vegetation occurring at a rate and geographic scope that is unmatched during the
lives of previous generations. This project will build critical expertise and
leverage technology in new ways to confront the grand challenge of management to
avoid large, regional-scale transitions in vegetation. Resilience theory and the
formal study of regime shifts in nature have been foundational science pursuits
for nearly 50 years in of ecology, and technology and computational power are
now at a point that allows launch of the next level of analysis in the study and
application of resilience science. This project will develop resilience
informatics screening tools for more advanced and earlier detection of
vegetation transitions. The project will create critical capacities to explore
this new and transformative informatics approach into social governance
structures and thus improve options for avoiding critical transitions in social-
ecological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tracking and predicting
large-scale ecosystem transitions are of national and international importance
and key to securing the future livelihoods, personal security, food security,
and water security of diverse populations in a changing world. This research
converges faculty from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the University of
Montana with a shared vision - to build sufficient capacity to address the grand
challenge of avoiding undesirable transitions in ecological systems that are so
severe that their consequences go beyond the traditions of any one individual
investigator's disciplinary expertise. We propose a spatial informatics approach
that links recent advances in resilience theory with a state-of-the-art
rangeland landcover and analysis dataset, and a powerful cloud-computing
platform, as screening tools for more advanced and earlier detection of regime
shifts across ecosystems. At the same time, we propose basic social science
research to better understand the barriers and opportunities to applying
innovative technological approaches to build resilience across working lands. We
will leverage emerging, big-data approaches to social and behavioral data
analysis to pioneer an approach for rapid and strategic identification of
individuals and social groups with increased willingness and capacity to address
future regime shifts and other environmental challenges of national priority.
Our collaboration of social and biophysical science faculty will engage with
collaborative landscape governance processes in Nebraska and Montana, include
groups of resource users and managers, and translate this knowledge into
proactive strategies for addressing various scales of ecological change before
it occurs, through adaptation and resilience-building processes. This
collaboration is built on five key convergence points which establish: a
platform for sustaining research productivity through recruitment and training
of early-career faculty; a nationally-recognized resilience-science education
program; and greater access to cyberinfrastructure among public and private
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.