* 1920204
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Micro Photonics SkyScan 1273 High-Energy Micro-CT Scanner for Research and Training in the HSU College of Natural Resources &amp; Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* John Reiss, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 491,223.00

An award is made to Humboldt State University (HSU) to purchase a Micro
Photonics SkyScan 1273 Desktop High Energy MicroCT scanner system, to serve as a
major addition to a shared-user Core Facility in the College of Natural
Resources and Sciences. The Biology/CNRS Core Facility represents the first
major endeavor on the HSU campus to create a truly interdisciplinary, shared-use
facility in the sciences. The MicroCT scanner will serve as a keystone addition
to the facility by bringing together student and faculty researchers from
departments across the college, including Biological Sciences, Fisheries
Biology, and Geology. By adding a microCT scanner to the facility, the ability
to train undergraduate and graduate students in the sciences will be greatly
increased. More specifically, the instrument will enhance the experience of
students in the Instrumental Methods in Geology course. HSU has a student
population that is more than 43% underrepresented minority students, and has the
greatest concentration of Native American students in the California State
University system. Through programs such as the Indian Natural Resources and
Science Program (INRSEP), these students will be trained on a modern research
instrument, enabling them to more readily pursue careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An in-house microCT scanner at HSU will greatly
facilitate research projects such as: mapping the detailed three dimensional
anatomy of amphibian noses, to better understand their adaptation to land vs.
water; developing new techniques for assessing sudden oak death oomycete
infection of plants and associated soils, helping to control the spread of this
pathogen; understanding form and ecological function of the skeletal structures
of marine invertebrates; understanding the physical processes that occur during
magma mingling events, which is critical to improving our ability to accurately
model and predict volcanic eruptions; expanding the investigation into
conformation of rodent occlusal surfaces to three dimensions, providing more
informative points by which to place fossils, and resulting in more accurate
time calibrated phylogenies; resolving fish otolith (inner ear bone) structure
in three dimensions, which will allow for more sophisticated assessment of
growth patterns across developmental transitions, and aid in maintenance of
healthy fish stocks; developing new ways to detect differences between cryptic
species of bryozoans; studying three-dimensional diversification of baculum
morphology among chipmunks, to assess the covariation of morphology and genetic
relatedness; documenting the diversity of seed-cone anatomy to better understand
the diversification of conifers; and comparing inner ear structures across the
groups of cartilaginous fishes, to understand ecomorphological relations that
can be extrapolated to interpret the ecology of fossil
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.