* 1920902
* Misdemeanor Charges among Persons with Serious Mental Illnesses
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Leah Pope, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 369,165.00

Individuals with serious mental illnesses (SMI), such as schizophrenia and
bipolar disorder, are more likely to be arrested and incarcerated than those
without SMI. Their arrests are often for non-violent, misdemeanor "quality of
life" and "public nuisance" charges. Such arrests and incarcerations interfere
with treatment and recovery. This problem of "criminalization" of individuals
with SMI is widely recognized, and programs are being put in place to try to
reduce arrests that are not necessary, and instead refer these individuals to
mental health treatment services. Despite nationwide efforts to develop models
of "pre-arrest jail diversion" (i.e., diverting from the criminal justice system
to the mental health system), research has yet to identify which misdemeanor
charges are most over-represented among persons with SMI. Effective pre-arrest
jail diversion programs--to address the problem of over-representation of
persons with SMI in jails--will only be effective if we understand the use and
prosecution of the most commonly applied misdemeanor
charges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to study
the implementation, meaning, and use of particular laws/charges and how they
contribute to the over-representation of persons with SMI in the criminal
justice system. The project will consist of a multi-site (Atlanta, Chicago, New
York, Philadelphia), mixed-methods study. Specifically, the research team will
first analyze two different datasets (one administrative, and one clinical) to
identify the 2-5 misdemeanor charges that appear to be most over-represented
among individuals with SMI. Next, the team will carry out four "systems mapping
exercises" in the four different cities in order to understand the use and
processing of these specific misdemeanor charges in different settings. Then,
the investigators will conduct three focus groups in each of the four cities (12
in total) to gain a rich, in-depth understanding of the use of these charges.
The project will create an explanatory theory to understand how police officers,
prosecutors, defense attorneys, and judges understand, apply, make use of,
potentially over-use, or rely upon certain types of misdemeanor charges among
individuals with SMI. Such an explanatory theory will serve as a foundation for
further, definitive research, as well as policy and program
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.