* 1920557
* Debt as a Control Tactic in Marriage
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Adrienne Adams, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 399,997.00

"Coerced debt" is an important but understudied form of intimate partner
violence (IPV). It occurs when abusers in intimate relationships use fraud or
coercion to generate debt in their partners' names. For example, abusers may
fraudulently incur car loans in their partners' names or force them to make
credit card purchases. Preliminary evidence suggests that coerced debt is a
common problem with damaging effects on the lives of women with abusive
partners. It can burden victims with hundreds or thousands of dollars in debt
and damage their credit ratings, thus creating barriers to employment, housing,
and utility services. These debts and barriers may be associated with long-term
economic harm in large part because victims of coerced debt have difficulty
attaining effective help from the two relevant legal systems: divorce law and
debtor-creditor law. Despite these potential impacts of coerced debt, the
research remains in its infancy. This project will be the first in-depth study
of coerced debt. It will address fundamental questions about how coerced debt
operates in abusive relationships, how victims seek and attain legal help for
coerced debt, and coerced debt's effects on women's recovery from an abusive
relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use a sequential mixed-method
longitudinal design to collect data from a sample of women recently divorced
from an abusive partner. The researchers will use public divorce records to
recruit a sample of 180 women in Michigan and Texas (120 women with coerced debt
and a comparison group of 60 without). The researchers will collect quantitative
data through in-person interviews with the full sample. They will identify
instances of coerced debt with an assessment tool used in conjunction with
participants' credit reports as well as a tested methodology (life history
calendar) to aid in the recall of focal experiences. The quantitative data will
be used to investigate: 1) the types and amounts of coerced debt incurred in
victims' names, tactics abuser use to incur it, and how victims learn of fraud;
2) differences between abusive relationships with and without coerced debt; 3)
the extent to which help for coerced debt is available, accessible, and
acceptable through divorce and debtor-creditor law; and 4) the extent of coerced
debt's economic effects in the three months after an abusive relationship ends.
Additionally, the researchers will conduct in-depth follow-up qualitative
interviews with a subsample of up to 40 victims of coerced debt. The qualitative
data will be used to gain a deeper, more nuanced understanding of how victims of
coerced debt experience it in the broader context of abuse, facilitators of and
barriers to attaining help through the divorce system, and the process by which
coerced debt shapes victims' lives. In addition to publishing scholarship, the
researchers will disseminate the findings to policy makers, service providers,
and attorneys with the goal of ensuring that interventions to address coerced
debt are evidence-based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.