* 1920914
* Collaborative Research: Emergence of terpene cyclization in animals
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Alexandre Morozov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2023
* USD 293,505.00

Chemical interactions between organisms represent a key form of communication in
nature and is mediated by diverse arrays of small molecules. These molecules or
chemical cues serve critical roles in maintaining and driving species diversity
and ecosystem functions. Using interdisciplinary methods, the team of
investigators explore the question of how chemical compounds emerge and adopt
biological functions with a specific focus on understanding the emergence of
terpenes - a major family of molecules used by insects to ward off enemies and
pathogens, search for food, and attract or seek out mates. Integrating
computational modeling and molecular modifications, the project reconstructs the
evolution of enzymes that are central to the generation of terpene chemical
diversity in insects. Through their study, the investigators will develop an
integrated empirical and theoretical platform that will serve as a blueprint for
tracing the evolution of various protein families. The project has broader
societal and educational impacts, including potential generation of target
enzyme products and gene variants for industrial applications and translation of
research results into a visual installation, which will be accessible to the
general public through theaters at Virginia Tech and the Science Museum of
Western Virginia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terpenes constitute a large class of
mostly cyclic molecules with major roles in chemical interactions of organisms.
However, the emergence of enzymatic functions responsible for the cyclization
and diversity of terpenes in animals has remained elusive. The research team
will apply a combination of computational and experimental methods to define key
enzymatic adaptations underlying terpene diversity in insects - the most
species-rich lineage of animals. Specifically, the project defines modifications
that activate terpene cyclase (TPS) enzymatic function in isoprenyl diphosphate
synthases (IDS), enzymes involved in core terpene metabolism. Investigators will
identify and functionally characterize terpene cyclase enzymes in diverse insect
taxa to assess adaptive changes corresponding to the evolution of these enzymes
in insects. The functional data will be combined with protein structural
analysis to generate models that pinpoint amino acid residue networks, which
trigger the emergence of TPS activities on IDS templates. Network models will be
used to construct synthetic enzyme libraries and help characterize mutational
pathways that underlie terpene cyclization. Investigators will also use data
from the study to develop integrated biophysical models of enzyme evolutionary
dynamics that quantitatively describe fundamental transitions of enzyme function
in the emergence of terpene diversity. Cumulatively, the insights from this
interdisciplinary project will lead to an improved understanding of the
biophysical principles behind major expansions of enzymatic and chemical
diversity in nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.