* 1920863
* Collaborative Research: Emergence and Evolution of a Colonial Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Barnet Pavao-Zuckerman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 83,288.00

Drs. Carla Hadden, (University of Georgia) Barnet Pavao-Zuckerman (University of
Maryland), Laurie Reitsema (University of Georgia), and Elizabeth J. Reitz
(University of Georgia) will study the role of animals in the development of
early colonial American cities. Early urban centers were often established as
trans-oceanic trading ports, but their connections to local and regional
economies is often overlooked. To what extent were urban colonial centers
dependent upon distant rural agrarian communities? This project will use
zooarchaeological, microbotanical, and stable isotope evidence coupled with
historical documents to test the hypothesis that specialized animal economies
were fundamental to the development of new colonies and urban centers in early
America. This study will contribute to interpretation and outreach efforts of
The Charleston Museum, under the supervision of Curator Martha Zierden,
particularly the development of Bragg Boxes for rural and underserved schools.
The boxes will include an activity book designed for a K-12 audience prepared by
the University of Georgia's Center for Applied Isotope Studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will examine how animals contributed to the
emergence of colonial economies in British North America during in the 16th-18th
centuries using colonial Charleston, South Carolina, as the test case, where the
production of animals and animal products ranked fourth among Charleston's
agricultural enterprises in the 1700s. This team will focus specifically on the
origins and distribution of cattle in the southeastern U.S. and Charleston's
role as a node in large-scale regional, interregional, and global provisioning
systems. The team will examine whether cattle were from distant rural locations,
suburban pastures, or urban backlots; whether and how these sources changed over
time; and the extent to which the city's participation in global markets
reflects the region's rural-urban animal economy. Bone chemistry data derived
from stable isotope analysis will be essential to understanding local, regional,
and international aspects of the animal economy. This combination will enable
them to determine whether provisioning shifts occurred between the colony's
foundation in 1670 and its role as a major trans-Atlantic port by 1780. The
interdisciplinary, multi-proxy research design allows them to distinguish
between local and distant sources of animals and animal products within a
colonial distribution system. It is rare to find this combination of approaches
used to examine how short- and long-distance trade networks and provisioning
strategies connected and organized people and landscapes. Professional
contributions will link the Charleston trade with studies of global trade in
animal products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.