* 1920315
* RCN-UBE:  Creation of the Biology Educator/Researcher Cross-Segment Collective
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kristine Callis-Duehl, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,643.00

The 2012 President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology Report
expressed the need to increase the number of STEM college graduates by one
million to fill current and future demand for STEM professionals. In the ensuing
discussions, community-college and transfer students have been a neglected
population. These individuals are particularly relevant as roughly one-quarter
of college students nationwide begin their higher-education career at a two-year
institution, including a disproportionate number of underrepresented students.
The Biology Educator/Researcher Cross-Segment Collective (BERCC) aims to improve
community college and transfer student outcomes by facilitating the formation of
faculty learning communities (FLC) comprised of faculty from two- and four-year
institutions. FLC members will work to collaboratively and iteratively develop
evidence-based teaching practices or programs, assess their effectiveness, and
share their experiences and disseminate the resulting products through biology
education publications, conference presentations, and the BERCC website. These
partnerships will lead to closer ties between neighboring colleges and
universities, improved educational experiences for students, and a greater
wealth of educational resources for instructors across the country.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;BERCC aims to improve educational outcomes for community-college and
transfer students in the biological sciences. Specifically, the Collective's
objectives are to: 1) Increase implementation of evidence-based practices in
biology courses or programs to improve student outcomes at multiple higher
education institutions; 2) Form faculty learning communities comprised of
individuals representing a variety of institution types to develop the practices
mentioned in objective 1); and 3) Assess implementation of objectives 1 and 2 in
a scholarly manner to capture student outcomes across institutional contexts,
while contributing to the growing body of Biology Education Research (BER).
BERCC will leverage existing resources in the BER community, including the
Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research (SABER), the Summer
Institutes on Scientific Teaching (SI), the Journal of Microbiology and Biology
Education (JMBE) and the journal CourseSource. By piloting this program at two
regions across the country, California and North Carolina, BERCC will establish
a sustainable model to bring together two- and four-year colleagues who are
committed to improving outcomes for their community college and transfer student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.