* 1920220
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Computing Cluster to Enhance the Undergraduate Discovery Experience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Sudeep Bhattacharyay, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 350,000.00

This project will fund the acquisition of a graphical processing unit
(GPU)/central processing unit (CPU) hybrid high performance computing cluster
(HPC) to enable undergraduate research and education. The cluster will be used
for high impact research, discovery, and learning across several disciplines
encompassing Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Geography, Material Science
and Engineering, Mathematics, and Physics. The additional compute capacity will
promote research-embedded classrooms and integrating computational science into
the standard curriculum. It will provide a significant push to student
development, code development, program profiling, system tuning, and system
administration. In addition the infrastructure will enable discovery of modeling
and simulation technologies that may elucidate molecular mechanisms for drug
delivery, computational design catalysts for renewable energy and chemical
synthesis, advanced computational analysis tools for next generation informatics
and big data, and improved understanding of risk and resistance to breast
cancer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will serve studies that employ
hybrid quantum/classical simulations, for example investigation of the influence
of protein dynamics on catalysis and inhibitions involving electron transfer and
group reaction in two important families of enzymes (quinine reductases and
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases). The inhibitory mechanisms in these proteins are
actively studied in the development of drugs with anti-cancer and anti-
pathogenic properties. These studies may pave the way to design mechanism-based
inhibitors of these enzymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.