* 1920529
* Examining the 'Class Ceiling' in Big Tech
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Sharon Koppman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 673,249.00

The project examines whether and how the class ceiling impacts the STEM
workforce by focusing on the application and hiring process of elite
internships, a key juncture in the path towards careers in Big Tech. By
simultaneously studying the hiring process at Big Tech firms from the demand
side evaluations of job applicants by employers and supply side choices and
preparation of job applicants, the research will illuminate the hidden factors
that shape who is offered elite internships. It fills a fundamental gap in the
knowledge base by investigating the role of class background in hiring for these
STEM jobs. While assumed to be minimal due to the emphasis on ?objective?
technical skills, pilot data suggest hiring decisions for these internships are
influenced by tacit markers of class background such as organizational fit,
individual fit, social networks, and communication style. Such inductive
findings motivate the current project, which will examine the relationship
between class background and the attainment of elite internships with a larger
sample and more rigorous mixed-methods design. The research will provide STEM
organizations with concrete ways to facilitate equitable and inclusive hiring
practices and enable underprivileged applicants to navigate the hiring process
by equipping them with knowledge about the expectations of the dominant hiring
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to examine how class
figures into the attainment of elite research internships in the top tech
companies such as Google, Facebook, Microsoft, and Amazon. Investigators will
examine two research questions: (1) How does the role of class background shape
internship attainment through gatekeeper evaluations? and (2) How does class
background shape internship applicant preparation, interview performance and
outcomes. Data will be collected primarily through interviews, observations at
Big Tech recruitment events and internship preparation seminars, questionnaires.
The study is the first to study how class background shapes hiring in a
technical profession, extends our understanding of how class shapes hiring
beyond the influence of childhood participation in organized activities, and
investigates how class shapes applicants? preparation, self-presentation, and
hiring outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.