* 1920979
* Power-on-Skin: Energy Generation from Sweat-Eating Bacteria for Self-Powered Electronic Skins
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Ahyeon Koh, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2023
* USD 452,581.00

Electronic skins or 'e-skins' have recently emerged as a novel platform for
electronics, taking on more important roles in health diagnostics, therapeutics,
and monitoring. Stand-alone and self-sustained e-skins are essential to
providing reliable, effective and sometimes life-saving functions. A stable
power supply is the most critical factor in developing practical e-skins because
the performance of their potential applications depends significantly on power
availability. Thus, a realistic and accessible power source is urgently needed
for a next-generation of smart, stand-alone, always-on e-skin systems. This is a
challenge because human skin intimately integrated with e-skins is an extremely
harsh environment for power generation. Skin is cool, dry, acidic and lacks
potential energy sources. The overall objective of this proposal is to create
the ability to generate an innovative, practical, and longstanding power from
human sweat, which is one of the few available energy resources on the skin, by
using the metabolisms of sweat-eating bacteria including human skin
microorganisms or ammonia-oxidizing microorganisms. Given that the total non-
human microbial cells inhabiting in and on our bodies outnumber the human cells
by at least a factor of 10, the direct use of the microbial cells to produce
power is conceivable for e-skins. Findings will first be disseminated within the
discipline through local and international conferences and journal publications;
then they will be distributed through educational venues maximizing the
project's reach and impact. The project will train graduate students and
outcomes will be integrated into post-secondary courses and K-12 outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish an innovative
strategy to revolutionize power generation on human skin, delivering on-chip
energy to the next generation of e-skin paradigm. The proposed sweat-powered
batteries will be based on microbial fuel cells (MFCs), exploiting sweat-eating
bacteria including human skin-inhabiting or ammonia-oxidizing microorganisms as
a biocatalyst to transform the chemical energy of sweat into electrical power
through bacterial metabolism. A thin, soft, flexible MFC will be pre-inoculated
with selected electrogenic (or electron-producing) sweat-eating bacteria and
will operate with human sweat, delivered by an integrated battery-free skin-
interfaced system. The two-fold central hypothesis is that (i) some sweat-eating
bacteria are capable of extracellular electron transfer and act as a biocatalyst
in the microbial fuel cell device to produce electrical power, and (ii) those
microorganisms can feed off the human sweat including ammonia and other organic
substances for constant and sustaining bioelectricity generation. The immediate
potential benefits of the proposed research are that (a) the project will
develop a skin-mountable bacteria-powered battery system and establish
fundamental knowledge critical to increase its performance, (b) the work will
promote and accelerate the discovery and characterization of electrogenically
active sweat-eating microorganisms, and (c) it will also create a novel skin-
interfaced microfluidic system for sweat collection, delivery and storage to
drive the integrated bacteria-powered battery. (d) Finally, this project will
allow the microbial fuel cell technology to find more realizable applications as
"biopower-on-skin" enables an entirely new area of energy harvesting
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.