* 1920334
* MRI: Acquisition of a fiber optic distributed acoustic sensing instrument for hydrological and seismological research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Matthew Becker, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2021
* USD 310,438.00

The earth deforms constantly in response to fluid pressure, the movement of
tectonic plates, and the gravitational pull of the moon and sun. The shallow
expression of this deformation, or strain, has important implications. For
example, strain in geologic material due to changes in subsurface fluid pressure
must be considered in the sustainability of groundwater, the extraction of
hydrocarbons, and the efficiency of geothermal well fields. Tectonic forces
cause measurable strain that ultimately result in earthquakes. Ground
deformation must be considered in the design of buildings and roads. The natural
pull of the moon and sun cause earth tides which have little direct effect on
humans, but can be used to characterize the mechanical properties of earth
materials. A challenge in measuring earth deformation, however, is that while
strain is distributed over large distances, typical measurement devices such as
strain meters measure only over short intervals. For this project, a sensing
system is developed that can measure distributed strain at sub-meter intervals
over the distance of kilometers. Although the instrument is available
commercially, this application is entirely new and will reveal deformation not
previously observed in the shallow subsurface. It has been adopted rapidly by
the petroleum and security industries but is largely unknown in academia due to
the high cost of contracting service companies. This MRI acquisition is intended
to bring this next-generation commercial technology into the hands of academic
researchers and students so it can be used to advance the understanding of earth
movements in both natural and engineered earth systems. A consortium of
California State University Long Beach, California Institute of Technology, and
University of Southern California will share the instrument. This consortium
will be led by a California State University Long Beach, which is a non-PhD
granting and Hispanic Serving university with about half the population
considered NSF Underrepresented minority (URM) students. The other two members,
California Institute of Technology and University of Southern California are top
PhD-granting institutions. Sharing of the instrument and training will expose
URM students to research cultures and experiences to which they would not
normally have access. A two-day DAS-training workshop will provide researchers
and students outside of the consortium and opportunity to learn about DAS
technology. The MRI program will provide URM students the opportunity to be
among the first students in the country to have hands-on experience with DAS
imaging.

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) acquisition of a Fiber Optic
Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) will support measurement of ground motion
related to tectonic and hydraulic forcing. DAS is a transformative technology
for measuring strain and vibration in Earth environments. Using laser
interferometry, dynamic strain is interrogated along the entire length of a
fiber optic cable. DAS typically has sampling resolution of 1 kHz every 25 cm
along a fiber optic cable that can be tens of kilometers in length. This
technology allows the measurement of seismic movements along communication
networks and in deep boreholes, often along fiber-optic cable that is already
present. The system measures strain on a fiber-optic cable that can be
installed, for instance, in deep boreholes or in shallow trenches. Strains of
less than 1 nanometer (one billionth of a meter) per meter can be detected. The
technology behind it is called distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) and was
developed for measuring vibration in response to sound or seismic waves. The
advancement here is that strain is measured over periods approaching a day,
while vibrations are usually measured at periods of less than a second. A
particular focus of research will be extension of frequency resolution into the
microHertz range, where tidal forcing and ultra-low-frequency ground motions can
be observed.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.