* 1920324
* MRI: Development of an Ultra-high Sensitivity Scanning SQUID Multi-Function Microscope for Nanoscale Magnetometry, Susceptometry, and Thermometry
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Martin Huber, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,633.00

Technological advances are increasingly dependent on the development of new
materials, often requiring a deep understanding of their physical properties at
the nanoscale. Traditional measurements of bulk or non-local quantities alone
are insufficient. A new generation of instruments must be developed that can
probe materials properties at nanometer length scales. However, at these scales,
the strength of signals (e.g., electric, magnetic, or thermal) from these tiny
regions is weak, so these instruments must also be extremely sensitive. This
project supports development of a cryogenic scanning probe microscope based on a
non-invasive superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) sensor with
ultra-high sensitivity to both magnetic and thermal properties. The specific
nanoSQUID technology employed in this instrument, a SQUID at the tip of a nano-
pipette, has application to a broad range of systems. The instrument enables
materials research in superconductivity, nanomagnetism, spintronics, quantum
information and computing, topological materials, and quantized thermal
transport and dissipation mechanisms. The multi-function scanning probe
microscope is developed through an interdisciplinary collaboration of faculty,
staff, and students at the Denver and Boulder campuses of the University of
Colorado. Its development trains a full-time graduate student and three
undergraduate students in instrumentation, cryogenics, and multiple other
physics and engineering topics under the mentorship of two senior faculty and
two senior engineering staff with complementary areas of expertise. This
instrument is part of a suite of nanospectroscopy tools in the Colorado Front
Range that brings in a diverse user base of academics, national laboratory
scientists, and industry members from the local area and across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a low-temperature (300 mK)
scanning probe microscope incorporating a SQUID sensor on the tip of a nanoscale
quartz pipette that meets a critical need in the understanding of local magnetic
and thermal material properties. This "SQUID-on-Tip" operates as magnetometer,
susceptometer, and thermometer with spatial resolution as good as 50 nm, single-
electron-spin magnetic sensitivity, and micro-Kelvin thermal sensitivity, orders
of magnitude beyond the thermal sensitivity of other probes. The combination of
these capabilities in one instrument enables many studies that cannot be carried
out by any other instrument. Research projects enabled by this new instrument
include studies of topological superconductors, Majorana fermions, topologically
protected magnetic solitons as well as novel quantum switches, artificially
engineered thermoelectrics, studies of quantized thermal transport, and more.
This project is developmental because no comparable instrument is available
commercially. The project scope is to implement the fabrication technology of
the SQUID-on-Tip sensor and to incorporate the sensor in an ultra-low-
temperature scanning probe microscope utilizing a dry low-temperature cryostat.
Fabrication of the sensor requires a novel vacuum deposition system that allows
for thermal evaporation of a superconducting film on a cryogenically cooled
quartz nano-pipette. The scanning probe microscope integrates commercial
positioning stages with the SQUID-on-Tip sensor and associated electronics. The
project scope includes a commissioning phase using magnetic or superconducting
meanders, or magnetic vortices for microscope verification. The goal of this
project is to provide collaborative access to this multi-function instrument to
a diverse user base from academia, national laboratories, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.