* 1920065
* MRI: Development of a High Sensitivity Instrument to Search for CP Violation in Positronium Decay
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth George, Wittenberg University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 291,661.00

Although our present understanding of the fundamental forces and particles in
the universe (the Standard Model) is remarkably successful in many respects,
there are still significant questions that remain unanswered. One important
question has to do with certain differences in how matter and anti-matter behave
(so-called CP-violating effects). Such effects have been observed in the decays
of exotic particles called mesons, but the differences that have so far been
observed are much too small to explain, for example, why there is much more
matter in the universe than anti-matter. For this and other reasons, it is
believed that the Standard Model is incomplete. Thus, experimental searches for
other types of CP-violating effects can provide information that might help to
extend the Standard Model. The goal of this award is to design and build a new
instrument to search for CP-violating effects in the annihilation of electrons
and their anti-particles, positrons. This project will provide research training
opportunities for undergraduate students at Wittenberg University, where the
proportion of women physics majors is well above the national average. These
students will work closely with faculty to develop, assemble, and test state-of-
the-art instrumentation and will learn how to do research at the frontiers of
science. The proposed apparatus will also enable a research project for at least
one graduate student at Michigan State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is to develop a highly efficient, compact, symmetric, and high rate
capable instrument which will enable the search for CP violation in the decay of
tensor polarized Positronium (Ps). CP violation is known to occur in the weak
decays of the K and B mesons and is described in the Standard Model (SM) through
the CP-violating phase of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) quark mixing
matrix. Since the discovery of neutrino oscillations, a similar mechanism is
also expected to exist in the neutrino sector. Searches for new mechanisms of CP
violation in observables where SM CP-violating effects are strongly suppressed
are considered among the most sensitive probes to search for new physics. They
are also expected to provide possible microscopic explanations for the origin of
the dominance of matter over anti-matter in the universe. The instrument to be
developed will make possible an order of magnitude improvement in the
measurement of a CP-violating correlation involving the spin of positronium and
the momenta of the two most energetic gammas in the 3-gamma decay of
positronium. The instrument consists of a positron source sandwiched between two
thin plastic scintillators surrounded by a high porosity medium where positrons
efficiently form positronium. This positronium production and tagging system
will be surrounded by 48 LYSO scintillation crystals covering a large solid
angle and segmented so as to select the most sensitive decay events. The entire
detection system will be located inside the warm bore of an existing
superconducting magnet available at the National Superconducting Cyclotron
Laboratory (NSCL) at Michigan State University (MSU). The extraction of the
correlation term requires the determination of the tensor polarization of
positronium, which will be deduced from the decay time spectrum of positronium.
The start signal will be given by one of the thin scintillators and the stop
signal by a pair of LYSO crystals in coincidence. The merit of the project
resides in both the statistical and systematic sensitivity of the system. The
group expects to get the current limit of 0.002 in a few hours and to improve it
by one order of magnitude within a reasonable measuring time. In addition, the
symmetry of the proposed instrument, and the fact that all configurations are
measured simultaneously, eliminate the dominant systematic effects in the most
precise previous measurement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.