* 1920025
* MRI: Development of Pulsar-based Power Grid Timing Instrumentation and Technology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* He Yin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,002.00

Power grids are vital links to achieve the essential continuity of electricity
service from power plants to end-users. Wide-area measurement systems monitor
bulk power grids and provide critical information for understanding and
responding to power system disturbances to prevent blackouts. Existing wide-area
measurement systems in the U.S. rely on the Global Navigation Satellite System
(or GPS) to provide the timing source. However, GPS signals are vulnerable to
malicious attacks. As many critical infrastructures depend on power systems, the
increasing reliance of modern power systems on GPS has created a major risk for
security of the U.S. economy and critical infrastructures. This project will
develop a reliable pulsar-based timing system where the timing source is
physically indestructible. Such a reliable timing system will improve the
resilience of next generation U.S. power grids, and many other industry sectors
that requires reliable and secure time synchronization, including communication
systems, transportation systems, and the emergency service sector. The
instrument will also provide many education resources and opportunities for K-12
and STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's primary goal is to develop
a pulsar-based timing instrument that is capable of providing accurate and
stable timing signals that are immune to physical attacks and potentially
revolutionize timing technologies. In particular, pulsar timing could reduce the
dependency of modern electric power system on GNSS. This instrument will include
four major parts, including: (1) a radio telescope array for pulsar signal
reception; (2) a pulsar signal transmission and processing system to filter out
noises and extract millisecond timing pulses from pulsar signals; (3) a timing
signal generation system to output high-precision timing pulse; and (4) a timing
distribution system to distribute the time signal generated by pulsar receiver
system to power system devices. This instrument can facilitate a variety of
cutting-edge research activities, including detection of GNSS outages and
attacks, development of pulsar timing-based power system controllers, and
integration with related GNSS/NTP/hybrid timing technologies. This instrument
will become the first timing source that introduces celestial timing technology
into industry applications and will also enable a series of applications that
may have broad impacts on many other engineering systems that require accurate
and secure time synchronization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.