* 1920117
* MRI: Acquisition of the NanoFrazor - a unique AFM-based nanolithography tool to support multidisciplinary research and promote nanoscience in South Carolina and beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Melissa Moss, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 529,693.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports this project
centered on the acquisition of the NanoFrazor Explorer nanopatterning instrument
from SwissLitho to be hosted at the University of South Carolina. Advancements
in the field of nanotechnology are responsible for accelerating development in
numerous and diverse research disciplines including materials science,
computation and information processing, photonics, biology, chemistry, and
medicine. The ability to customize nanoscale structures and patterns, especially
with a top-down approach, in an affordable and efficient manner, is highly
desirable in all fields. The user-friendliness of the NanoFrazor will expedite
the process of optimizing nano/micro-devices for practical applications in
biosensing, information processing, energy storage, CO2 capture, etc., as well
as provide a unique tool to study novel materials and answer basic scientific
questions in a wide range of fields. Its remote access capability and simple
operation procedures also render it an ideal tool for training and outreach. The
Principal Investigators have established a partnership with the South Carolina
State Museum and plan a set of public and educational outreach activities that
utilize the NanoFrazor to promote nanotechnology and nanoscience to the general
public as well as K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The thermal
scanning-probe lithography tool based on heated-tip atomic force microscopy in
the NanoFrazor system is capable of achieving nanoscale resolution in imaging
and patterning while overcoming the shortcomings of the electron-beam
lithography (EBL) technique. The NanoFrazor's unique capabilities will enhance
and enable multidisciplinary research in areas including physics, material
science, chemistry, biomedical engineering, electrical engineering, chemical
engineering, mechanical engineering, and even material computational theory. It
will open up opportunities of precise and controlled nanopatterning and
nanoscale studies in a wide range of materials including those previously
excluded by traditional EBL nanofabrication techniques, such as polymers, metal-
organic frameworks, and protein self-assembled nanostructures. It has the
potential to jump-start previously unfeasible multidisciplinary collaborative
research and put the University of South Carolina on the national map for
serving the needs of nanoscale science, engineering, and technology. Its
intuitive operations and simple training requirement will appeal to a wide user
base. The following objectives can be achieved through the acquisition of the
NanoFrazor: (1) expand nanofabrication capability to material classes previously
excluded by EBL; (2) enhance ongoing nanoscale research across a wide range of
disciplines; (3) Enable new nanoscale research across a wide range of
disciplines; (4) encourage collaborative research between departments and
universities; and (5) promote nanotechnology through outreach activities
involving NanoFrazor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.