* 1920513
* CHS: Small: Protecting Election Integrity Via Automated Ballot Usability Evaluation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Michael Byrne, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,994.00

Ballots used in elections are not always well-designed. Flaws in ballot design
can lead voters to make errors, and this can affect the outcome in a election.
While we know how to design better ballots, there are too many jurisdictions and
too many different ballots for human usability experts to manually evaluate or
conduct usability studies on all of them. A usability evaluation method that
scales to a problem this large does not yet exist. This project will do the
basic science to support the initial development of a computational model of
human performance that is able to automatically analyze a ballot and flag areas
where there are potential design flaws. The ultimate goal is to develop a web-
based tool that local election officials could use to check their ballots before
they are used in a real election, thus preventing errors before they happen.
This has the potential to improve election integrity by ensuring that what is
recorded on each ballot is actually what each voter intended. In addition, this
research will contribute to our understanding of how errors emerge in other
contexts where fillable forms are used, such as use of electronic health
records. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to address this problem by
developing a tool that, when given a ballot as input, produces an assessment of
whether or not that ballot is likely to lead to voter error, and if so, where on
the ballot these errors are most likely to occur. This tool will be based on
computational human performance models developed with the ACT-R cognitive
architecture, which has been successfully applied to other usability problems by
numerous researchers. The model will be developed based on an exploration of the
space of ballot completion and visual search strategies available to voters and
informed by eye-tracking data. ACT-R's current visual capabilities in terms of
scene analysis are limited, and the architecture will be extended with
capabilities to support detection of visual groups, which are critical in
understanding how voters visually navigate a ballot. A preliminary version has
already been developed and incorporated into preliminary models of voting; this
project will further develop and evaluate both the visual grouping extension and
the voting models. The models will be validated using ballots with known flaws
as well as with new behavioral data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.