* 1920954
* RII Track-2 FEC: Data Driven Material Discovery Center for Bioengineering Innovation
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Matthew Fields, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 6,400,000.00

Microbes attached to surfaces, commonly known as biofilms, represent multi-
million dollar challenges and opportunities in municipal water, marine,
manufacturing and oil and gas sectors and a range of other engineering and
medical applications. The study of biofilms at the cellular level and the study
of materials at the atomic level generate extremely large amounts of rich data.
To mine this data and establish connections between biofilm growth and material
properties, this Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR
Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award will form a new collaboration between
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Montana State University, the
University of Nebraska - Omaha and the University of South Dakota to develop Big
Data Analytic Tools. This team will develop the Biofilms Data and Information
Discovery system (Biofilm-DIDs) to collect and combine these large data sets
using artificial intelligence to analyze and predict gene responses and biofilm
characteristics influenced by surface properties. By accomplishing this goal the
team intends to rapidly accelerate the pace of discovery of new materials to
control and leverage biofilm growth. This project will provide education,
training and workforce development opportunities for a diverse cohort of junior
faculty and post-doctoral researchers and graduate, undergraduate and high-
school teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
project is to develop Big Data Analytic Tools for understanding rules of life in
biofilms on technologically relevant materials modified with an emerging class
of single-atom thick, two-dimensional (2D) materials. This will be accomplished
by developing the Data Driven Material Discovery (DDMD) Center for
Bioengineering Innovation, which will coalesce diverse infrastructure in
bioscience, computer science, and material science from South Dakota School of
Mines &amp; Technology, Montana State University, the University of Nebraska-
Omaha and the University of South Dakota to develop the unique Biofilm-DID
system. The DDMD Center will focus on the development of novel interdisciplinary
approaches and data analytics to track biofilm phenotypes on 2D materials,
coupled with -omics analyses of sulfate-reducing biofilm phenotypes to discover
rules of biofilm assembly and organization governed by atomic-scale material
surface features. The DDMD Center?s areas of research will include: big data
mining, machine learning, and predictive modeling; 2D materials for biological
applications; and biofilm composition and diversity. The Biofilm-DIDs will be
developed, calibrated and validated to provide a scientific platform for
interrogating biological mechanisms in response to nano-scale properties. This
platform will be leveraged to understand how the substrate crystallographic
orientations and point defects in coatings affect gene expression, signaling
pathways, metabolites, and structure formation controlling stress resistance,
extracellular electron transfer, and biocorrosion mechanisms of biofilms. The
DDMD center infrastructure will offer a series of education, training, and
workforce development opportunities in data analytics and informatics approaches
customized to material and biofilm sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.