* 1920761
* IUSE/PFE:RED Innovation Beyond Accommodation: Leveraging Neurodiversity for Engineering Innovation
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Rachael Gabriel, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Radical advances in engineering often emerge through nonstandard ways of
thinking. Even so, decades of efforts to increase the representation of women
and underrepresented minorities in engineering fields have largely overlooked
the cognitive diversity of the human race as a resource that must be leveraged
to address the increasingly complex challenges facing our world. The one-size-
fits-all model of teaching and learning not only limits opportunities for
traditional learners to engage in interactive learning and creative problem
solving, but it also notably fails students whose ways of thinking fall outside
of the typical range. To this end, the focus of this proposal is to move beyond
the limitations of traditional engineering education by creating a radically
inclusive Civil and Environmental Engineering Department that advances
personalized learning, increases recruitment and retention of neurodivergent
students, improves learning outcomes for all students, and leverages the
potential of neurodivergent individuals to contribute to engineering
breakthroughs. This will be accomplished by purposefully engaging students,
faculty and staff in the creation of INCLUDE, a strengths-based engineering
education community, through a process of identifying student and faculty
strengths and creating a multi-dimensional environment that offers students
choice in terms of learning methods, assessment tools and interaction modes with
their instructors, advisors and peers. Engagement with the INCLUDE program will
span all stages of higher education, beginning with pre-college programs and
recruitment efforts, continuing through all four years of college, and
supporting students as they prepare to enter the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This radical transformation of a Civil and
Environmental Engineering Department, will increase understanding of what it
takes to make and sustain cultural change in a risk-averse branch of engineering
education. The creation of INCLUDE, a dynamic epistemic community centered
around shared theories, code, and tools will support the advancement of
knowledge and sharing of best practices for inclusive engineering education,
both at and beyond the institutional level. Currently, very little is known
about the perceptions and experiences of neurodivergent students in engineering
programs. This research will contribute to the understanding of how
neurodiversity shapes the experience of engineering students, their persistence
in engineering programs, and their sense of identity as professional engineers.
The educational activities, centered around the principles of Universal Design
for Instruction in the context of a strengths-based model, will increase
knowledge of best practices for inclusive teaching; the implementation of which
may dramatically transform the educational experience for neurodivergent
engineering students. Additionally, by examining engineering faculty attitudes
toward neurodiversity, this project will increase understanding of how these
attitudes affect outcomes for students with learning differences. Finally, this
study will advance knowledge about the strengths of neurodivergent students and
the ways in which diverse ways of thinking may contribute to engineering
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly funded by the
Directorate of Education and Human Resources and the Directoratefor
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.