* 1920896
* RII Track-2 FEC: The Visual Experience Database: A Large-Scale Point-of-View Video Database for Vision Research
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Benjamin Balas, Bates College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 07/31/2023
* USD 3,974,003.00

Current artificial intelligence (AI) systems that recognize visual content
require millions of training examples to achieve good performance. However, the
databases used to train such systems often take photos and videos from the
internet, and thus do not represent the content that humans see on a daily
basis. This introduces substantial biases into the AI systems that can have
serious implications for AI-based applications such as self-driving cars. This
project, a collaboration between Bates College, the University of Nevada, Reno,
and North Dakota State University, Fargo will create the Visual Experience
Database (VED), a database of over 240 hours of video shot from the perspective
of a diverse set of observers engaged in common, everyday activities such as
shopping, eating, or walking. Along with these videos, we will track each
observer's head and eye position in order to understand how people look at the
world, and how this changes with environment, age, and task. Our goal is to make
this database open and accessible to all. Having the computer skills to use the
database is key to accessibility, so we will be releasing a suite of software
tools for using the database, as well as implement a summer workshop in basic
computer programming skills to grow a workforce that is prepared for a variety
of scientific occupations. By making the database open to the public, we will
enable scientists, historians, and even artists to benefit from this rich
resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress in both human visual neuroscience and
computer vision are limited by the availability of representative visual data.
However, currently available image and movie databases are not representative of
typical first-person visual experience. This project, a collaboration between
Bates College, the University of Nevada, Reno, and North Dakota State
University, Fargo, will create the Visual Experience Database (VED), a database
of over 240 hours of first-person video complete with eye- and head-tracking. We
will record from people of diverse ages (5-70 years) across three geographically
distinct sites as they engage in common, everyday activities such as shopping,
eating, or walking. With these data, we will be able to assess how observers
sample their visual environments, and how gaze patterns change with environment,
age, and task. Further, these data can be used as training data for next-
generation computer vision systems. In order to develop a workforce with the
skills necessary to work with big data, we will teach a Big Data Skills Summer
Workshop to provide undergraduate and graduate students with the basic skills of
computer programming and computational literacy to make contributions to this
project and to prepare them for a variety of STEM occupations. The VED will be
of broad use across several academic communities (cognitive science,
neuroscience, computer vision, and possibly digital humanities and art). By
creating a database that represents common, human experiences, we bypass the
many biases of extant datasets, which will increase the efficacy of computer
vision algorithms. By making these data fully open, we will enable advances in
these fields to be accessible to all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.