* 1920404
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Improving the Accuracy of Juror Self-Reports of Bias during Rehabilitative Voir Dire
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Margaret Bull Kovera, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 19,779.00

The courts have long acknowledged pretrial publicity as a source of juror bias.
To safeguard defendants' rights to a fair and impartial jury, the courts
frequently attempt to "rehabilitate" jurors who admit bias by asking them if
they could set aside their bias and be fair and impartial. Yet research
indicates that jurors' self-reports of their ability to be fair and impartial
are largely inaccurate. For example, regardless of their level of exposure to
pretrial publicity, jurors typically report an ability to be fair and impartial.
Therefore, this practice of juror rehabilitation is ineffective. Enhancing self-
reporting accuracy is critical given that inaccurate self-reports not only
undermine defendants' right to a fair and impartial jury but can also create
additional litigation, thus requiring valuable time and resources from the
courts and weakening public confidence in the accuracy and legitimacy of the
legal system. The present research examines how conformity pressures from the
judge and other jurors influence jurors' self-reporting accuracy and tests the
effectiveness of a novel intervention designed to increase the accuracy of self-
reported bias.

This project examines the mechanism behind jurors' inaccurate reports of their
ability to be fair and impartial and the effectiveness of juror rehabilitation
in two jury simulation experiments. First, this project will test whether the
behaviors of the judge, other jurors, or both are influencing jurors' self-
reporting accuracy by fostering pressures for them to conform their behavior to
the request of the judge and other potential jurors. Second, this research will
test the effectiveness of an intervention for decreasing conformity pressures
during juror rehabilitation and attenuating the biasing effects of pretrial
publicity on jurors' decision making. Research shows that pretrial publicity
biases jurors' decision-making in part by creating source monitoring errors
wherein jurors confuse evidence learned from pretrial publicity with evidence
presented during trial. The proposed intervention allows jurors to reflect on
and write down information obtained through pretrial publicity prior to being
questioned about their ability to set aside bias and be impartial. This
intervention should decrease conformity pressures and source monitoring errors
and, in turn, increase self-reporting accuracy. In addition, the proposed
research will involve students enrolled at a Hispanic-serving institution as
research assistants, contributing to the preparation of students from
underrepresented groups for graduate study in the sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.