* 1920385
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Network for the Integration of Natural History Collections in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Elizabeth Shea, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 02/28/2022
* USD 74,494.00

Undergraduate research increases student engagement, retention, and long-term
success and is essential for building a scientifically literate and engaged
workforce. The Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Course-based Research Experience
(EEB-CURE) Network seeks to support the development of new course based
undergraduate research experiences by leveraging the rapidly increasing
availability of digitized natural history collections data. Embedding research
experiences in biology and environmental science coursework is especially
important for low income, first generation, and minority undergraduate students
unable to dedicate time to research outside their normal course load due to
personal and financial barriers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EEB-CURE Network will
create a community of undergraduate educators, natural history curators,
education experts, and data experts who will explore how ecology and
evolutionary biology classes can mine the hundreds of millions of data records
being curated and served on web-based data portals such as iDigBio.org. The
first stage of this project will identify the challenges associated with
developing course-based research experiences using natural history specimen data
and determine what resources and training opportunities are critical for
development of these courses. Two surveys will be designed and distributed, one
to assess the interest of biology educators in teaching CUREs using natural
history collection data and the other to assess the interest of natural history
collections professionals in collaborating with educators. The surveys will also
investigate the training and resource needs of both groups. The project will
recruit a diverse group of steering committee and network members who are
passionate about the intersection of ecology, evolution, and natural history
collections and who will actively promote the development of an upper-level
biology CURE. Faculty members who teach high proportions of underrepresented
minorities and first-generation college students will be especially encouraged
to participate in the network. The culmination of the project will be a network
meeting to review the results of the surveys and develop plans for training
workshops, teaching materials, and collaboration opportunities to move the goals
of the network forward. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.