* 1920356
* MRI: Acquisition of a multifunctional x-ray diffractometer (XRD) for research (materials and geology) and education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* George Lazar, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant will support the acquisition of
a multifunctional x-ray diffractometer, enhancing research and student training
at California State University, San Bernardino (CSUSB). This system will be used
across a broad range of disciplines. In physics and chemistry, it will
contribute to research on the development of new technological materials,
including novel magnetic and ferroelectric systems. In geology, it will be an
important tool in student and faculty research, primarily for the identification
and characterization of rocks and minerals. Work performed using this instrument
will significantly enhance the research infrastructure at CSUSB, particularly by
furthering access to many experimental techniques (e.g. powder and thin film
diffraction, reflectometry) applicable to a wide range of sample types (e.g.
thin films, powders, polymers). CSUSB is an undergraduate-focused university and
a qualifying Hispanic- and Minority-Serving Institution; thus, acquisition of
this instrument will broaden participation of students from underrepresented
demographics in state-of-the-art research, with a long-term impact of increasing
diversity in STEM fields. Additionally, the ability to provide access to an
advanced x-ray diffraction system will support the development of local
collaborations with many institutions, including community colleges, other four-
year universities, and local industries. Many of these education institutions
and industries also serve minority populations that are underrepresented in the
physical sciences, compounding the impact of this instrumentation in the
development of a diverse STEM pipeline in the local
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diffractometer will be utilized for a variety of
x-ray scattering techniques. Some of the major features of the instrument
include a precision sample positioning stage and Eulerian cradle, enabling the
performance of powder, thin film, and grazing incidence diffraction and
reflectometry. A Ge monochromator and pixel area detector will allow for high-
resolution scanning and rapid collection of reciprocal space maps, and a multi-
position automatic sample chamber will permit the rapid and automatic collection
of powder diffraction patterns. These capabilities for rapid data collection and
multi-sample analysis will significantly augment the team's research
productivity, allowing time for more projects and broader impact of the machine.
The diffractometer will enhance research output at CSUSB's NSF-CREST funded
Center for Advanced Functional Materials (CAFM). The focus of the work will
include: engineering novel ferroelectric and magnetic properties into single-
crystal oxide thin films using epitaxial strain and multilayer geometry;
optimizing organic ferroelectrics through preparation as thin films and novel
polymer composites; and the identification and characterization of rocks and
minerals in field and laboratory studies in geology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.