* 1920550
* Collaborative Research: INSITE:  INtegrating STEM Into Transition Education for Incarcerated Learners
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sarup Mathur, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 863,743.00

The project will investigate the impact of a Universal Design for Learning (UDL)
App-based curriculum on STEM career knowledge, interests, competencies, and
readiness for incarcerated youth. Integrating STEM into Transition Education for
Incarcerated Learners (INSITE) will integrate STEM workforce development
activities into Merging Worlds, an empirically supported transition program, and
deliver it through a UDL App-based framework to prepare and support STEM career
readiness and employment for incarcerated youth age 14-19. INSITE will utilize a
Design-based Research approach to (1) co-design the INSITE curriculum with
incarcerated learners, juvenile justice educators, and STEM employers, and (2)
test the impact of the curriculum on STEM employment outcomes. The INSITE
curriculum will be grounded in evidence-based research on incarcerated youth,
STEM education, transition, recidivism, and workforce development. The
curriculum will prepare and support career readiness that mediates the impact of
limited access, exposure, and skill development for an untapped STEM workforce
with vast potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Social Cognitive Career Theory
(SCCT) will serve as the theoretical framework to guide the research activities
supporting the INSITE curriculum development. The rationale is that the theory
allows for the contextual affordances and barriers that can influence
individuals' career choices and actions. The research questions are (1) How
prepared are incarcerated learners to transition to the STEM workforce? (2) What
types of STEM workforce outcomes are incarcerated learners experiencing post-
release? (3) What are the functional components of a STEM transition curriculum?
(4) In what ways does the INSITE curriculum impact STEM career readiness and
career actions of incarcerated youth? and (5) What are the roles of contextual
variables and cognitive variables on STEM career readiness and career actions
for incarcerated youth? Data will be collected in iterative design and test
phases that employ longitudinal, quasi-experimental, and qualitative case
studies. INSITE will produce products across six topics aligned with the
research questions and associated research plan. The findings are expected to
document the impact of a novel intervention that prepares an underserved
population for the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by
the EHR Core Research program that supports fundamental STEM education research
that focuses on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.