* 1920392
* MRI: Development of a Robotic University of Hawaii 88" Telescope (Robo88): A new tool for large surveys, rapid transient classification, and multimessenger astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Shappee, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 991,297.00

This project will develop a robotic University of Hawaii 88" Telescope (Robo88)
on Mauna Kea Hawaii, one of the premier astronomical sites in the world. Robo88
will bring new capabilities that will enable scientific investigations that are
not currently feasible, including large systematic surveys of many targets
distributed over the sky, studies of supernovae and other transients, and rapid
follow-up of gravitational wave sources, potentially hazardous near-earth
asteroids, and stellar flares. The project will also support undergraduate
research and training in the fast-evolving field of time domain astronomy.
Through partnership with the Akamai Workforce Initiative, this project will
broaden participation in science by engaging students from underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robo88 will be an agile robotic observatory
with three instruments: 1) The Supernova Integral Field Spectrograph, a fully-
integrated high-throughput instrument delivering one percent spectrophotometric
observations for point sources even on structured backgrounds. 2) STACam, a 10K
by 10K wide field-of-view imager. 3) Robo-AO-2, a robotic laser adaptive optics
system that will deliver visible and infrared diffraction-limited imaging.
Robo88 will bring new capabilities that will enable three new classes of
scientific investigations not currently feasible: 1) Large systematic surveys
(e.g., exoplanet host star characterization) that have many targets distributed
over the sky that are otherwise not feasible on larger telescopes. 2) Rapid
supernovae/transient classification of handfuls of interesting targets each
night, that are otherwise inefficient on classically scheduled telescopes. 3)
Near-immediate observations of quickly evolving or moving objects (e.g.,
gravitational wave sources, near-earth asteroids, stellar flares) that are only
briefly visible once discovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.