* 1920156
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope Rheometer for Structural Characterization of Complex Fluids &amp; Soft Materials Under Shear
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Paulo Arratia, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2022
* USD 436,188.00

Complex fluids are a broad class of materials widely used in processes spanning
the chemical, petroleum, pharmaceutical and food industries. They are also
abundant in natural environments (for example, soil and mud) as well as in the
human body (for example, mucus and reproductive fluids). Complex fluids may be
considered 'soft', in the sense that they flow or distort easily in response to
external forces. Many fascinating macroscopic responses of complex fluids
containing particles, polymers, (bio)molecules, surfactants, or liquid crystals,
have been widely reported in the literature. Characterizing the mechanical
properties and microstructure of complex fluids and biological materials remains
a challenge. The main issue is that one needs to precisely measure the material
bulk response (or rheology) while simultaneously characterizing its
microstructure. To that end, this project involves developing an instrument that
incorporates a sensitive rheometer with a dynamic range that allows precise
application of kinematic deformation coupled with a confocal microscope that
provides real space, high-magnification, time-resolved spatial information in
three dimensions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to develop a
confocal rheometer microscope by combining two commercially-available
instruments, a confocal microscope and a stress-controlled rheometer. This new
apparatus will allow researchers to impose precise kinematic deformation (i.e.
shear, steady or time-dependent) onto a desired material while simultaneously
characterizing the fluid microstructure and measuring the bulk fluid response.
By incorporating both a high precision rheometer and a confocal microscope into
one system, the project researchers will be able to conduct cutting edge
experiments that relate 3-dimensional microstructure to bulk properties. The
research project also could lead to new fundamental understanding of the
mechanical and chemical forces that govern the dynamics of complex and soft
materials and to new applications via the development of novel
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.