* 1920042
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Materials for Agriculture Resource Imaging Analytics at High Resolution (MARIAH)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/03/2019,08/31/2021
* Donald Roper, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2021
* USD 96,659.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
rising global demand for food amidst increasing drought, extreme temperatures,
and pest damage is straining precious land, water, and energy resources. The
Planning Grant for the proposed Engineering Research Center for Materials for
Agricultural Resource Imaging Analytics at High Resolution (MARIAH) will engage
experts in agriculture and other sciences, engineering, and management in
developing innovative approaches to increase crop yields while reducing
insecticide, herbicide, and fertilizer use. Talented people from diverse
disciplines, perspectives, and backgrounds will come together using novel
approaches to networking and entrepreneurship to catalyze bold new innovations
that will sustainably increase agricultural productivity while preserving
natural resources. Innovative materials, devices, and methods that enhance our
understanding of plant resilience to stress will be pursued to identify better
crop varieties and crop management strategies. Award-winning approaches to
mentoring, entrepreneurship, and team building will train tomorrow's leaders in
data-driven, sustainable agriculture. Our goal is 'partnering to nourish a
healthier world.' &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A rising global demand for food amidst
increasing drought, extreme temperatures and pest damage is straining precious
land, water, and energy resources. The Planning Grant for the proposed
Engineering Research Center for Materials for Agricultural Resource Imaging
Analytics at High Resolution (MARIAH) will engage experts in agriculture and
other sciences, engineering, and management in developing innovative approaches
to increase crop yields while reducing insecticide, herbicide, and fertilizer
use. A series of conferences, workshops and contests will be held in conjunction
with meetings of professional societies to identify (i) new materials to examine
stress tolerance in individual plants (e.g., nanoscale antennas); (ii) novel
devices to image crop phenotypes and environment (e.g., detectors based on II-VI
and IV-alloy semiconductors and quantum dots); and (iii) advanced high
throughput plant phenotyping systems and data analytics to mitigate effects of
drought, extreme temperature and pest damage (e.g., drone-acquired ultra-high
spatial resolution multispectral imagery). Novel, high-resolution
sensing/imaging platforms will be integrated with autonomous collection and
advanced data analytics to rationally select crop varieties and crop management
strategies that increase crop resilience to stress, improve food and water
quality, and decrease energy usage and nutrient pollution. Acclaimed methods for
innovation, mentoring, and communications will attract participants from diverse
backgrounds and disciplines and train next-generation leaders in data-driven
sustainable agriculture. By identifying bold new approaches to increase crop
yield and sustainably use land, water, and energy resources while preparing
tomorrow's workforce, we will advance the U.S. agriculture economy. Our goal is
'partnering to nourish a healthier world.'&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.