* 1920718
* Identifying Elements of Engineering Design Activities that Foster Underrepresented Children's Engagement in Engineering in Informal Learning Institutions
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Dorothy Bennett, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 02/28/2023
* USD 540,262.00

Informal learning institutions, such as science centers and museums, are well-
positioned to broaden participation in engineering pathways by providing
children from underrepresented groups with motivational, self-directed
engineering design experiences. Though many informal learning institutions offer
opportunities for young visitors to engage in engineering activities, little is
known about the specific features of these activities that support children's
motivation in engineering design processes such as problem scoping, testing, and
iteration. This project will address this gap and advance foundational knowledge
by identifying features of engineering design activities, as implemented within
an informal setting, which support underrepresented children's engineering
motivation and persistence in engineering tasks. Researchers at New York Hall of
Science (NYSCI) will observe children interacting with families and museum
educators as they engage in different engineering design activities in NYSCI's
Design Lab, an exhibition space devoted to hands-on exploration of engineering
design. They will also survey and interview the children and their caregivers
about these experiences. Analyses of these data sources will result in a
description of features of design activities foster motivation and task
persistence in engineering design. Findings will be disseminated nationally to
other informal learning institutions, which in turn can use the knowledge
generated from this project to create motivational, research-based, field-tested
engineering design experiences for young visitors, especially for children from
underrepresented groups. The experiences may encourage children to further
pursue engineering pathways, resulting in a diversified engineering workforce
with the potential to drive and sustain national innovation and global
technological leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the framework
of goal orientation, defined as learners' self-reflection of why and how they
engage in tasks, to understand whether, how, and why underrepresented 7-12-year-
olds engage in engineering design activities in an informal learning
institution. Though previous research has suggested that goal orientation is
strongly, positively related to learning and motivation in formal settings such
as schools, research in informal settings has not robustly accounted for the
role of goal orientation in participants' engagement with learning tasks in
these unique learning environments. To better understand how children's goal
orientations contribute to their motivation in engineering in informal learning
institutions, researchers will answer the following research questions: (1) What
are underrepresented children's goals and goal orientations while participating
in engineering design activities in an informal setting? (2) What contextual
factors--including facilitation strategies, materials, task relevance, and
social interactions with family members--may support or discourage the adoption
of different goal orientations? (3) How do goal orientations relate to
children's learning experience in the engineering design activities and the
likelihood that they will test and iterate their solutions? These questions will
be answered through a mixed-method research study conducted with approximately
200 families, with children aged 7-12, recruited from underrepresented groups.
Semi-structured clinical interviews, conducted with 20% of the children and
their caregivers, as well as observations and surveys gathered from all
families, will provide information on the children's goal orientation and
engagement as they relate to specific engineering design activities. Qualitative
content analyses and multilevel structural equation modeling will result in
findings that will be disseminated widely to other institutions of informal
learning. Ultimately, this project will generate new empirical knowledge
regarding the features of engineering design activities in informal learning
environments that increase engineering engagement and motivation among
underrepresented children, thereby broadening participation in engineering
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.