* 1920345
* MRI: Acquisition of OCT Imaging System and Deep Learning Workstation for Interdisciplinary Healthcare Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Patrick Donnelly, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2021
* USD 110,375.00

This proposal requests acquisition of a swept-source optical coherence
tomography (OCT) imaging system and a deep learning workstation (DLW) at
California State University, Chico (CSU, Chico). The proposed OCT imaging system
and DLW will enable studies on the application of OCT imaging in dentistry to
detect early carious lesions, micro-fractures, pulpal inflammation, early
dysplastic changes in oral malignancies and signatures of other dental diseases.
Acquisition of the OCT imaging system and DLW will significantly enhance current
research programs and enable new research directions at CSU, Chico. These
instruments will also support the established collaborative research with
faculty at the Stony Brook University School of Dental Medicine. Approximately
500 students from the Departments of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Computer Science, and Mechanical and Mechatronic Engineering and Sustainable
Manufacturing will be among the major users of the OCT system and DLW and will
be available for use by the broader CSU, Chico research community. CSU, Chico is
a minority-serving institution with a large proportion of students from
underrepresented and underserved groups, including veterans, and Hispanics. This
cutting-edge OCT system and DLW will provide these students with hands-on
experience. The OCT system and DLW will be used to (1) increase involvement of
undergraduate students in research, (2) promote active learning and skills
development, (3) train upper-division undergraduate and graduate students on
state-of-the-art imaging and algorithm development techniques, and (4) stimulate
collaborations with faculty and students across CSU, Chico and from other
institutions of higher learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed swept-
source optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging system and deep learning
workstation (DLW) will stimulate interdisciplinary research projects in
healthcare and industrial nondestructive testing at CSU, Chico. OCT is a
noninvasive optical imaging modality based on low-coherence interferometry that
utilizes non-ionizing near-infrared laser to obtain images with 1-10 micrometer
resolution. Currently, the major biomedical application of OCT is in
ophthalmology. Many other applications of OCT are under investigation as
researchers take advantage of the ability to rapidly acquire images
noninvasively. Machine learning and deep learning techniques can be used to
supplement the OCT images to more accurately identify diseased and damaged
tissue. The following research projects at CSU, Chico will utilize the OCT
imaging system and DLW: (1) the development of a deep learning model, namely
convolutional neural networks (CNN), and quantitative analysis of OCT images for
early dental caries detection; (2) the investigation of various deep learning
optimization methods and their performances with OCT images to minimize back-
propagating errors; (3) the development of signal and image processing
algorithms to extract meaningful features from OCT data for image
classification; (4) the design of compact and low-cost fiber optic based probe
for noninvasive OCT imaging of occlusal caries; and (5) the use of deep learning
to analyze and model non-speech sounds, such as music or industrial noise, as
well as automatic analysis and classification of musical timbre. The OCT imaging
system and DLW will help catalyze interdisciplinary efforts between engineering,
science, and agriculture faculty, and develop an undergraduate and graduate
research and teaching laboratory at CSU, Chico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.