* 1920108
* MRI: Acquisition of Differential Electrochemical Mass Spectrometry for Investigation of Different Electrochemical Reaction Kinetics on Nanostructured Catalysts
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Mehran Elahi, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2021
* USD 176,828.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program enables the
study of important electrochemical reaction mechanisms, such as, carbon dioxide
electrochemical conversion and electrochemical hydrogenation of unsaturated
biofuels on emerging nanocatalysts. In combination with advanced gas
chromatography system, this instrument strengthens the product analysis facility
at a minority-serving institution, Elizabeth City State University (ECSU). It
also supports both research training and education of underrepresented minority
students at ECSU in state-of-the-art research areas such as electrochemistry,
nanocatalysts and renewable energy storage systems. This system facilitates
several research projects with both domestic and international collaborators.
Regionally, two faculty members and numerous students from Old Dominion
University (ODU) and Eastern Carolina University (ECU) working on collaborative
projects will directly benefit from this facility. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award supports the acquisition of a Differential Electrochemical Mass
Spectrometry (DEMS) system consisting of microflow capillary inlets for research
and education at ECSU. The real time electrochemical reaction intermediates and
products analysis by DEMS is at the center of identifying reaction mechanism of
several electrochemical reactions and providing fundamental knowledge for the
development of efficient nanocatalysts. In one project, research focuses on
understanding of carbon dioxide electrochemical reduction mechanism on grain-
boundaries or edge atoms of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide
nanosheets. This project further enables the development of an efficient
catalytic system consisting of heterogeneous grain-boundaries for efficient
carbon dioxide conversion into valuable products. In another project with ODU,
this instrument addresses the question of how electrochemical hydrogenation
occurs on reduced metal oxide nanostructures to help designing more energy-
efficient and cost-effective catalytic system for conversion of bio-oils into
transportation fuels. The gained knowledge will broadly benefit areas related to
nanocatalysts, renewable energy storage systems and biofuel
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.