* 1920510
* Modeling Brain and Behavior to Uncover the Eye-Brain-Mind Link during Complex Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Leanne Hirshfield, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,991.00

The project, based at the University of Colorado, will advance fundamental
knowledge on learning from complex STEM texts. This is a critical skill for
success in an increasingly information-driven world and workforce, but it is
also an area where students consistently struggle. Scores on standardized
assessments are stubbornly stagnant, troublesome achievement gaps remain, and
the U.S. continues to lag behind its international peers. This is especially
relevant to the reading of complex STEM content. The main idea of the project is
that learning from text is fundamentally about the coordination of vision (the
eye) with thought (the mind) in a manner constrained by the content (the text),
the context (the task), and the individual (the learner). Thus, there is a need
to understand how these factors interact in order to advance basic knowledge and
to inform effective interventions. The team will study how brain and behavioral
signals can be used to understand the reading process and associated learning
outcomes in a manner that is sensitive to individual differences. Anticipated
near-term broader impacts include the interdisciplinary training of students,
especially those from groups underrepresented in STEM fields, community
outreach, and promoting scientific reasoning skills relevant to multiple STEM
areas. In the longer term, the results of the project will inform the design of
future interventions that aim to make learning from text more efficient,
engaging, and effective. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances the fundamental research literature
on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is
to gain fundamental knowledge on how the eye and brain dynamically coordinate to
construct mental representations during complex learning from STEM texts. The
project will address this goal by collecting eye movements, reading behaviors,
noninvasive brain signals, and learning outcomes from high-school and college
students in controlled lab settings and in school environments. It is expected
that students will improve critical thinking and scientific reasoning skills by
engaging with multiple texts on scientific research methods. The project will
use behavioral (eye tracking and reading times) and non-invasive brain measures
(high-density functional near-infrared spectroscopy and electroencephalography)
to identify neurobehavioral markers of core processes involved in reading
comprehension (e.g., focused attention vs. mind wandering, inference generation
and elaboration) and the extent to which these measures can predict learning
outcomes (comprehension, knowledge, and transfer) assessed immediately after
learning and a week later. The project will also leverage advances in deep
machine learning to build computational neurobehavioral models of the process
and outcome variables in a manner that is sensitive to textual difficulty and to
individual differences (e.g., prior knowledge, interest). Thus, the project will
advance fundamental knowledge by integrating three research areas: theories of
low-level reading processes and associated models of eye movements, models of
higher-order STEM text comprehension including multiple document comprehension,
and emerging research on the cognitive neuroscience of reading including co-
registration with eye movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.