* 1920229
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Research in Materials and Biological Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Martin Kirk, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,400.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemical
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Jeffrey Rack from the University of New
Mexico and colleagues Martin Kirk and Yang Qin are acquiring an ultra high-
pressure, quadrupole, time-of-flight mass spectrometer (UPLC-QTof-MS). In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex samples. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized into ions and the ions' masses are measured.
This highly sensitive technique allows the structure of molecules in complex
mixtures to be studied. An instrument with a liquid chromatograph can separate
mixtures of compounds before they reach the mass spectrometer. Using the time-
of-flight method of mass spectrometry, the mass-to-charge ratio of an ion is
determined by the way of a time measurement in which ions are accelerated by an
electric field of known strength. This acceleration results in an ion having the
same kinetic energy as any other ion that has the same charge. The acquisition
strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by involving diverse groups of students in
research and research training using this modern analytical technique and
supports many users and underrepresented students. It also provides training
opportunities to undergraduate students, many of whom are first-generation
students. The instrument gives students experience using vital instrumentation
that they carry with them into their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of
this mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels. It is especially useful for developing photoactive compounds and
materials and for designing support magnetic materials for molecular
electronics. The instrument is also employed in evaluating polychalcogenylene
vinylene conjugated polymers for flexible optoelectronic applications and for
developing platforms for screening libraries of bioactive species. The mass
spectrometer is also utilized for the characterization of generic architectures
that may be related to the Niemann-Pick C1 metabolic pathway associated with
liver and spleen disorders and for deciphering the conformational control of
nitric oxide synthases as well as labeling potential drugs with stable
isotopes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.