* 1920190
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Lumicks C-Trap microscope for the study of biomaterials at the nanoscale and education in the South East
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Guy Benian, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 448,875.00

An award is made to Emory University to support the acquisition of a new
advanced microscope that combines optical tweezers for high precision mechanical
pulling and nm-resolution fluorescence detection for spectroscopic localization
of single molecules in microfluidic cells that allow rapid and non-disruptive
exchange of experimental conditions. At Emory, the acquisition of this
microscope will enhance and extend existing, and enable new, projects spanning
from genome transcription and maintenance to the mechano-biochemistry of muscle
protein function, shear sensing in blood, the design of molecular tension
sensors and motors and materials nano-physics. The system will directly impact
research and training infrastructure, the quality of undergraduate and graduate
education and, ultimately, STEM education. The microscope will be part of the
Core Research Facilities shared among the research Universities in the Atlanta
area through the Georgia Research Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
projects enabled by the acquisition of this system will allow i) the
understanding of key processes at the level of the genome such as the effect of
elongating RNA polymerase on regulatory proteins normally bound to DNA (and vice
versa) and the repair and editing of the genome; ii) understanding of the
mechanism of force sensing in living muscle and blood cells; iii) the design of
molecular force sensors, probes and motors for biotechnological applications;
and iv) extension of the length scale over which advanced fluorescent detection
techniques are applicable. The spectrum of research areas that will be
transformed by these investigations is broad, connects fundamental with applied
research and the natural synergies among the users which will lead to a stronger
and better integrated research environment at Emory. Results from these studies
will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.