* 1920177
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-free Cooling System to Enable Multi-Modal Materials Research and Research Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sophia Suarez, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 154,350.00

The ability to conduct regular, reliable measurements of material properties is
a cornerstone of modern materials physics research and training. The physical
property measurement system (PPMS) at CUNY-Brooklyn College currently provides
essential measurement of electrical, magnetic and thermodynamic material
properties over a wide range of temperature and in magnetic fields of up to 9
Tesla. The acquisition of a cryogen-free dewar for the PPMS will greatly improve
CUNY-Brooklyn College researchers' ability to collaborate and respond to
research needs in a timely fashion by eliminating the need to purchase expensive
liquid helium to cool the magnet and sample measurement chamber. Cryogen-free
operation of the PPMS will maximize research output, allowing innovation in 3
key areas of energy-related science: pressaure-driven cooling and magnetic
cooling, and aluminum ion battery technology. Cryogen-free operation will also
give high school, undergraduate and graduate students, many of whom are from
under-represented groups, research training opportunities. The lifespan of the
upgraded instrument will be more than 10 years, while the costs of future
operation and maintenance have been carefully assessed and will be reduced
significantly. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a cryogen-free dewar
for the physical property measurement system (PPMS) at CUNY-Brooklyn College
will enable transformative research in 3 areas of energy-related science: (1)
investigate the (pressure,temperature) phase diagram of metal-organic molecules
and polymeric structures that have spin crossover transitions near room
temperature; the aim is to understand the role of different ligands and side-
chains in the response of spin crossover compounds to hydrostatic pressure,
building on our recent work that has recently demonstrated the first giant
barocaloric effect in this class of compounds; (2) adiabatic temperature change
measurements using a sensor recently constructed and tested by undergraduates at
Brooklyn College; the results will be correlated with total scattering of hard
x-rays at synchrotron sources. (3) ionic conductivity and viscosity experiments
on electrolytes for next- generation aluminum ion batteries, thereby
investigating fundamental characteristics of ion transport that enable better,
safer performance than current lithium-based technology. The research will have
societal and technological impact as it is motivated by the need to reduce the
environmental footprint of cooling and by seeking improvements in battery
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.