* 1920369
* MRI: Development of an Ultra-High-Precision Gas Mass Spectrometer
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jeffrey Severinghaus, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,120,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports development of a next-
generation gas mass spectrometry system with sufficient precision to measure the
rate of ocean warming due to fossil fuel burning. The method works by measuring
the atmosphere's krypton and xenon abundances over time, which are rising due to
the fact that warm water holds less dissolved gas than cold water. These
measurements complement the direct ocean temperature observations from floats
and ships with a completely independent method, which takes advantage of the
well-mixed nature of the atmosphere to track volume-average ocean heat at a
single location. Given that 93% of the excess heat from greenhouse gases ends up
in the ocean, this approach is a cost-effective way to add confidence to
society's knowledge of this crucial planetary vital sign. The gas mass
spectrometry system also enables measurement of past atmospheric oxygen
concentrations from trapped air in ice cores, which will improve scientific
understanding of release of greenhouse gases from soils as they warm. Broader
impacts of the work include education of one PhD student, and the research
career development of two under-represented minorities who will use the
instrument.

The inventory of excess ocean heat reflects in a rather direct way the
cumulative energy imbalance at the top of the atmosphere due to human radiative
forcing. In principle, a better knowledge of ocean heat content over the past
half century would narrow the uncertainty on the estimate of sensitivity, which
has been at 3+-1.5 degrees C for the last 50 years. Archived air samples taken
by the Scripps CO2 program over the past 50 years will be measured for krypton
and xenon concentration, using the proposed equipment, to see if it is possible
to improve the historical record of ocean heat, and thereby reduce the
uncertainty on the sensitivity. The technological strategy is based on purchase
of a factory-modified MAT 253 Ultra mass spectrometer, combined with a custom
pressure-stabilized inlet system already in use at the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography. A parallel conventional inlet system will enable frictionless
shared use of the instrument for other purposes, such as gas measurements that
require high mass resolution to separate interfering masses from the species of
interest, or studies of rare isotopologues and mass-independent fractionation.
This proposal will establish a shared-use Facility for Advanced Isotope
Geochemistry at Scripps, which will underpin transformative new discoveries and
attract young researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.