* 1920479
* Refining Understanding of the Home Math Environment in the Early Years: An Interdisciplinary Working Conference
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2022
* David Purpura, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 02/28/2022
* USD 99,284.00

This award to Purdue University provides partial support for a conference
focused on the home numeracy environment (HNE). The conference addresses this
critically important topic, drawing on researchers from a range of disciplines
and literatures. A robust finding across these literatures is that achievement
gaps in math exist at preschool and largely persist through high school. Though
it is clear that socio-economic status (SES) plays a significant role in
producing these gaps, a better understanding of specific causal mechanisms is
needed. Moreover, there may be other important home-based factors that could
inoculate children, protecting them from lagging behind in mathematics upon
school entry. The conference is a unique opportunity for researchers across
disciplines to share the results of their cutting-edge work, receive feedback on
the translational opportunities, and get a sense of how to move forward. The
project is funded by the EHR Core Research program, which supports fundamental
research that advances the research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference has three aims: First, discussion
around variability in HNE across age and culture; second, the development of a
review of the extant literature on HNE (identifying gaps and future directions);
and, third, the development of a better survey measure of HNE. The output of the
conference will include a working paper that presents a coherent vision for the
HNE research community. The award will largely help offset expenses for
participants related to travel. It will also support the development of the
position paper that provides a foundation for the field to move
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.