* 1920304
* MRI Acquistion: High Performance Computing Cluster for Data Intensive Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Gwen Jacobs, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 716,000.00

This award to the University of Hawaii (UH) System results in the acquisition,
deployment, and maintenance of a high-performance cluster to support
computational and data intensive research for the UH campuses, supporting data
science research that uses machine learning and artificial intelligence.
Focusing on three multi-disciplinary research efforts (Data Science Institute
(HI-DSI), Ike Wai: Securing Water Future for Hawaii (EPSCoR RII Track 1), and
Center for Microbiome Analysis through Island Knowledge and Investigation
(C-MAIKI)), the investigators aim to impact a broad range of research that
primarily involves 15 pre-tenured faculty. The cluster will be managed as a
shared resource servicing various goals that include: &lt;br/&gt;1. Advance
technical training, &lt;br/&gt;2. Support for researchers who use Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs) in their research, &lt;br/&gt;3. Support High Throughput
Computing (HTC) users, &lt;br/&gt;4. Broadening the multi-campus user base
through training activities and support, and &lt;br/&gt;5. Expanding educational
and research opportunities in the classroom and in hands-on immersive training
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;The HI-DSI is diverse UH system-wide effort that serves as
a nexus for expertise in data science research and education. This effort
creates new knowledge important to the islands and the global community to
improve national security and derive economic value from its research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides the critical computational
resources, and technical human infrastructure (a cadre of early career faculty
from top tier institutions recently recruited) to ensure that these new
investigators thrive in the university. The UH Information Technology Services-
CyberInfrastructure (ITS-CI) will continue training and collaborate with HI-DSI
to add new data science training modules and workshops. These activities will
augment formal classroom education and support graduate and undergraduate
research projects. The investigators will work to engage new user communities
and help design training programs to meet the needs of the researchers. The
cluster, managed as a shared campus resource free to all researchers, will
contribute to keep researchers at the leading edge of their programs and better
prepare students for careers in research and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.