* 1920538
* Generalization Across Multiple Mathematical Areas: Studies of Classrooms and Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Amy Ellis, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,499,857.00

With funding from the EHR Core Research Program, this project will investigate
how productive mathematical generalization can be supported in whole-classroom
settings. Generalization is the ability to recognize patterns in relationships
between numbers. An example of generalization is recognizing that 2 + 3 = 5, and
generalizing that adding any even number to any odd number will produce an odd
number. Generalization is a critical component of mathematical reasoning. As a
result, researchers and policymakers recommend that it should be central to the
education of all students at all grade levels. However, acting on this
recommendation poses serious challenges, given the limited research base about
students' difficulties in making appropriate generalizations and the challenges
teachers face in supporting generalization in the classroom. This project aims
to help address this gap by focusing on math classes from Grade 6 through
college. To do so, the project team will investigate students' generalizations,
as well as the strategies that affect their ability to develop generalization
skills in algebra, advanced algebra, trigonometry, calculus, and combinatorics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a framework to describe and
understand research-informed, classroom-based strategies for fostering
generalization at the whole-classroom level with practicing teachers and
instructors of undergraduate mathematics courses. The project has two
objectives: (1) systematically investigate the current state of classroom
generalization, identifying existing supports for students' generalizing; and
(2) examine the ways in which teachers/instructors can be supported to foster
productive mathematical generalization. The study implements a classroom-based
design experiment model, leveraging classroom observations and videotaped
professional development sessions in a two-phase methodology, with the second
phase building on the first phase. The research activities will produce a set of
findings about the relationships between instructional supports for generalizing
and the nature of student generalizations, thus contributing to theory and a
deeper understanding of generalization as it occurs in the context of typical
instruction across multiple domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.