* 1920946
* RII Track-2 FEC: Marshalling Diverse Big Data Streams to Understand Risk of Tick-Borne Diseases in the Great Plains
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* A. Townsend Peterson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,921,229.00

Tick-borne diseases, including Lyme disease, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and
others, are increasingly appreciated as a significant public health concern
worldwide, and an increasing concern in the Great Plains in particular. However,
a detailed understanding of these diseases, how they are acquired, where are the
high-risk areas, and how might they best be mitigated, has remained surprisingly
opaque. This project, a collaboration between University of Kansas, Kansas State
University, Pittsburgh State University, Oklahoma State University, the
University of Oklahoma, the University of Oklahoma, Norman campus, and the
University of Central Oklahoma, represents a broad-scope, highly
interdisciplinary, integrated, and data-intensive effort to illuminate these
questions across two states, Kansas and Oklahoma in the Great Plains. Major
elements of the project include assembling detailed, large-scale datasets on the
occurrences of different tick species, the genomes of the ticks and the
pathogens, and environmental variation across the region, as well as marshaling
new artificial-intelligence tools to permit rapid and accurate tick
identifications by non-experts. Project scientists will use ecological niche
modeling and mathematical population modeling approaches to assess and predict
transmission of the major tick-borne pathogens, and create and test the
automated identification tools. The project will foster what can be termed "big
data literacy" via a series of workshops and courses, as well as online data
resources. Perhaps most importantly, the project will involve numerous
undergraduate and graduate students in many project tasks, giving them
opportunities to learn and explore futures in these and related areas of
science. Project students will be recruited as broadly as possible, to represent
in particular populations that are not well-represented in science, including
minorities, women, and those from families without a tradition of university-
level education. Project outcomes will include online, interactive maps of tick-
borne disease risk, and online facilities for identification of tick photographs
taken by the general public. Junior members of the project team (younger
faculty, postdocs, and students) will be mentored and guided by more senior
individuals, so as to maximize the probability of their successful advancement
in this field. The project team will be guided by an advisory board with broad
and international expertise, as well as state-level public health policy
experience. At the close of the project, we anticipate a much-improved and
considerably more detailed understanding of the diversity and risk of tick-borne
diseases across Kansas and Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tick-borne diseases
are increasingly recognized as an important public health concern across the
United States, including Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted
fever, southern tick-associated rash illness, human granulocytic anaplasmosis,
babesiosis, and viral infections with Heartland and Bourbon viruses. Knowledge
of the spatial distributions of ticks and pathogen species, and the associated
spatial risk of transmission of tick-borne diseases in the Great Plains is quite
limited. This project marshals several "big data" streams (tick occurrence data,
tick and pathogen genomic data, remote sensing data to characterize
environments) and novel scientific tools to shed light on geographic patterns
and temporal dynamics of risk of infection with the pathogens that cause these
diseases. Specifically, this project, a collaboration between University of
Kansas, Kansas State University, Pittsburgh State University, Oklahoma State
University, the University of Oklahoma, the University of Oklahoma, Norman
campus, and the University of Central Oklahoma, will involve field collections
of ticks and vertebrates hosting ticks from 12 sites in ecologically distinct
regions across Kansas and Oklahoma, which will be tested using genomic tools for
a diverse suite of pathogens; the resulting data on tick and pathogen
distributions will be the basis for detailed modeling of transmission risk using
complementary, cutting-edge tools (correlative niche models, mechanistic
population models) to achieve new syntheses of population and range dynamics.
This project will explore and develop a first automated tick identification
system based on deep-learning approaches, which will feed much more information
into the other analyses envisioned for this project in the form of detailed
distributional data. This project will also have substantial implications for
broadening participation in science, via linking senior and junior scientists
(including minority faculty members) in a joint, collaborative, and integrative
effort designed to mentor and build confidence and stature among junior team
members (faculty, postdocs, graduate students, undergraduate students) and among
faculty from teaching-focused institutions. This project will offer various
educational opportunities in the areas of big data analytics, big data access,
and disease risk mapping, which will be made broadly and openly available to the
scientific community. Finally, towards mitigating effects of tick-borne diseases
in communities across the southern Great Plains, this project will produce and
make broadly available detailed risk maps for each tick-borne disease in the
region, and create technology for automating tick identifications, to allow
citizen scientists and stakeholders in the general public better access to
information on ticks and disease risks that are personally and immediately
relevant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.