* 1920039
* MRI: Acquisition of Tabletop Scanning Electron Microscope
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Hansung Kim, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2022
* USD 172,070.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art table top Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) that greatly
benefits Purdue University Northwest's (PNW) research programs on topics ranging
from advanced manufacturing and civil and mechanical engineering to material
science and biology. The acquired SEM system will expand the research and
training infrastructure, attract and retain junior faculty, and expedite current
NSF-funded research at PNW. The SEM's enhanced nanotechnology capabilities will
allow faculty to resolve fundamental scientific questions in these research
fields--enabling significant societal benefits such as enhanced manufacturing
productivity. The instrumentation will also attract qualified and motivated
students to participate in high-impact research activities. This award will
enhance collaboration with local industry and planned growth in academic
programs. The new SEM system will be integrated into laboratory and course
curricula across multiple disciplines through live demonstrations and focused
projects, expanding access to undergraduate and graduate students in engineering
and biological science. Outreach efforts in Northwest Indiana will use the
instrument to help broaden the higher education participation of significantly
underrepresented populations and to engage and benefit local industrial
partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEM, with secondary and back scattering
electron imaging and energy dispersive spectroscopy for elemental analysis, will
help fill the gap between the magnification provided by existing optical
microscopy and atomic force microscopy. The superior imaging of this new
instrument, along with the embedded 3D surface roughness reconstruction
algorithm, will allow researchers to better understand physical phenomena at the
fundamental level. For example, to better understand process parametric
relations in microfluidic device fabrications, the researchers will use SEM to
evaluate and identify the resolution capacities of the master mold and resulting
microstructures, such as the minimum feature size, aspect ratio, and side-wall
angles for various dry film thicknesses, to achieve the required tolerance.
Deterministic lateral displacement (DLD) devices fabricated with high
resolutions will achieve high-efficiency focusing and separation of micro-
particles by precisely controlling the particle trajectories under the drag and
lift forces that can be accurately quantified. The effects of height, diameter
and sidewall angle of micro-posts and their arrangement pattern in the DLD
system on the unique laminar flow patterns can therefore be investigated with
much higher accuracy with the superior imaging capability provided by the
acquired SEM system. The SEM will also be used to study lead-free solder joint
failure mechanisms by investigating the formation and growth of tin whiskers as
a function of relative humidity and temperature for lead-free alloy compositions
used commercially. The information obtained will provide input to models that
predict tin whisker formation, which is important in helping to determine the
reliability of lead-free solder joints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.