* 1920299
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Bruce Lipshutz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 06/30/2022
* USD 573,385.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Liming Zhang from the University of
California Santa Barbara (UCSB) and colleagues Bruce Lipshutz, Trevor Hayton and
Javier Read de Alaniz have acquired a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a
liquid-nitrogen cooled probe and a probe with multinuclear capabilities. This
spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as
those that facilitate studies of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists to describe the structure of molecules. NMR is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. The cryogenic
probe provides a significant increase in sensitivity relative to standard NMR
probes while the multinuclear probe allows study of a wide range of elements
above and beyond the common hydrogen and carbon atoms. The NMR studies improve
understanding of synthetic organic/inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research. This broadly accessible instrumentation strengthens the regional
instrumentation infrastructure and helps advance the scientific careers of about
200 regular undergraduate and graduate researchers, postdocs and visiting
scholars in more than 18 research groups. The spectrometer enriches the
education and training experience of underrepresented undergraduate students in
several NSF-supported science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
programs and several hundred undergraduate students in chemistry and
biochemistry laboratory classes at UCSB and from Santa Barbara Community
College. This NMR instrumentation also facilitates research and development
(R&amp;D) efforts of several local startup companies specializing in clean
energy and food preservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer with a cryoprobe is aimed at enhancing research and education at
all levels. This acquisition especially benefits the development of a
thermochemical model for nanocluster formation and the exploration of actinide
electronic structures. The instrumentation also serves researchers studying
fluorinated functional polymers and those using boron-11 isotopes in boron-
catalyzed peptide bond formation. Finally, the spectrometer benefits the
syntheses and characterization of complex bioactive natural
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.