* 1920401
* The Development of Gender Stereotypes About STEM Abilities: A Meta-Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Courtney Tanenbaum, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,831.00

This project will study the origins of beliefs and motivational processes that
could potentially limit the full participation of girls and women in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Specifically, this
synthesis project aims to clarify mixed findings about how gender stereotypes
about STEM abilities first develop and how these stereotypes relate to gender
gaps in STEM. Some studies of children have found the expected stereotype of
superior male ability in mathematics and science, but others have found only in-
group bias or even stereotypes of female superiority. This project will
synthesize more than 25 years of empirical research across the world to
understand how demographic, contextual, and measurement factors explain these
mixed findings. For instance, children's STEM ability stereotypes may
increasingly favor boys and men as children age and learn messages in their
environments. Knowledge of these developmental trajectories can help
intervention researchers and practitioners target the earliest ages when
children begin to believe that girls and women are inferior in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of two meta-analyses that will
analyze variation in (a) mean levels of children's gender stereotypes about STEM
abilities and (b) these stereotypes relation to motivational STEM outcomes such
as confidence and interests. In both meta-analyses, focal moderators will
include child demographics, cultural contexts, and measurement characteristics.
Knowledge generated by this project will help bring clarity to the mixed
developmental literature on STEM ability stereotypes. Understanding why one
study finds stereotypes strongly favoring males, whereas another study finds the
opposite, will be critical to foster cumulative, replicable science and build
integrative theories of stereotype development. Furthermore, synthesizing how
ability stereotypes relate to outcomes such as confidence and interests can
build fundamental knowledge on how these beliefs might relate to gender gaps in
STEM participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.