* 1920249
* The Advancing Coherent and Equitable Systems of Science Education Project
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Philip Bell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project will examine how partnerships among state science leaders,
education researchers and education practitioners cultivate vertical coherence
and equity in state science education. This is an important study because in
most states, the student population is becoming more diverse, and states need
help in finding ways to better serve schools and districts within their
jurisdictions. Through this effort, state science leaders will participate in a
networked improvement community model organized to develop and test state-level
strategies. Specifically, the focus will be on the adaptation of instructional
materials and formative assessment as linked policy strategies for aligning
curriculum, instruction, and assessment and for relating instruction to the
interests and histories of local communities. State science leaders and
researchers will investigate how and under what conditions certain strategies
support the emergence of coherent and equitable state systems of science
education in which all students have opportunities to meet challenging new
science standards. The project will build knowledge and theory about the
conditions under which a network of state teams can promote coherent guidance
for culturally-based instruction in local districts and schools. Together the
partners will collaborate to diagnose current challenges to promoting coherence
and equity and then develop knowledge and resources about conditions that
promote coherence and equity by testing and studying strategies for cultivating
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An iterative design-based research approach will be
used to build foundational knowledge for the equitable implementation of the
vision of science and engineering learning that integrates disciplinary core
ideas, science and engineering practices, and crosscutting concepts working from
a cultural perspective on learning. A multiple-case study will be used to
collect data about the impact of the networked improvement community model on
leadership development to effectively improve state efforts. Surveys and
interviews will be used to gather information on co-designing efforts, use and
adaptation of resources, and knowledge gained by state science leaders. Data
will also be collected on political conditions and infrastructures of teamwork
as potential facilitators and barriers to the development of strategic knowledge
leadership. Analyses of data will identify patterns or configurations of
conditions associated with growth in science leaders' strategic knowledge
leadership related to equity. This technique will generate evidence-based claims
for how and when supports and barriers matter for growth in strategic knowledge
leadership for equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.