* 1920593
* Mind, Brain and Education in STEM Learning: Research, Policy and Practice Collaboratory
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Ido Davidesco, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2020
* USD 49,892.00

This award to New York University will provide support for a workshop on Mind,
Brain, and Education scheduled to be held in New York City in January 2020. It
will bring researchers from multiple fields (e.g., education research, cognitive
science, neuroscience) together with education practitioners (e.g., teachers,
district leaders, parents) to share ideas about brain research and STEM learning
in both formal and informal contexts. It will be an opportunity for researchers
to share the results of their cutting-edge work on such topics as numerical
processing and STEM problem solving with educators and, in turn, for educators
to have direct input to researchers about issues concerning the translation to
practice. It will also provide educators with the opportunity to help drive
basic and applied research agendas. The goal of the workshop is to develop new
models for sustained collaborations among researchers, educators, parents, and
policy influencers. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research program,
which supports fundamental research that advances the research literature on
STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will explore innovative models
of interaction between researchers and educators in the nascent field of Mind,
Brain, and Education, centering on collaboratories - table discussions on
specific topics led by a range of top experts so as to foster dialogue - as well
as networking sessions, rapid-fire talks, keynote addresses, and a session
devoted to discovering new models for sustained interaction of the gathered
communities. The specific topics will may include cognitive neuroscientific
findings related to inducing durable memories in STEM, cognitive findings about
the geometric intuitions that underlie formal learning in mathematics,
establishing researcher-practitioner partnerships in STEM education, teaching
science at the secondary school level, supporting museum-university
collaborations, and best practices in public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.