* 1920407
* Momentary Assessment of Research Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Allan Cohen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,420,571.00

A growing number of studies show that participation in undergraduate research
experiences (UREs), including course-based undergraduate research experiences
(CUREs), may influence a student's persistence in science, that is, whether a
student graduates from college with a science degree. However, these research
experiences have been widely implemented for many years without much knowledge
of the specific characteristics of the experiences that are necessary to
positively influence student persistence. This knowledge gap is critical to
address because undergraduate research experiences vary widely in their designs
and thus in their likely effectiveness. Furthermore, most studies of research
experiences ask students to provide their perceptions at the end of the
experience rather than during the experience. This delay can be problematic in
several ways. For example, in end of experience assessments, students may
overemphasize more recent events. In addition, end of experience assessment does
not capture changes in students' experiences over time. This research project
will use a method called ecological momentary assessment to document students'
research experiences at multiple times per week, enabling the investigators to
better understand student experiences as they occur. This information has the
potential to provide new insights into how UREs and CUREs influence student
persistence in science. The research will involve students in introductory and
upper-level research experiences, including UREs and CUREs in genetics,
biochemistry, microbiology, ecology, and other life science disciplines. The
study will include students at nine different universities, including those with
high enrollments of students from groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by self-efficacy theory and social
cognitive career theory, this EHR Core Research project will characterize key
features of UREs and CUREs in the life sciences and how these features relate to
students' development as scientists. It will also address methodological
shortcomings of previous studies of undergraduate student research experiences
by adapting ecological momentary assessment (EMA) and topic modeling to identify
recurring themes in students' responses to EMAs. In Phase 1 the researchers will
test and refine the research methodologies. The team will use EMA to: 1) collect
and analyze data from a diverse group of 750 students who are participating in
UREs and CUREs at nine universities; 2) characterize aspects of the experiences
that are hypothesized to affect student development (amount of time, nature of
collaborations, levels of epistemic involvement); and 3) identify other aspects
of research experiences that are salient to students. In addition, the
investigators will use established scales to measure students' science self-
efficacy, sources of efficacy, scientific identity, outcome expectations, and
intentions to continue in science before and after participating in UREs. In
Phase 2, the project team will collect and analyze data from a second cohort of
750 students, and use structural equation modeling to better understand how
features of research experiences serve as sources of self-efficacy for students.
In addition, the project team will identify the features of research experiences
that relate to changes in students' science self-efficacy, science identity,
expectations about further education or a career in science, and intended and
actual persistence in science. The team will also explore whether and how the
results differ with respect to student sociodemographic variables. The research
results are expected to provide a better understanding of the important aspects
of research experiences, and to provide insights into how to design UREs and
CUREs to support all students in realizing desired educational outcomes,
especially their persistence in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.