* 1920248
* MRI: Acquisition of A Single Crystal Diffractometer With A Silver Microsource and A Detector Optimized for Silver Radiation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Kenneth Poeppelmeier, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 308,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Instrumentation Programs. Professor Mercouri Kanatzidis from Northwestern
University and colleagues Kenneth Poeppelmeier, Sossina Haile, Steven Jacobsen
and Danna Freedman are acquiring a single crystal X-ray diffractometer equipped
with a silver micro-source, goniometer, and an efficient detector optimized for
silver-radiation. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and
precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule,
including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the
spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution where students
receive hands-on access to the diffractometers and collect data on their own
experimental samples. The new diffractometer is also used for the biannual
international Summer School co-organized with the American Crystallographic
Association and Northwestern University. Collaborations are in place with other
research institutions such as the University of Chicago, the Ohio State
University, Illinois Institute of Technology, Loyola University Chicago, Lake
Forest College and Roosevelt University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially used
for exploring solid state chemistry of chalcogenides and analyzing solid-state-
related electrochemical processes. The diffractometer is also utilized for the
analyses of synthesized compounds and minerals as well as synthesized oxides and
oxide-fluorides. The instrument is employed in projects with applications in
sustainable energy, geology, planetary sciences, ceramics and
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.