* 1920166
* MRI: Acquisition of Focused Ion Beam-Scanning Electron Microscope for the Multidisciplinary Research and Education at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Sherry Krayesky-Self, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 09/30/2022
* USD 997,589.00

The principal aim of this project is to facilitate multidisciplinary research
for three-dimensional reconstructions of highly complex microscopic samples that
have not yet been achieved but are crucial for the interpretation of topology
and geometry of surface and shape attributes of various types of specimens
relating to energy materials, petroleum, geology, and biological systems. The
project will significantly transform the study of the nano/microstructure and
chemical composition of a wide variety of inorganic and organic compounds and
provide scientific insights that would otherwise be unattainable, and will be
integrated with other analytical tools. The project will also encompass
significant educational and outreach activities, including collaboration with
local schools and Science Museum, multi-year undergraduate and graduate research
programs, advanced technical training and inclusive workforce development for
future electron microscopists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals of this project are
to (i) investigate the role of interface structures on the durability of high-
performance fuel cell electrodes, (ii) enable an understanding of materials for
solid-state batteries, (iii) unravel the unexpected catalytic activity in
mesoporous oxides, (iv) explore the role of nano/microstructures on the
properties of magnetic materials, (v) conduct research on geomaterials, self-
healing concrete, and cosmic dust, (vi) characterize complex micro-fracture
propagation in heterogeneous unconventional resources, (vii) understanding the
mechanisms of self-healing concrete under harsh environmental conditions, (viii)
improve the design of absorbents for the treatment of hydraulic fracturing
flowback water, (ix) analyze presolar grains to identify astrophysical
conditions, (x) conduct biodiversity, developmental, morphological, cytological
and biomineralization research in vastly varying fields pertaining to
microstructures of calcified coralline algae, fern spores, and plant organs,
(xi) understand functional roles of fibroblast growth factor receptors signaling
on astrocyte development, and (xii) resolve microstructures in photosynthesis
proteins, and in extracellular matrix of tumor cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by CBET-MRI Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.