* 1920182
* MRI: Development of an Instrument for a Comprehensive Study of Alzheimer's Disease: Multimodal Imaging, Visualization, Machine Learning and Therapeutic Brain Stimulation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Naphtali Rishe, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,423,641.00

This project develops an instrument to establish an integrated infrastructure
not only in terms of multiple recording modalities, but also in terms of
collection and management of structural, functional, and metabolic brain data.
As an application it utilizes the comprehensive study of Alzheimer's Disease
(AD),notably neuropsychological testing, genetics, and demographic factors, all
linked to a database with common evaluations and standardized measures, thus
setting up an environment most suitable for multi-site studies and the merging
of data across sites. This instrument is expected to create an appropriate
environment for seeking the gold standards of machine/deep learning (i.e.,
stability, sparsity, interpretability, accuracy, and ability to handle missing
data inherent to clinical studies and to confront multicollinearity--an
intrinsic characteristic from the repeated measures design in longitudinal
studies). This work integrates a Neuroimaging Web-Services Interface, Multimodal
Neuroimaging Platform, and a Computational Platform. The instrument is created
to overcome the opacity of ensemble methods such as ANNs (Artificial Neural
Networks) through sparse, and yet highly interpretable, decision trees and
processes. The deliberation process for a diagnosis or prognosis is likely to be
enhanced by learning what significant features are essential to lead to a given
classification and/or prediction outcome. The modular structure of the design
allows extensions to other application domains that involve other neurological
disorders where brain imaging is part of any subject critical care. Utilizing
the instrument through the web interface as a cyber-physical system may enable
the research community to apply new data mining concepts or to execute novel
classification and prediction algorithms on a multimodal and computationally-
effective neuroimaging platform, thus opening the field for multi-site studies,
as well as extensive data sharing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This sophisticated
instrument allows for training new graduates who combine engineering and
computing know-how into the fields of bioscience, computing, and medicine. It
significantly promotes science and national health by eliciting new
understanding of a disease that according to the data reported in 2017 by the
Alzheimer's Association, affects 10% of the population over 65 (with growing
costs estimated above $259 billion).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.