* 1920851
* Designing to Overcome the Asymmetry Problem in  Computer and Information Science Service Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Amy Voida, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2023
* USD 307,207.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by enabling computer science educators to deliver more
valuable service learning experiences. Service learning is an authentic
educational experience in which students provide service to a community partner
while learning content knowledge, professional skills, and critical thinking.
Service learning can also shape the professional identities of students, while
improving communication skills, empathy, and civic awareness. Though all of
these general outcomes align with educational and accreditation goals in
computer and information science, very little empirical research has been
conducted to understand instructional design choices in these disciplines that
maximize benefits for students, educators, or community partners. In many cases,
the needs of community partners are minimized in computer and information
science service learning to the detriment of community relationships and student
learning. This Engaged Student Learning track Exploration and Design tier
project is designed to study the various benefits of service learning in
computer and information science to students, educators, and community partners.
The project aims to identify best principles in curriculum design for equitably
balancing benefits across stakeholders and to co-design a suite of curricular
and instructional resources to support educators in delivering more valuable
service learning experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer and information
science service learning courses often emphasize student outcomes over community
partner outcomes, limiting benefits to both students and communities. The goal
of this project is to develop resources for designing curriculum that more
equitably balances benefits across stakeholders. This research will triangulate
across a mixed-methods research design that will analyze data gathered through
surveys, document analyses and interviews to gain a deep understanding of the
intentions, costs, and benefits of computer and information science service
learning from the viewpoint of educators, students, administrators, and
community stakeholders. The project team will incorporate initial research
findings into participatory design workshops, the design of curricular
resources, and pilot course offerings. A publicly available repository of these
resources, broadly advertised, is designed to enable computer and information
science educators to create service learning experiences that maximize benefits
for students, educators, and community partners. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.