* 1920335
* MRI: Acquisition of an Energy-Filtering, Direct Electron Detector for Advanced Soft and Hard Materials Research with In Situ Transmission Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Robert Nemanich, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,283,060.00

This project provides a novel detection system for an electron microscope
enabling unprecedented advances in imaging and spectroscopy to resolve
fundamental scientific issues in biology, energy, environmental sciences and
quantum information technologies. Such advances make enormous contributions
toward understanding how atoms arrange and bond in materials in both their
native and working states, thereby providing completely new insights that
enhances understanding and increases our ability to manipulate and control
chemical, material, and biological systems. The researchers have a strong
commitment to diversity and inclusion in their research, outreach, and
educational activities. This novel system is accessible to researchers outside
ASU and thus give significant regional impact. The wonders of
materials/biological structures and functionalities obtained from this system
are communicated to rural and underprivileged K-12 communities through the well-
developed programs in the Fulton Schools of Engineering and the College of
Liberal Arts and Science. In addition, the researchers have developed programs
for student leadership initiatives and female participation related to materials
and microscopy at the Microscopy Society of America, as well as in the annual
Electron Microscopy Winter School hosted at ASU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
system is a novel, high-sensitivity, energy-filtering, direct electron detector
to install on an aberration-corrected in situ FEI Titan environmental
transmission electron microscope. This new system provides unprecedented
sensitivity for imaging and spectroscopy, and mitigates the long-standing
electron beam induced damage problems that has plagued analysis of many
materials and biological systems. This project enables four key research areas
that have been identified by their scientific importance and impact to the
broader communities: (1) Understanding the structure of soft/biological
materials and their interfaces with hard materials. (2) Observing functionally
important defects and structural heterogeneities in zeolites and metal-organic
frameworks at atomic resolution. (3) In situ, real-time, atomic-level
identification and dynamic characterization of active sites in catalysts. (4)
Developing single-photon sources (SPSs) from point defects in solid-state
materials is critical for many scalable quantum
technologies&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.