* 1920619
* Collaborative Research: Validity Evidence for Measurement in Mathematics Education (VM2ED)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Erin Krupa, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,390,727.00

As education has shifted more towards data-driven policy and research
initiatives in the last several decades, data for policy-related aspects are
often expected to be more quantitative in nature. This has led to the increase
in use of more quantitative measures in STEM education, including mathematics
education. Unfortunately, evidence regarding the validity and reliability of
mathematics education measures is lacking. Furthermore, the evidence for
validity for quantitative tools and measures is not conceptualized or defined
consistently by researchers in the field. The purpose of this project is to
fully explore the mathematics education literature to synthesize what validity
evidence is available for quantitative assessments in mathematics education.
Drawing on the results of the synthesis study, the researchers will design,
curate, and disseminate a repository of quantitative assessments used in
mathematics education teaching and research. The researchers will also create
materials and online training for a variety of scholars and practitioners to use
the repository. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will address two main research
questions: 1) How might validity evidence related to quantitative assessments
used in mathematics education research be categorized and described? and 2) What
validity evidence exists for quantitative instruments used in mathematics
education scholarship since 2000? Researchers will use a cross-comparative
methodology which involves conducting a literature search and then analyzing and
categorizing features of instruments. The research team will examine cases
(i.e., assessments described in manuscripts) in which quantitative instruments
have been used, alongside specific features such as the construct measured,
evidence related to sources of validity, and study sample. The team will then
design, develop, and deploy a free online digital repository for the
categorization of instruments and describe their associated validity
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.