* 1920368
* MRI: Development of Joint-use Ultra-fast Pump-probe Instrument for Thin-films Experimental Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Albrecht Jander, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,056,253.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This instrument development project
delivers a versatile, shared-use experimental platform to enable ultrafast,
pulsed laser measurements to systematically determine the properties and
investigate fundamental physical processes in a variety of new optical, magnetic
and electronic materials of interest for application in solar cells, information
storage, low-power computing and signal processing. The platform is available
for use to researchers nationwide, via the National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure initiative. It, vitally, also serves in the education and
training of the next-generation of scientists and engineers in advanced
instrument design and ultrafast laser measurement techniques for
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The instrument
combines robust commercial components with custom-built subsystems to provide
the experimental flexibility necessary to support diverse measurement needs. The
laser pulses are tunable over a wide spectral range (258 nm to 2500 nm) and
temporal characteristics (25 fs to 10 ps) with a repetition rate from 1 kHz to 1
MHz. The instrument integrates a magneto-optic cryostat to vary the temperature
(1.7 K to 350 K) and magnetic field (up to 7 T) environment of the sample and
allow steady-state to radio-frequency (15 GHz) electrical excitation and
detection. Custom-designed optical subsystems enable laser pulse stretching and
compression, programmable spatial modulation of the pulses, and scanning
confocal microscopy. Control software, with remote front panels, allows virtual
use. Examples of studies supported by the instrument include vibrational
coupling and charge-carrier dynamics in perovskite thin films, determination of
anisotropic elastic properties for engineered functional materials, magnon-
phonon coupling in novel magnetostrictive materials, and intrinsic internal
quantum efficiency and ultrafast electron dynamics of materials used in solar
absorber devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.