* 1920129
* MRI: Acquisition of High Performance Computing Facilities for Research, Instruction and Outreach
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Henry Castejon, Wilkes University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 486,615.00

This project aims to build and deploy a high-performance computing cluster to
facilitate inter-disciplinary and collaborative research at Wilkes University.
The cluster will support a broad range of computationally demanding research
efforts including development of algorithms for computational chemistry and
materials science, modeling protein folding and misfolding, predicting
catastrophic geological events, large-scale analysis of bacterial genomes, and
analysis of microwave tomography data for medical imaging, among others. Each of
these projects will yield positive societal impacts including environmental
hazard prevention, understanding and preservation of ecosystems, design of new
nanomaterials, and detecting and treating diseases. These projects share the
common theme of pattern recognition within large, complex, and noisy datasets
and simulations. Thus, this instrument will enable a collaborative and multi-
disciplinary approach for the execution of these projects while enhancing
pedagogical activities within the college. The instrument will be administered
so as to provide hands-on training for undergraduate students in modern
computational techniques across multiple disciplines. The instrument will be the
key piece of a new facility that will ultimately support the scholarship
activities of a diverse group of investigators working mainly with first-
generation college students as well as outreach activities aimed to inspire and
encourage underrepresented groups and girls into scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid architecture of the instrument will
simultaneously support data- and memory-intensive projects as well as real-time
modeling and visualization. The primary computational engine, consisting of
8-nodes each possessing 24 computing cores (spanned across 2 processors), 4
commercial grade graphics cards, and 96 GB of RAM, will double as a
visualization engine with the aid of virtualization software. This will allow
the instrument to perform a variety of computational tasks such as molecular
dynamics simulations, medium scale finite element analyses, training of smaller
neural networks, performing medium-scale bioinformatics analyses, and MCMC
analyses/ Bayesian modelling while enabling collaborative work among faculty and
students as well as outreach activities through virtualization and
visualization. Additionally, the cluster will include 4 ultra-high-performance
nodes each containing 40 CPU cores, 1.5 TB of RAM, and 2 state-of-the-art GPUs.
These nodes will facilitate extraordinarily demanding calculations such as the
training of very large neural networks, simulating molecular systems with
hundreds of thousands of atoms, and simultaneous alignment of multiple genomes.
By using a combination of a standard batch queuing system as well as more modern
container-based resource allocation schemes, this instrument will serve its
ultimate goals of enabling computationally intensive, multi-disciplinary
collaborative research at Wilkes University and providing hands-on experience
and training for undergraduate students in key skills required for our nation's
growing scientific work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.