* 1920242
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Mass Spectrometer for Atmospheric Ecometabolomics Research
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 448,130.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemical
Instrumentation Programs. Professor James Smith from the University of
California Irvine and colleagues Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, Alex Guenther, Sergey
Nizkorodov and Celia Faiola are acquiring a high-performance quadrupole mass
spectrometer combined with an Orbitrap mass analyzer and equipped with an ultra-
high-pressure liquid chromatograph and tandem capabilities. In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in complex samples.
In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they
are ionized into ions and the ions' masses are measured. This highly sensitive
technique allows the structure of molecules in complex mixtures to be studied.
An instrument with a liquid chromatograph can separate mixtures of compounds
before they reach the mass spectrometer. This mass spectrometer can resolve ions
with a precision that allows determination of molecular formulas and provide
essential molecular information using tandem mass spectrometric capabilities.
The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and
regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving diverse groups
of students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. This instrument provides opportunities for collaboration between
chemists, earth system scientists, and ecologists in studies of the soil-plant-
atmosphere continuum and its response to global
modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies of
atmospheric phenomena. The mass spectrometer is used to investigate ecosystem
functioning, including specific processes such as cyclic and seasonal natural
phenomena known as phenology, succession, and response to biotic and abiotic
stresses, as well as the integrated dynamics of ecological response to
environmental changes. The instrument also aids researchers exploring a
metabolomics approach to understanding the formation and growth of atmospheric
particles from the oxidation of biogenic volatile emissions by hydoxo species,
ozone, and nitrogen oxide radicals. This instrument is also employed to perform
chemical analysis of aerosol particles formed from biomass burning to better
understand the processes controlling its formation and atmospheric impacts. Data
from this instrument provides information on the relationship between health
impacts and the molecular composition, particularly of the organic component, or
ambient aerosol particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.