* 1920953
* Collaborative Research: Microfluidic Mm-Wave RF Devices with Integrated Actuation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* R Daniel Maynes, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 248,953.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wireless technology has traditionally used
radio waves to transmit and receive data. High data rate demands driven by
mobile communications are being addressed by emerging wireless communication
systems. These use new frequency bands such as mm-wave (THz) where a large
frequency spectrum is available. Wireless communication in mm-wave bands,
however, faces challenges such as reductions in signal strength with distance
and blockage or reflection of signals. These challenges drive the development of
new antennas and devices that can maximize the signal strength with high
efficiency and rapidly adapt their operation. This project focuses on an
innovative microfluidic based approach to enable such mm-wave antennas and
devices with reduced cost and enhanced efficiency. These novel devices will be
enabled by integrated compact actuation mechanisms. Advances from this project
can immediately benefit wireless communication as well as emerging mm-wave
applications such as identification tags and smart appliances. The
interdisciplinary nature of the program is expected to offer unique training and
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. The PIs will
develop new curriculum content that focuses on problems faced by engineers
working on interdisciplinary projects. The project also plans to expand research
opportunities for high-school students and students from underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microfluidic
reconfiguration techniques have drawn interest to address efficiency,
tunability, and power handling issues of reconfigurable radio-frequency (RF)
devices. Unfortunately, the majority of the proposed devices cannot operate in
mm-wave bands due to the challenges in manufacturing, RF modeling, and
utilization of liquid metals exhibiting lower conductivities and oxidization
issues. This project focuses on a more recent microfluidic reconfiguration
technique that is suitable for mm-wave band operation due to its reliance on
selectively metallized plates (SMPs) repositionable within microfluidic
channels. The major goal is to integrate novel actuation mechanisms with the SMP
based microfluidic devices and enable their practical operation in mm-wave
frequencies to achieve superior performances in efficiency, tunability, and
power handling. Two distinct actuation mechanisms based on piezoelectric disks
and electrowetting (EW) will be investigated to allow discovery of a broad range
of capabilities. Through refinement of fabrication methods, flow
characterizations, and RF design; the piezoelectric actuation will be optimized
to achieve maximum RF reconfiguration speed. EW-based actuation will create a
microfluidic linear stepper motor for addressing the high precision motion
requirements. The trade-offs in plate alignment accuracy, selection of liquids,
device geometry and RF performance will be investigated to establish the
fundamental design and fabrication guidelines. In the RF design domain, the
project will introduce novel capabilities by modeling the motion-dependent RF
parasitics of SMPs. The proposed actuation and modeling methods are applicable
for a large class of mm-wave devices. This three-year program is particularly
tailored for addressing the challenging needs imposed by the mm-wave beam-
steering antenna arrays. The program aims to investigate novel switches, phase
shifters, and beamforming networks by addressing their design (i.e. RF
parasitics modeling, size reduction, high efficiency, power handling) and
actuation aspects (integration, resilience to vibration and impact, lifetime,
speed).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.