* 1920095
* MRI:  Acquisition of Leica STED Super-resolution and FALCON Microscope System for the Clemson Light Imaging Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Scott Husson, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 493,330.00

An award is made to Clemson University to acquire super-resolution fluorescence
lifetime imaging system upgrades to an existing multiphoton/spectral confocal
imaging system. These added capabilities will significantly enhance the research
objectives of more than 30 principle investigators at Clemson University. As
this equipment will be placed in Clemson Light Imaging Facility, a core research
facility, it will be accessible by the entire Clemson research community and to
the extended Clemson research family, including nearby universities and
businesses, through collaborative partnerships and outreach programs. From
nanoparticles to cellular exosomes and organelles, there is a great need for
increased resolution in fluorescence-based imaging studies, which the super-
resolution capacity will provide. The fluorescence lifetime imaging system
generates images based upon the decay of a fluorophore's fluorescence. This
"lifetime" provides information about the fluorophore's direct environment,
producing an image that contains not only structural information, but
information about pH, ion concentrations, reduced oxygen species, and molecular
binding as well. These systems will serve as avenues of training in advanced
imaging techniques for the next generation of great researchers and inventors.
At Clemson University, this current cohort of scientists is made of
undergraduates, graduate students and
postdocs/technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the increased resolution
afforded by super-resolution, researchers can visualize extremely small
structures such as cellular exosomes, which play a role in cell-cell
communication. Studies of actin filament formation dynamics in ciliated
organisms can lead to new insights in cell motility, and in neuronal dendrites,
where actin controls the size and shape of synaptic connections, scientists can
begin to unravel the mysteries of learning and memory in the brain. The addition
of the fluorescence lifetime imaging system will provide unprecedented imaging
capabilities for tracking changes in cellular structure and metabolism within
microenvironments from biofilms to tissues. The additional environmental data
generated through fluorescence lifetime imaging will enable greater coupling of
molecular modeling and experimental efforts, enabling the development of more
robust simulations that can aide biologists and even engineers. Images and data
generated through the use of these systems will be publicly disseminated through
a variety of peer-reviewed journals and publications as well as at scientific
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.