* 1920357
* MRI: ACQUISITION OF A WAVELENGTH DISPERSIVE X-RAY FLUORESCENCE SPECTROMETER FOR TEACHING AND RESEARCH AT FRESNO STATE
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Aric Mine, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2021
* USD 352,088.00

This award will permit the purchase of a new Wavelength Dispersive X-ray
Fluorescence Spectrometer to replace an aging instrument purchased in 2002. The
new instrument will open up many new research avenues. The new analytical
instrument will be an important tool in educating the next generation of
scientists. These analytical instruments allow students to participate as
partners in research. By having such equipment available, students can ask
questions and form and test their own hypotheses, and perhaps most importantly,
revise their hypotheses as they collect new data. The researchers and students
will use the instrument to address questions such as the sources of heavy metal
contaminants in groundwaters of the San Joaquin Valley of central California, an
area where access to clean drinking water can be problematic for many
residents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will fund a new X-ray fluorescence
spectrometer to provide essential support for the following: (a) Studies of
ancient and active volcanoes that provide tests of how and why volcanoes erupt;
(b) Examination of metamorphic rocks of the California Coast Ranges, to
determine how subductions zones (the collision of two tectonic plates) affect
the kinds of rocks that are produced at Earth's surface; and (c) An
interdisciplinary collaboration to study how soils interact with groundwater to
affect the quality of drinking water in California's Central Valley. Many small
towns in the "Valley" rely on groundwater for drinking, but many such
communities have groundwater that is contaminated by uranium, arsenic, chromium
and other heavy metals. This collaborative study will combine expertise in
microbiology, mineralogy and groundwater chemistry to identify how such
contaminants enter groundwater, which will lead to viable mitigation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.