* 1920147
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU-Accelerated Research Cluster
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Pengyu Hong, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 349,983.00

Large scale data analysis capability has become the key factor that is driving
rapid progress in all fields of science. This project will significantly expand
the high-performance computing resources at Brandeis University, by acquiring
state of the art GPU computing machines that enable big data driven research.
The new capability will support integrated research projects across a variety of
disciplines, including the areas of Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry, Computer
Science, Math, Physics, and Psychology. It will also provide a platform at
Brandeis University for training the next generation workforce to develop and
apply deep learning techniques, thus accelerating discoveries in basic research
and technological innovations. The project will enable Brandeis researchers and
instructors to utilize modern computing techniques to broaden participation in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the new resources will include 16 GPU nodes
and 1 storage node on a 10Gbit network fabric to allow rapid internode
communications. This project will enable Brandeis researchers to conduct big
data driven convergence research that enhances our understanding of the Rules of
Life in areas ranging from neuroscience to virus assembly, and addresses the
fundamental problems underlying societal needs (e.g., green energy). The
emerging interdisciplinary research activities will also create an inclusive
environment for developing novel and more powerful big data driven techniques.
The project will enable courses and workshops that train faculty, postdocs,
graduate students, and undergraduate students to effectively use state of the
art GPU computing and deep learning techniques. It will allow Brandeis to
further integrate its education and research via a current NSF funded REU site
at Brandeis Materials Research Science and Engineering Research Center. In
addition, it will enhance Brandeis' ability to broaden participation in STEM,
especially by women and underrepresented minorities, through several existing
programs, including the NSF funded REU site, the Transitional Year Program for
economically disadvantaged students, the local Society for Advancement of
Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science chapter at Brandeis, the
Brandeis Science Posse Program, and the Brandeis Scientists in the Classroom
Workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.