* 1920054
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Enhancing Undergraduate Biology Education through Science Communication
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Anna Sher, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 74,975.00

Confronting the accelerated pace of environmental change demands both a
scientifically literate public and a new generation of ecologists and other
scientists prepared to communicate scientific knowledge to educators,
policymakers, managers, and others. In recent years, efforts have been made to
enhance the communication skills of graduate students and faculty. However,
undergraduate students far outnumber scientists with advanced degrees and are
likely to interact frequently with a broad set of public stakeholders. Biology
undergraduates are ideally situated to help translate science and reach a broad
audience. To better serve these roles, undergraduates need formal training and
practice in science communication. The SciComm RCN-UBE will unify a group of
researchers dedicated to improving the communication skills of undergraduate
students so they may more effectively convey scientific discoveries to the
public. Effective science communication of all types engages citizens in
scientific practices and discovery, educates policymakers, and facilitates an
accurate representation of the scientific process and its
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work to enhance undergraduate science
communication is currently happening in silos with little communication between
them. There is thus a need to bring practitioners together to assess best
practices and articulate a clear research agenda. To that end, the SciComm
Network has two objectives: 1) build a collaborative, interdisciplinary
community of scholars dedicated to training undergraduate students in effective
science communication for the public; and 2) disseminate teaching tools,
articulate a research agenda, and plan for objective evaluation of undergraduate
science communication training programs. These objectives will be achieved by
holding a workshop to facilitate collaboration between faculty from eleven
diverse institutions--public and private universities, minority-serving
institutions, a museum, a military academy, and community colleges--evaluating
existing science communication programs and generating a web-based repository of
undergraduate science communication resources. SciComm also aims to identify
outstanding "grand challenges" in science communication education and consult
with science learning researchers and evaluators to provide quantitative and
qualitative assessments of the role of training in developing undergraduate
communication skills, content knowledge, and self-efficacy. In this way, SciComm
will move the field beyond acknowledging the need to train undergraduate
students in science communication to improving how it is done, thereby impacting
the perception and understanding of science by the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this project is being provided by the
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) program in recognition of the
project's alignment with the overarching goals of the IUSE: EHR
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.