* 1920050
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal and Tip-Enhanced Raman and Photoluminescence Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Saiful Khondaker, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2021
* USD 424,900.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;A traditional optical microscopy, even with
the best possible spatial resolution that can be achieved, is not sufficient to
study very small structures, such as the ones often found in nature,
nanotechnology and small-scale engineering. In this project, an advanced
scanning probe microscopy system allows scientists and engineers to overcome
this limitation. Light is reflected off a nanoscale tip of the microscope to
explore fine structures and discern composition of complex materials. The
ability to span multiple length scales, from bulk to a scale approaching that of
molecules, offers new understanding of the heterogeneities contributing to
properties in complex natural and engineered systems. The project significantly
enhances research and education capabilities across the boundaries of STEM
(Science Technology Engineering Math) disciplines, while providing new
opportunities in graduate and undergraduate research training and education.
These activities serve a diverse population at the University of Central Florida
(UCF), a Hispanic Serving Institution, and the Southern US.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the
acquisition of an integrated confocal, tip-enhanced Raman system (TERS) and tip-
enhanced photoluminescence (TEPL) microscope at UCF. The platform implements the
principle of tip-enhanced near-field optics on an atomic force microscope to
surpass the diffraction limit of conventional Raman confocal microscopy. The
TERS configuration achieves a lateral resolution of approximately 10 nm. The
microscope is equipped with several excitation lasers, covering most of the
visible wavelengths plus near infrared , to accommodate a wide range of research
projects. The system enables interdisciplinary research to understand the
structure-property relationships of a broad range of emerging materials
including two-dimensional materials, perovskites, nanoparticles, biomaterials,
pesticides, composites, soft tissues (e.g., plant cells), meteorites and
asteroids for applications in electronics, optoelectronics, catalysis,
biosensing, nanomedicine, nano-agriculture and planetary
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.