* 1920462
* CICI: RDP: Enforcing Security and Privacy Policies to Protect Research Data
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Yuan Tian, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2023
* USD 924,503.00

Advances in computer systems over the past decade have laid a solid foundation
for data collection at a staggering scale. Data generated from end-user devices
has tremendous value to the research community. For example, mobile and
Internet-of-Things devices can participate in large-scale Internet-based
measurement or monitoring of patient's health conditions. While ground-breaking
discovered may occur, malicious attacks or unintentional data leaks threaten the
research data. Such a threat is hard to predict and difficult to recover from
once it happens. Preventative and defensive measures should be taken where data
is generated in order to protect private, valuable data from the attackers.
Currently, there are efforts that try to regulate data management, for example,
a research application might have a privacy policy that describes how the user
data is being collected and protected. However, there is a disconnect between
these documented policies and the implementations of a research project. In this
project, the investigators propose to interpret the documented policies and
enforce them in research projects, in order to protect the privacy of research
data. This work can significantly reduce researchers' overhead in implementing
policy-compliant code and reduce the complexity of protecting research
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators provide a
solution that protects research data using policies mandated by different
regulatory entities, such as an application store and an Institutional Review
Board (IRB). The system utilizes Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to
extract security and privacy requirements from unstructured regulatory documents
and translates these requirements to code that can patch a program that does not
comply with the policies. The solution covers the lifetime of research data
protection, from data collection to data storage, and data processing. This
research has two thrusts. First, the investigators will build novel NLP
techniques to extract security and privacy policies from unstructured, sparsely-
labeled documents such as IRB protocols, and privacy disclosure of research
applications. Second, the investigators will enforce these extracted policies in
code, through context-aware program analysis to discover inconsistencies between
a researcher's implementation and the extracted policies, and instrument
researcher?s code to enforce compliant program behavior. The results of this
work will have a transformative impact on the development of the next generation
research data protection techniques, and more defensive security and privacy
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.