* 1920796
* Advancing Computational Grounded Theory for Audiovisual Data from STEM Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Nigel Bosch, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,313,855.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 19-508. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
EHR Core Research project is conducting methodological research on the
computational analysis of video data focused on the social and spatial
dimensions of STEM learning in classrooms. Video data are complex. They involve
visual, acoustic, spatial, and temporal features that can be reduced in several
ways. To date, analysis of video data of STEM classrooms has not been able to
leverage computational power to take advantage of their richness. However,
recent advancements in data science, coupled with existing speech analytics
methods, make it possible to computationally identify important features from
video in ways that preserve complexity and nuance. These advancements will
improve research replicability. The methods developed through this project will
facilitate use of sophisticated computational analysis with video data by more
researchers. Application of these new methods will help increase the scale and
generalizability of video research and lead to the building of new theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project builds on state-of-the-art computer
vision and speech analytics methods tested on video data collected in STEM
classrooms. It does so within a computational grounded theory methodological
framework, which leverages the interpretive power of grounded analytical
approaches with the processing power of computational methods. Specifically, two
types of computational analysis procedures will be produced: (a) extracting
meaningful features from video and audio data of STEM classrooms, and (b)
conducting exploratory pattern identification using these extracted features. To
develop these procedures, existing large-scale video datasets of STEM classrooms
will be used to test and refine increasingly sophisticated analyses, which will
also be used to demonstrate the application of these methods to investigate the
social and spatial dimensions of STEM classrooms. The project focuses on
integrating these methods to improve their power and leverages existing large-
scale datasets of STEM classrooms, such that the methods developed can be tested
on realistic data. The datasets are extensive enough to support the
investigation of a wide range of research questions, including high-inference
questions about students' participation in disciplinary practices. Finally, by
pairing computational and grounded analytical methods, the project is developing
methods that have the potential to enhance and test construct validity of the
patterns found in the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.