* 1920270
* RCN-UBE: Development of an Inclusive Community for the Instruction of Visualizing Biomolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Daniel Dries, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 536,489.00

Today's biochemistry and life sciences students need an understanding of
molecular structure if they are to make the critical advances in areas such as
personalized medicine, agriculture, and biofuels necessary for the future
welfare of humanity. Given the importance of molecular structures, images of
biomolecules are extensively used in biochemistry and molecular biology
textbooks and classrooms. However, these figures are usually static and do not
fully convey complex structure/function relationships that happen in three
dimensions, especially to novice undergraduate learners. Furthermore,
instructors seldom explore whether students can extract key structural features
and relationships from them. This project will develop strategies and
assessments for evaluating students' biomolecular visual literacy skills by
creating a network of biochemistry and molecular biology instructors. Working in
teams, these instructors will develop assessments with improved accessibility
for colorblind individuals that probe students' visualization skills. Following
a peer-review process, a subset of these tools will be made freely available on
an online repository. By working as a trans-institutional community of practice,
the network of instructors will facilitate more robust and more universally
understood instruction in the visualization of
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the previously
developed molecular visualization framework at BioMolViz.org. The BioMolViz
framework defines twelve overarching themes in visual literacy that are
subdivided into learning goals and objectives. To further populate it,
assessment instruments will be created to evaluate student progress in achieving
the visual literacy learning objectives in the four overarching themes
identified by educators in our previous work as being of greatest importance to
the community--monomer recognition, alternate rendering, molecular interactions,
and structure-function relationships. Following creation and peer review,
iteratively revised questions will be piloted in classrooms of network members.
Item-response theory will be applied using the Rasch Model to further test the
instruments for reliability to determine which items should be included in the
online repository. The data collected from these studies will be used to improve
the methods for future assessment development and establish a community of
practice for the explicit instruction of molecular visualization
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this project is being provided by
the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE: EHR) program in recognition of
the project's alignment with the overarching goals of the IUSE: EHR
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.