* 1920421
* Am I Smart Enough to be an Engineer? Study of Engineering Students' Beliefs and Identities Across Institutionalized Educational Pathways
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Rachel Kajfez, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 02/29/2024
* USD 599,558.00

This EHR Core Research project involves a qualitative, exploratory study that
will collect interview data to capture the beliefs and identities of first-year
engineering students with respect to intelligence and engineering. Participants
will be enrolled in the same introductory engineering courses across six
distinct institutionalized pathways. Despite significant efforts to increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering, those who earn
engineering undergraduate degrees remain predominately male, white, and middle-
or upper-middle class. While this problem is complex and persistent, for
students who are interested in engineering, the beliefs they hold about their
own "ability" is critical to their participation. These beliefs are tied to the
cultural construction of "intelligence" in educational systems, which is often
biased towards the values of dominant groups. In addition to programmatic
efforts to directly increase diversity (e.g. women or minority in engineering
programs), providing multiple introductory pathways into engineering degree
programs is a wide-spread and institutionalized structure that is often assumed
to recruit and retain diverse individuals. Such pathways commonly aim to do so
through increasing options (e.g., honors or residential versions of introductory
courses), access and affordability (e.g., introductory courses at community
colleges or regional campuses), and support (e.g., an alternative math starting
point). Upon implementation, these pathways may be similar in structure to
educational tracking; students with higher previous academic achievement end up
in the more prestigious pathways. Prior research in the K-12 context has
concluded that such educational tracking perpetuates social inequities; students
who participate in less prestigious tracks often hold lower educational
aspirations and less positive beliefs about their own ability. As a result, this
research seeks to investigate how multiple pathways intended to increase
diversity in engineering may fail to achieve this intended goal due to
unintended influences on students' beliefs and identities. Through iterative,
qualitative analyses the researchers will investigate if and how students'
beliefs and identities vary as a function of their participation in a given
pathway. Understanding the dynamics of student beliefs and identities across
these pathways has the potential for translation into policy recommendations
locally and nationally to address the use of multiple pathways to recruit
students and promote their persistence in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study addresses two research questions: 1) What do students on different
educational pathways believe about intelligence and engineering? 2) How do these
students express their personal identities related to being smart and being an
engineer? Based on theories of belief and identity, the researchers will recruit
students from six different pathways with varying degrees of competitive
entrance, geographic location, class size, and enrollment: 1) an honors program;
2) a living-learning or residential program; 3) a general engineering enrollment
program; 4) an alternative mathematics starting point program, 5) a regional
campus program; and 6) a community college pathway. Students from all six
pathways will supply survey data and 30 will be recruited for in depth
interviews conducted three times during the research study. Researchers will
code the data giving consideration to each individual's experiences as well as
search for patterns in the data from individuals within and across each pathway
to determine whether there are between-pathway variations. The research will
bring in the voices of individuals who pursue engineering degrees following
different pathways, including those who may not be retained in their initial
pursuit of an engineering degree. This work may reveal some hidden limitations
of multiple pathways as a way to diversify engineering graduates in the US. In
addition, the research contributions may advance the field of engineering
education by taking a systematic and critical look at potentially problematic
differences in students' beliefs and identities as a function of their
educational pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.