* 1920687
* Conference: Understanding the Intellectual Merit and Broader Impacts of Fifteen Years of U.S. Federal Funding for Documenting Endangered Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2021
* April Counceller, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2021
* USD 30,790.00

This project will bring together scholars, students, and community members
representing language documentation research projects funded by the National
Science Foundation/National Endowment for the Humanities Documenting Endangered
Languages Program (DEL) in order to participate in three organized sessions at
the annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America (LSA). Since its
inception in 2003, DEL has funded hundreds of institutes and conferences,
fellowships, and doctoral dissertations. In addition to "standard" documentation
projects, increasingly, projects have come to include cross-disciplinary
collaboration benefitting language revitalization and teaching, and community
collaboration and capacity-building. These events will offer the opportunity for
both reflection on significant achievements from DEL projects in the past
fifteen years, and also for discussion about what directions documentation,
archival preservation, and revitalization projects should take for the future.
These events will allow participants to demonstrate how the science of
documentation research can be co-constructed, from project conception, through
to methods, and on to outputs, via considering indigenous interpretations and
knowledge. The events will also allow participants to share how their
documentation research has facilitated construction of sustainable community
collaborations and educational opportunities, and fostered the rethinking of
power distribution in situations of community involvement in documentation
research. Broader impacts include the cross-pollination of ideas from different
disciplinary perspectives, the potential for increased participation by Native
Hawaiians, Alaska Natives and American Indians, historically underrepresented
groups in linguistics, and the evaluation of the impact of federal funding from
two distinct agencies in terms of intellectual merit and broader impacts, merit
review criteria at NSF determined by the National Science
Board.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These events are scheduled to coincide with and
complement LSA-organized celebrations of the 2019 International Year of
Indigenous Languages. Led by two NSF DEL award holders, the events will provide
a platform for case studies of demonstrating the relevance of documentation
research to science more generally, and also how funded projects provide
training opportunities for community members, and members' roles in valuable
resource creation. Importantly, the project will support the attendance of
students and community partners, allowing for multiple viewpoints and
perspectives about shaping and conducting documenting research for, by, and with
language communities. The methodology employed will include pre-event dialogue
between participants and project leaders to shape presentations and discussions
according to project goals, and will also include allotted time during the
events for audience-participant interaction. The outcomes of this project will
articulate and promote community-based approaches toward the conceptualization
and carryout of future documentation research. The participant collaborators
will disseminate recommendations and best practices for community-oriented
documentation research, and through post-conference publications, they will also
provide examples and resources for future project directors and those with whom
they partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.