* 1920086
* MRI: Acquisition of a Quantum Design Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Darrell Schlom, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2021
* USD 577,500.00

Advances in modern technology are tightly linked to the discovery of materials
that provide new or superior properties compared to existing ones. The vast
knowledge of existing materials, their corresponding properties, and our
emerging understanding of the connection between the positions of atoms in
materials and the properties they possess allows researchers to more skillfully
design new materials with sought after properties. The pace of progress between
implementing design ideas that are believed to lead to superior materials and
the actual discovery of superior materials is crucially dependent on feedback on
the actual atomic structure and properties of the materials made. With such
feedback the validity of materials design ideas is verified or denied, providing
knowledge that can be acted upon in refined attempts to make superior materials.
The equipment made possible by this grant is an important element of the path to
accelerate the discovery of magnetic materials. It is also useful to identifying
new superconductors as superconductors expel magnetic fields, which this
equipment measures with a 100-fold increase in sensitivity compared to existing
instruments at Cornell University currently being used for this purpose. These
more sensitive and accurate magnetic measurements will also aid scientists using
Cornell's national user facility supported by the NSF known as PARADIM in their
quest to discover new magnetic materials and new superconductors. PARADIM's
mission is to accelerate the discovery of inorganic materials. The enhanced
sensitivity of the equipment made possible by this grant is vital to PARADIM's
focus on "interface materials," where magnetic effects can originate from a
single layer of atoms within a sample containing typically millions of atomic
layers. The broader impact of the new instrument includes the training of
students and its accessibility to the broad community of researchers within
Cornell as well as users from across the nation that come to discover new
inorganic materials in PARADIM.

The support of this grant enables Cornell University to acquire a Quantum Design
Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) to characterize and investigate the
magnetic properties of materials. The higher sensitivity of the new MPMS - 100
fold greater than Cornell's existing PPMS systems - will facilitate the
investigation of entirely new classes of materials, including atomically thin
and interfacial systems, which are currently out of reach, and accelerate the
discovery of superior electronic/magnetic materials for researchers from
academia, national labs, and industry from across the country. The new
instrument will be housed at the Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR),
whose two general-purpose instruments (Quantum Design PPMS) can characterize
magnetic properties, but their limited sensitivity restricts the type of
magnetic materials to be investigated. The addition of the MPMS will accelerate
materials discovery, which is the mission of the recently NSF-funded national
user facility headquartered at Cornell known as the Platform for the Accelerated
Realization, Analysis, and Discovery of Interface Materials (PARADIM), an NSF
Materials Innovation Platform. This MPMS will also greatly enhance the ability
of Cornell researchers in areas ranging from spintronics, superconductivity, and
two-dimensional materials, to electronic and magnetic devices, impacting the
productivity of 19 faculty members across 4 departments and 2 colleges, as well
as one of the interdisciplinary research groups (IRGs) of the NSF-MRSEC at
Cornell, which is focused on spin manipulation of materials for next-generation
magnetic memories and devices.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.