* 1920730
* Impact of Sleep Loss on Creativity and STEM Learning for First-Year College Students
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* A Beaujean, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,499,721.00

More than half of all college students are habitually sleep deprived. Sleep
deprivation is known to have powerful, detrimental effects generally on brain
functioning, yet the extent of its specific effects on mental activity is
unknown. This project, led by researchers at Baylor University, will bring
together a collaborative team of sleep scientists, educators, cognitive
neuroscientists, and statisticians to address theoretical and applied issues at
the nexus of sleep, creativity, and STEM learning, especially those concerning
whether such prolific sleep loss in students thwarts efforts to foster
creativity and STEM learning. Existing theoretical frameworks posit that
creative ability is not firmly set, but instead can fluctuate dynamically across
hours, days, and weeks. Investigating the brain processes underlying these
fluctuations in creativity, in relation to sleeping patterns and success and
retention in STEM, will not only provide crucial information from a theoretical
perspective, but can also provide a foundation for the development of future
educational interventions. Therefore, the study findings will be disseminated
broadly, in scientific as well as in formal and informal educational settings.
The Project will include a collaboration with a local museum in hosting pop-up
exhibits each year to disseminate the findings directly to students, parents,
and teachers. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program,
which supports work that advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning and broadening participation in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will empirically investigate the interplay of sleep, creativity, and
learning outcomes. A large sample of college students in a STEM major will
complete a battery of tests assessing creativity, fluid intelligence, sleep
habits, and science-concept learning. Structural equation modeling will assess
the degree to which sleep habits and creativity have a causal influence on
science-concept learning, independent of fluid intelligence. A subset of this
larger sample will complete a two-phase polysomnography-monitored, cross-over
experiment in which they will sleep normally and undergo multi-night sleep
restriction (order counterbalanced). At the end of each phase, participants will
undergo neuroimaging while performing tests of creativity, attention, and
encoding. The psychometric, polysomnographic, and neuroimaging data will then be
utilized to investigate longitudinal relations with STEM achievement and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.