* 1920812
* Demographic and evolutionary significance of adoption and fosterage
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Keith Hunley, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 456,102.00

Adoption and fosterage are life-altering events that arise in diverse contexts
in the United States and across the globe. Whether and in what ways the welfare
of adopted and fostered children improves outside their natal environment are
subjects of much debate. Important factors affecting the welfare of adopted and
fostered children include: the circumstances that lead to adoption and
fosterage; differences between the activities and treatment of adopted and
fostered children and of biological children; and societal acceptance versus
stigma surrounding adoption and fosterage. Understanding how these factors
interact to facilitate or inhibit successful outcomes for adopted and fostered
children is critical for tailoring family programs to suit the individual needs
of the many children who are reared primarily by non-natal parents in the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be conducted in the Melanesian
island nation of Vanuatu, where adoption and fosterage are commonplace and arise
in contexts comparable to adoption and fosterage among minority populations in
the United States. The research team, including a postdoctoral scholar, two ni-
Vanuatu graduate students, and an international team of highly trained PIs, will
investigate the causes and consequences of adoption and fosterage using an
evolutionary framework that seeks to understand how adoption and fosterage
contribute to familial success. The researchers will use a diverse set of
methods that leverage the significant variation in these practices in Vanuatu to
evaluate which specific factors or sets of factors best predict differences in
child outcomes. Specifically, the investigators will use questionnaires,
interviews, dietary and activity recall assessments, and anthropometric
measurements of health to describe the circumstances surrounding adoption and
fosterage and to tie such circumstances to differences in child health and well-
being. Findings from the research will provide insight into tailoring support
for adoptive and foster families by examining how social and demographic factors
contribute to variation in the welfare of adopted and fostered children as
compared to their biological counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.