* 1920616
* Reconstructing Research in Teacher Education to Provide Usable Knowledge and Support Teacher Education Improvement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Heather Hill, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,818.00

The long-term goal of this project, funded by EHR's Core Research Program, is to
guide and support teacher education programs. Significant research work is
currently available about how to best train STEM K-12 teachers. As a result, it
is an appropriate time to reflect on what educational researchers have already
learned and plan for new research designs and methods that can sustain and
extend improvements in STEM teacher education. This project will work with STEM
teacher educators to study existing research designs and develop new ones to use
in STEM teacher education. Using research to improve STEM teacher education is
likely to contribute to increased student learning in K-12
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working in partnership with a group of STEM
teacher educators, this two-year project aims to: 1) Develop strong research
designs that can be realistically embedded in teacher education programs; 2)
Identify key K-12 STEM classroom practices and design a proof-of-concept
instrument to capture performance on one or more of these practices; 3) Publish
working papers that provide guidance to teacher educators and others interested
in improving research designs and developing new measures; 4) Conduct and report
results of a proof-of-concept study that uses one of the newly developed
research designs and measures to evaluate preservice teacher learning; and 5)
Create a collaboration between teacher education researchers and educational
methodologists aimed at increasing the generation and dissemination of new
knowledge about effective STEM teacher education practices. This project
includes strong collaborations among STEM education researchers and STEM Teacher
Preparation programs, which may have long ranging benefits for improving STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.