* 1920840
* Self-Assembled Angle Independent Plasmonic Displays
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Debashis Chanda, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,221.00

The range of colors and hues in the natural world are astonishing - from
colorful flowers, birds and butterflies to underwater creatures like fish and
cephalopods. The mechanisms underlying this color are as varied as the species,
but can be broken into two main categories: pigmentation and structural color.
In pigment producing cells, molecules absorb part of the visible spectrum while
leaving the rest to be scattered back to the viewer. Structural color, on the
other hand, is produced through combinations of reflection, scattering and
interference within groups of cells or external nanostructures. Of these two
classes, structural color serves as the primary color generating mechanism in
several extremely vivid species. The key aspect of these color displays in
nature is that they are consistently and uniformly formed from self-assembled
nanostructures on thin, flexible and curvilinear surfaces. This in contrast to
state-of-the-art manmade displays, which remain vastly rigid, brittle and based
on top down processing.&lt;br/&gt; Here, we propose a large area, highly
reproducible self-assembling technique where aluminum particles are formed on
the surface through a temperature and pressure dependent thin film growth
mechanism in an ultra-high vacuum electron beam evaporator. The system supports
localized surface plasmons confined to the gaps between particles and the mirror
which demonstrate a high degree of independence on the angle of incident light.
The spectral location of the resonance can be tuned based on the size
distribution of the aluminum particles and the index of the surrounding media.
Light which is not absorbed by the surface is reflected back, resulting in a
vivid perceived color. By integrating the self-assembled surface with liquid
crystal cells, actively tunable plasmonic displays can be obtained. The process
is also amiable to large-scale flexible and diffusive substrates which can
result in novel plasmonic surfaces/displays with engineerable material and
scattering properties. &lt;br/&gt; The proposed work is important for the
development of low cost reflective displays on flexible substrates. The newly
developed self-assembling techniques will enable large area patterning of
nanostructured surfaces for low cost manufacturing. The program provides a good
platform for interdisciplinary research (including integrated optics,
nanofabrication and materials science and engineering) and graduate education.
The research will generate exciting scientific content for enriching the PI's
graduate and undergraduate teaching. The program will integrate outreach
activities that span Autistic students, K-12 students and other underrepresented
minorities. The PI collaborates with Orlando Science Center to informally
educate the broader community and increase public awareness on displays and
color generation in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: There is much to
understand and develop in the field of actively tunable plasmonics. A fast
response, angle independent and diffusive Liquid Crystal (LC) based tunable
displays which can actively shift the color of its pixels is now possible only
after years of interdisciplinary research. We plan on furthering this field
through an in depth analysis of the plasmonic response of self-assembled
nanostructured surfaces, LC orientation and how they influence each other. A key
objective of the proposed system is to design angle independent and diffuse
color surfaces based on a self-assembled resonance which doesn't depend on angle
of illumination or viewing angle. While apt at producing color, these plasmonic
surfaces cannot produce deep black states needed for displays due to intrinsic
narrow band absorption. A vital aspect of these display devices is the ability
to control the amount of light reflected from them. One possible way of
achieving black and intermediate gray states is the use of liquid crystal
shutter. The proposed device can readily be fabricated on flexible substrates as
the low temperature fabrication process is compatible with low glassing
temperature polymers such as PET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.