* 1920482
* Exploring STEM Career Pathway Persistence Among Student Service Members and Veterans: A Mixed Methods Study of Social Support Networks
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Matthew Hora, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Carrie Hall
* 10/31/2023
* USD 556,754.00

________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student
military service members and veterans, who are undergraduate students, face
numerous medical, financial and social obstacles that universities and
communities must address to prevent this skilled talent pool from leaving STEM
before entering, or re-entering, our nation's workforce. For example, many
service members and veterans have family or work responsibilities that limit
full-time enrollment in post-secondary education. With the appropriate academic
and social support systems, veterans and service members can succeed in college
and advance their careers. It is critical for our nation to better understand
the needs of this unique population and the social support networks that
contribute to persistence in STEM. Advancing a diverse and technically competent
STEM workforce is critical for contributing to the progress of science and the
health, prosperity and welfare of our nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
team is exploring the association between social support networks and
persistence in undergraduate STEM education among student military service
members and veterans. More specifically, knowledge is being advanced about
trajectories and social support characteristics of veterans and student military
service members, as well as about the network variables associated with
persistence along STEM academic and workforce pathways. This mixed methods
research includes collecting and analyzing survey and interview data. Results
are being examined to advance knowledge about why STEM undergraduate students,
who are military service members or veterans, persist in STEM. Study findings
will also provide university and college administrators and educators with
information about how their institutions might better provide social, academic,
health and career support services to advance the persistence and career paths
of STEM veteran and military service members who are undergraduate students at
their schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is supported by NSF's EHR
Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development. The program supports the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to understand, build theory to explain, and suggest
intervention and innovations to address persistent challenges in STEM interest,
education, learning and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.