* 1920029
* MRI:   Acquisition of a wide-field inverted fluorescent microscope capable of live-cell tracking to support faculty research and undergraduate education at Stetson University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Heather Evans-Anderson, Stetson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 266,091.00

An award is made to Stetson University, a predominantly undergraduate university
in Central Florida, to purchase an inverted fluorescent microscope system
capable of imaging over a wide range of living biological samples from
subcellular structures to small organisms. This instrumentation will actively
engage undergraduate students across Biology, Health Sciences, and Physics in
superior training through faculty-mentored research projects and promote
implementation of inquiry-based lab experiences for students in upper-level
Biology and Physics courses, thus providing exposure to advanced microscopy for
a diverse population of students. The microscope system will propel cutting-edge
research programs at Stetson University and foster sophisticated capstone
research for seniors under the mentorship of faculty members committed to
student training and advancing the participation of under- represented and
minority undergraduates in the sciences. Student outcomes include opportunities
to present their work at regional and national scientific conferences and as
coauthors on scientific papers. Collectively, these invaluable experiences will
promote scientific competency in students as they achieve a comprehensive range
of career goals and contribute to the development of the next generation of
scientists. Furthermore, the acquisition of this microscope system will provide
a regional resource for other researchers in Central Florida, as well as enable
exciting cellular-based science outreach programs through art exhibits based on
images acquired using this microscope and expand Stetson?s existing
relationships with local K- 12 schools through demonstrations and hands-on
activities using this instrumentation to further promote scientific
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This microscope will provide a powerful
foundation to support and enable fundamental pioneering research by junior
faculty members. Highlights of the research that will be enabled through this
imaging system include: 1) tracking migrating cells in living tissues to link
cellular and subcellular mechanisms to tissue-scale movements; 2) examining
improperly located cell death proteins in malignant cells; 3) dissecting
communication pathways that regulate cardiac myocyte cell proliferation and
regeneration in Ciona intestinalis; 4) examining spatial organization and
dynamics of iridescent marine bacteria; and 5) promoting education through use
of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing technology by undergraduates in a Genetics course to
manipulate and label genes in order to visualize effects in living organisms.
These diverse interdisciplinary projects, made possible through the acquisition
of this microscope, represent exciting educational opportunities for
undergraduate students to contribute to meaningful scientific
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.