* 1920332
* MRI: Acquisition of Raman Spectrometer to Enable Nanoscale Multi-disciplinary Research and Education in Advanced Materials, Health and Energy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Nathan Anderson, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2021
* USD 212,250.00

Raman spectroscopy enables researchers to identify the composition and
characterization of nanomaterials. This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI)
award will support the acquisition of a Raman confocal microscope to support new
cutting-edge nanotechnology research at California State University (CSU),
Chico, spurring research and educational activities in the fields of
engineering, materials, energy, computer science, and medicine and benefitting
more than 600 students. These research activities could enable societal benefits
-- ranging from high-strength, efficient, and smart materials to targeted drug
delivery systems. The acquisition of a Raman confocal microscope will enable the
development of coursework introducing undergraduate students, many of whom come
from underrepresented groups, to cutting-edge technological fields. The
microscope will also enable cross-disciplinary collaborations, enhance CSU,
Chico's collaborations with City University of New York and Sandia National
Laboratory and may promote new partnerships with other research institutions and
with industry. These interactions enhance CSU, Chico's research capabilities and
give students an opportunity to work with researchers in other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman spectroscopy allows the chemical composition of
materials to be determined non-destructively by analyzing their atomic level
response to a laser via Stokes and anti-Stokes scattering and it is the gold
standard for material characterization in a wide range of scientific fields.
CSU, Chico faculty will use the instrumentation to advance fundamental research
on the synthesis and characterization of nanoparticles, the design of DNA
nanostructures, the synthesis and characterization of metal-organic graphene
analogues, the fabrication and characterization of nanoscale semiconductor
materials, devices, and nanosensors, scaffold development for tissue
engineering, and in characterization of plant-based enzymes. For example, to
enable breakthroughs in qualification and process control in AM/3D printing
processes of polymer-nanoparticle composite materials, the researchers will
analyze geometry flaws, external and internal defects, porosity at the micro-
and nano-meter level and the texture of inside and outside surfaces to develop
information for enhanced modeling of AM printing processes. Researchers will use
XRD and XCT scans to measure the lattice structure, analyze the defects inside
nanoparticle-polymer composite materials and predict where a lattice-structure
may become distorted or break during printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.