* 1920116
* MRI:  Acquisition of a fluorescence-activated cell analyzer (FACS) to enhance undergraduate classroom and research experiences
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Grace Lim-Fong, Randolph-Macon College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,245.00

An award is made to Randolph-Macon College to acquire a flow cytometer, an
instrument capable of measuring up to 16 molecular properties of thousands of
individual cells per second. Access to the flow cytometer will facilitate
undergraduate research and training across disciplines and institutions. In
particular, research projects supported by the instrument will enable the
mentorship and training of over 25 undergraduate research students per year at
Randolph-Macon College and Longwood University. An additional 50 students per
year will benefit from the inclusion of the instrument in laboratory courses at
Randolph-Macon College. Further, the acquisition of the cytometer will enhance
outreach activities to Latina high school women enrolled in Randolph-Macon
College's NSF-funded Pathways to Science Program and local middle school
students. Overall, the addition of the flow cytometer to Randolph-Macon College
will enhance the scientific training and literacy of undergraduate students,
Latina high school students, local middle school students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow cytometer will support research projects
directed by seven faculty from two departments and three institutions, spanning
a broad range of investigative topics. These topics include: a range of
immunology studies, neural physiology, mammalian fertility, the evolution of
brewer's yeast, and other topics. Overall these projects will enhance our
understanding of the natural world and are likely to generate a significant
degree of collaboration between the investigators and senior personnel,
enhancing the already strong intellectual community at Randolph-Macon College
and Longwood University. Results from projects enabled by the acquisition of the
flow cytometer will be communicated in peer-reviewed publications and at
regional and national scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.