* 1920445
* Digit Dependence in Numerical Magnitude Judgments
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Hilary Barth, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Finbarr Sloane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,091,303.00

This proposal was submitted in response to EHR Core Research (ECR) program
announcement NSF 19-508. The ECR program of fundamental research in STEM
education provides funding in critical research areas that are essential, broad
and enduring. EHR seeks proposals that will help synthesize, build and/or expand
research foundations in the following focal areas: STEM learning, STEM learning
environments, STEM workforce development, and broadening participation in STEM.
The ECR program is distinguished by its emphasis on the accumulation of robust
evidence to inform efforts to (a) understand, (b) build theory to explain, and
(c) suggest interventions (and innovations) to address persistent challenges in
STEM interest, education, learning, and participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research examines numerical and mathematical cognitive processing, with
accompanying correlational work that links study results to formal math skills
and complex judgments relevant to mathematics literacy. Estimation tasks predict
performance on real-world math outcomes; and are useful as teaching tools.
Understanding these tasks, what they conceptually measure, and why these
measures predict math outcomes, help us better teach math concepts. The research
advances mathematics learning by carefully examining paradigms used in numerical
cognition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct seven
experimental studies of estimation tasks using number lines. The research team
will examine whether participants' judgements of numeric magnitude are
influenced by digit dependence; principally, the left most digit. The work will
be conducted with subjects aged 3-11, as well as adults. To support causal
claims, participants will be randomly assigned to treatment and control groups.
The data will be analyzed causally using analysis of variance techniques. The
studies have been appropriately powered to warrant all research claims. The
proposed research advances basic knowledge of mathematics learning by carefully
examining research paradigms that inform theories of cognition, development, and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.