* 1920110
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Variable Temperature (3.8-300 K) X-Band Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Xiangqun Zeng, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 289,760.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation Programs. Professor Roman Dembinski from Oakland
University and colleagues Xiangqun Zeng, Ferman Chavez, Wei Zhang and Amitava
Adhikary are acquiring a variable-temperature, continuous-wave-X-band-electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer. In general, an EPR spectrometer
yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic structure of
molecular and solid-state materials. It is also used to obtain information about
the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive species involved in
valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation of possible
pathological growth. These studies impact several areas, from the synthesis of
inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid-state materials
to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing examples inspired
from ongoing research, this instrument is an integral part of research and
teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at Oakland University.
Additionally, the investigators are sharing the spectrometer with many
interested users from the area. The instrumentation strengthens the
institution's educational mission in the chemical, biochemical, and
environmental sciences, which involves students from a broad range of ethnic and
cultural backgrounds in southeastern Michigan. The student users include socio-
economically disadvantaged and minority students in the Detroit metropolitan
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this spectrometer is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. The instrument acquisition is especially
useful in understanding the mechanisms of reactions involving free radical
damage to biomolecules and its repair and/or restitution. The instrument is also
employed in investigations of the roles of metallo-peptides involved in reactive
oxygen species formation and in research of feromagnetic-coupled systems for
materials science. The instrumentation serves researchers studying free-radical-
mediated redox processes in molecules dissolved in ionic liquids, and those
trying to understand the role of free radicals such as superoxide anion radical
that are related to the onset of maturity of human
cataracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.