* 1920468
* SpecEES: Unified System Architecture for Energy Efficient Cognitive Radios
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Won Namgoong, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 585,296.00

Although long envisioned to dramatically improve spectrum utilization and to
safely share multiple frequency bands without interfering with licensed users,
building and deploying energy efficient cognitive radios with dynamic spectrum
access have proven to be a challenging task. This project proposes an energy-
efficient cognitive radio system that addresses its many practical challenges
including a low-power wideband radio that operates in multiple frequency bands
and a means to seamlessly and efficiently coordinate the operating bands between
communicating unlicensed users. The proposed work presents a complete integrated
solution, ranging from radio implementation, signal processing algorithm
development, and network connectivity. These different layers of abstraction
have been jointly optimized to enable a low-power and robust cognitive radio
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed energy-efficient cognitive radio (CR)
system, which is jointly optimized at the circuit, signal processing, and
network layers, operates as follows: 1) A secondary user (SU) employs a novel
compressed sampling receiver based on polyphase sequences implemented via mixer
harmonics to sense concurrently the entire frequency span of interest. 2) Since
the communicating band between SUs is unknown, data is transmitted by sending
the same signal at low power levels across the entire frequency span of interest
while nulling energy in the primary user (PU) bands. A novel sub-Nyquist
transmitter, which can be viewed as a dual of the compressed sensing receiver,
is proposed for this purpose. 3) The receiving SU uses the same compressed
sampling receiver for sensing PUs to receive the SU signals. This is achieved by
projecting the received signals to PU's null space, whose frequency locations
were estimated during sensing. By appropriately selecting the basis functions
set in the analog front-end, most of the received energy can be added
coherently. 4) As SU energy is spread across the entire frequency span of
interest, the resulting channel impulse response (CIR) is richly scattered. The
CIR itself, therefore, can be used as users' signatures for achieving multiple-
access communications. Furthermore, by leveraging on techniques from multiuser
detection theory, high spectral efficiency can be achieved.