* 1920908
* RII Track-2 FEC: Leveraging Intelligent Informatics and Smart Data for Improved Understanding of Northern Forest Ecosystem Resiliency (INSPIRES)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mary-Kate Beard-Tisdale, University of Maine
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 6,599,999.00

Forests are an economically important and ecologically critical component of
Northern rural working landscapes. Local and regional communities depend on the
health of these forest ecosystems to support biodiversity, conservation,
recreation, and a forest-based workforce. Forests are highly dynamic and diverse
due to a wide variety of complex interacting factors, including changing
environmental conditions, varying management objectives across federal, state
and private land ownership, and natural disturbances. Despite advances in
technology and acquisition of forest-related information, critical forest data
remains highly variable, inconsistently available, and relatively coarse in
scale. The INSPIRES project will build a digital framework to better assess,
understand, and forecast complex forest changes. The integration of emerging
computational, monitoring, remote sensing, and visualization technologies into a
Digital Forest Big Data framework will provide comprehensive, near real-time
spatial and temporal measurements of the forest at levels readily usable by
scientists, land managers, and policy makers. This project will strengthen
workforce development and broaden participation in science, particularly among
students with diverse backgrounds and skills. The project will accomplish both
its digital and educational aims by drawing from a broad array of established
programs and disciplines, including data science, ecology, electrical
engineering, computer programming, and communications. This effort will help
support and sustain northern New England's unique forested landscape, which many
rural communities rely on for their livelihoods. Faculty and students will
collaborate on the development of a regional Complex Systems Research Institute
that will facilitate ongoing analysis of forest ecosystem integrity and
resilience from multiple scientific perspectives. Ultimately this Big Data
Framework integrating advanced sensing and computing technologies, environmental
informatics and analytics, ecological modeling, and quantitative reasoning
skills would be applicable to other forested regions and ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Forests in New England represent the Northern Forest
ecotone, which is a complex assemblage of transitional ecosystems that have a
unique history of natural disturbance and human land use. In recent decades,
societal demands on these forests and the ecosystem services they provide have
continued to expand at a time when key stressors such as land use pressures,
invasive pests, and extreme abiotic events are on the rise. Maintaining the
value and integrity of the Northern Forest for the communities that depend on
them requires a better understanding of how these interactive stressors affect
this ecosystem. Thus, a new digital framework for harnessing Big Data is needed
to assess and predict interactions under multiple alternative future response
pathways. To address this grand challenge, faculty from the state universities
of Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont will collaborate on the development of a
regional Complex Systems Research Institute that will facilitate analysis of
forest ecosystem integrity and resilience from multiple scientific perspectives.
Faculty and students will work across four research-integrated themes to develop
a novel and flexible Digital Forest Big Data framework for effectively
harnessing complex data streams from a variety of sources such as wireless
sensors, remote sensing, and citizen science to enhance our fundamental
understanding of Northern Forest ecosystems across multiple spatio-temporal
scales. The project?s specific research themes are: (1) Advanced Sensing and
Computing Technologies; (2) Environmental Informatics and Analytics; (3)
Integrated Ecological Modeling; and (4) Quantitative Reasoning in Context. In
particular, project participants will explore how to integrate the traditional
ecological knowledge (TEK) of Wabanaki tribes and other available qualitative
data with the primarily quantitative data typically employed to analyze and
model ecosystems. The long-term goal is to extend this framework beyond the
region, particularly to other ecosystems of high interest, including marine
environments. Importantly, the effort will link with ongoing regional efforts to
improve K-20 data literacy skills, while generating valuable new approaches for
supporting natural resources-based economies and associated industries. The
formation of a regional Complex Systems Research Institute will incorporate,
extend, and sustain the strengths of all three EPSCoR jurisdictions by
leveraging prior and ongoing efforts and expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.