* 1920732
* The Developmental Emergence and Consequences of Spatial and Math Gender Stereotypes
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sara Cordes, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2024
* USD 870,968.00

There is currently a gender gap in STEM fields, such that females participate at
lower rates and have lower career attainment than their male counterparts. While
much research has focused on gender differences in math attitudes, little work
has explored how attitudes in a closely related STEM domain, spatial reasoning,
may also contribute to the observed gender gap. The proposed research will
characterize the acquisition of gender stereotypes in childhood in two key
domains critical to success and participation in STEM fields: math and spatial
skills. Recent evidence suggests that children acquire math gender stereotypes
(i.e., the belief that "math is for boys") as early as 1st - 2nd grades, but
less is known about children's attitudes about spatial abilities. This project
will be one of the first to investigate the development and emergence of spatial
gender stereotypes (and their relation to math gender stereotypes) in elementary
school-aged children, and their impact on parent-child interactions in the pre-
school period. This project is funded by the EHR Core Research program, which
emphasizes STEM education research that will generate foundational knowledge in
the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eight behavioral studies involving 1290
children (Pre-K - 4th graders), 240 caregivers, and 180 adults will participate
in studies that evaluate an integrated theoretical model of the relations
between gender, gender stereotypes, attitudes, and abilities in the domains of
math and space. In Series 1, studies will characterize the emergence of and
assumptions behind spatial- and math- gender stereotypes in 1st - 4th graders,
while determining how they may be acquired. In Series 2, studies will explore
the real-world impacts of spatial-gender stereotypes on STEM participation and
achievement in childhood. Lastly, Series 3 studies will explore the malleability
of these stereotypes in the hopes of identifying ways to ameliorate their impact
early in development. The project will provide training for doctoral graduate
and undergraduate students. Moreover, this project will support new and ongoing
collaborations with local children's museums, which facilitate interactions and
communication with families, educators, and the public about the research
findings. By being some of the first work to uncover the developmental origins
and consequences of math and spatial stereotypes, this work may inform possible
future interventions to reduce and/or eliminate the perpetuation of these
stereotypes in children, long before they can have greater lifelong
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.