* 1920560
* The College Internship Study: A Longitudinal Mixed Methods Study Exploring the Impacts of College Internships on Student Outcomes at HBCUs
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Matthew Hora, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,489,273.00

Internships and other forms of experiential and work-based learning are
increasingly a common feature of STEM education in the United States and are all
central to the goal of preparing a STEM workforce for the 21st century. In
focusing on access and equity related to internship participation, this study
will be one of the first to empirically explore these issues, which are of
increasing concern to higher education scholars.The University of Wisconsin-
Madison's Center for College-Workforce Transitions launched a translational
mixed-methods longitudinal College Internship Study in 2018 at three different
types of institutions in Wisconsin and South Carolina to produce empirical
evidence on student outcomes of internships. An integrative theoretical
framework that views internships as a problem of situated learning as well as a
venue for students' development of self-efficacy beliefs and vocational
identities was used to inform the study design. The project adds six
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to this study to track a
cohort of students and employers, faculty, and career centers over three years
and measure psychosocial and labor market outcomes. Additionally, the proposed
research project will leverage the strengths of large-scale, generalizable
survey data and the more fine-grained perspectives of qualitative data. In
addition, the longitudinal aspect of the study promises to shed important light
on the impacts of internship experiences on a cohort of college students over
time. This study represents one of the few empirical studies examining the
relationship between internships and psychosocial outcomes that are of central
importance to the fields of vocational psychology and persistence and equity in
STEM education. Finally, expansion of the College Internship Study to encompass
HBCUs will contribute to the research on these campuses as a unique
institutional context in general and to the research base on the experiences of
African-American students with college climate, persistence, and career
planning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The College Internship Study builds upon two
bodies of literature - the learning experience as a form of situated and
experiential learning and developmental processes of vocational identity. The
investigators will examine what students do and under what forms of mentorship.
They will use situated cognition theory to interpret these results along with
Social Cognitive Career and career Construction theories from vocational
psychology to conceptualize the developmental processes of interns themselves.
The internship experience will be characterized as comprising three elements -
participation and access, program design features, and student outcomes and
experiences. The research questions are: (1) How, if at all, does internship
participation vary by students? demographics, academic programs and performance,
and life/employment situations?; (2) What, if any, are the major barriers for
students to access and then persist in an internship?; (3) How, if at all, are
internship program features associated with students? satisfaction, career-
related self-efficacy beliefs, sense of adaptability, and employment outcomes?
and (4) What are the strengths and weaknesses of institutions regarding
provision of internship programs and subsequent student supports? Investigators
will conduct three waves of data over three years via online student survey,
student focus groups, employer interviews, and faculty/career advisor interviews
across the six institutions. Using statistical and qualitative techniques, they
will compile reports and interactive data and visualizations for institutional
partners. They also will use a comparative case study approach that involves
situating cases within specific cultural, political, and historical contexts.
The translational aspect of the project will ensure its impacts extend beyond
the contribution of new scientific knowledge to policy and practice related to
internship programs on participating campuses. These impacts could involve
meaningful changes to students? experiences and learning, to institutional
practice regarding internship programming, and to continuous improvement
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR Core Research
program that supports fundamental STEM education research focused on STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and
STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.