* 1920871
* An Integrated Evaluation of Therapeutic Pathways in Opioid Addiction
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* China Scherz, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 315,465.00

Economic problems and other societal issues have led many people not only to
lose hope of a better future but also hope in their relationships with their
families and communities. This study will explore how people living under such
conditions negotiate relationships of trust and to alter their sense of future,
focusing on the role that opioid analgesics and addiction treatment programs
play in these processes. Since the proliferation of prescription opioids began
in the 1990s, opioid addiction and overdose rates in the United States have
skyrocketed and those suffering from opioid addiction are overwhelmingly from
deindustrialized, lower-income surroundings. This study will examine how these
substances have affected people 's lives, social networks, and sense of the
future. It will also investigate the effects of three therapeutic interventions:
medication assisted treatment (MAT); Narcotics Anonymous; and faith-based
programs. How might these modes of addressing addiction influence people 's
sense of future possibility and perceived pathways to recovery? How do these
programs contribute to or detract from people 's efforts to transform their
relationships with those around them? Are religious and clinical therapeutics
mutually exclusive? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia
anthropologists, China Scherz and Joshua Burraway, will investigate these
questions by using qualitative methods to analyze the life trajectories of
twenty current and former opioid addicts over the course of three years. The
research will be conducted in Southwest Virginia because of the intersection of
deindustrialization and rural poverty; higher than national overdose rates; and
this region 's religious landscape. Results from this research will provide a
model for addressing questions of hope and temporality in clinical and social
scientific studies of addiction. This study will also provide the first
ethnographic analysis of how spiritual transformations relate to opioid
addiction and recovery in an Appalachian context, illuminating the way that
religious practices intersect with the historical, economic, sociopolitical, and
embodied trajectories of the current epidemic. Finally, through its potential to
offer insights into other ways of conceptualizing addiction, this study will
contribute to a growing body of literature that seeks to think beyond the
increasingly dominant medical model of addiction as a chronic relapsing brain
disease. Opioid abuse and addiction present a national crisis given the
unprecedented toll on both public health and the economy. While Medication
Assisted Treatment (MAT) remains a valuable and hard-won therapeutic avenue for
those afflicted, recovery, like addiction itself, does not emerge in a social
vacuum. Indeed, rebuilding meaningful social connections and a sense of trust in
the future may be just as important an aspect of recovery as mediating physical
withdrawal symptoms. This study aims to offer new insights into the mechanisms
through which these social connections could be built and to lay groundwork for
improved collaborations between addiction practitioners who may see their
approaches as fundamentally at odds. The research team 's enduring connections
with academics and policy-makers at leading national psychiatric and medical
facilities in the United States and UK will facilitate broadcasting the results
and translating the study 's findings into relevant and usable policy
recommendations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.