* 1921025
* CAREER: Towards Control of Photo-Induced Charges in Chiral Nanocomposites via Optical Spin-Orbit Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/27/2018,06/30/2019
* Luat Vuong, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Opila
* 06/30/2019
* USD 22,656.00

Technical: The research component of this CAREER award aims to understand the
photo-induced electrical energy flows in chiral nanocomposite materials where
nonlinear optical phenomena are observed at unprecedented low light intensities
(&lt;1 W/cm^2) stemming from the appreciable photo-induced magnetic fields and
the interactions between nanoparticles. These effects, associated with optical
spin-orbit interactions, are theoretically underestimated and not well
understood; refining numerical models so that they properly estimate the
measured intensity-dependent and polarization-dependent processes is a priority
in this project. Samples of partially-metal-coated dielectric nanospheres are
subsumed in transparent conducting polymers and assembled electrophoretically
and with external magnetic-field processing techniques. Scattering, transient
absorption, electrical, and magnetic field measurements characterize the
modified nanoparticle alignment and the low-frequency charge transport that
occurs in the surrounding conducting polymer.&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical: The
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
with technological relevancy. Nanocomposite materials provide a platform for new
optoelectronics, solar harvesting, and photocatalysis applications. The
educational activities of this project are designed to attract, train, and
retain creative, resourceful students of all backgrounds, with special emphasis
on those attending public schools in the outer New York boroughs of Queens and
the Bronx. Research opportunities for highly motivated pre-college students,
professional Master's students, and international collaborators address the need
for scientific training prior to and outside of a doctoral program.