* 1921387
* Support for Participation of US Students to the 3rd World Congress on Micro-Nano Manufacturing (WCMNM); Raleigh, North Carolina; 10-12 September 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Gracious Ngaile, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2020
* USD 16,000.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial travel support for 20 graduate
students to attend the 3rd World Congress on Micro-Nano Manufacturing (WCMNM);
Raleigh NC, 10-12 September 2019. The congress focuses on new developments in
the field of micro and nano manufacturing science and engineering. The students
present their research at the conference, exchange ideas with leading
researchers and engineers from U.S. and international institutions and visit
companies involved with nano-micro manufacturing in Raleigh's Research Triangle
Park. Travel grants for the students are based on acceptance of their paper for
presentation at the conference and a short vision statement. Priority is given
to student participants who are women or who come from underrepresented groups.
This approach promotes diverse participation at the conference. This award
benefits the nation through the education and training of a skilled and diverse
engineering workforce better prepared to provide transformative solutions the
challenges of their chosen fields.

This participation support is expected to benefit the students' professional,
scientific and technical development. Participants are given an opportunity to
nurture a global vision in nano-micro-manufacturing and learn about the latest
developments in the field. A wide range of topics are presented to stimulate
learning and training. These include mechanics and dynamics of processes at the
micro and nano-scale; miniaturization of machines and equipment; micro-factory
paradigm; micro- and nano-scale metrology; materials handling; multi-scale
modeling and simulation; design for micro- and nano-scale manufacturing; micro
and nano additive manufacturing technologies; and others. Participating students
learn by attending technical presentations by leading international experts in
micro and nano manufacturing, and by interacting with fellow researchers from
around the world. These experiences foster new ideas and a deeper fundamental
understanding, which help shape future of research in manufacturing science and
engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.