* 1921484
* Collaborative Research: Rational Design of Alloys with Low-Melting-Point Metals for High-yield, Non-thermal Plasma-assisted Catalytic Production of Ammonia
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Diego Gomez Gualdron, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 214,967.00

Close to 2% of the world's energy is spent synthesizing ammonia by a chemical
process called the Haber-Bosch process. Plasma catalysis is emerging as a
promising alternative method for ammonia synthesis at moderate pressure and
temperature, which allows it to rely on renewable energy resources that are more
distributed and intermittent in nature. The goal of the proposed collaborative
research project is to use computation and experiment to rationally design an
alloy catalyst for a new plasma-assisted ammonia synthesis process that requires
less energy. The research will also train students from underrepresented and
minority groups and support the development and dissemination of educational
materials on a general access website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
integrate experiments and simulations in a feedback loop that will culminate
with the computational identification of a high-performance low melting point
alloy that will be tested in catalytic experiments under an atmospheric plasma.
The fundamental reaction mechanisms under plasma conditions will be elucidated
by using kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. The research objectives of the project
are: (1) Synthesize gallium alloys and evaluate kinetics of ammonia synthesis in
a radio-frequency plasma reactor. (2) Determine recombination kinetics of H and
N radicals from "plasma-on-plasma-off" experiments. (3) Calculate energetic
descriptors for ammonia synthesis reaction steps under plasma conditions using
Density Functional Theory. (4) Develop a kinetic Monte-Carlo model for ammonia
formation using graph theoretical approach and cluster expansion. (5)
Experimentally test a computationally identified alloy in a plasma
reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.