* 1921013
* Collaborative Research: Taphonomic Correlation for Past Events
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Daniel Contreras, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 79,465.00

This project will develop new methods estimating past population sizes, in order
to more accurately reconstruct past population dynamics. Accurately
reconstructing past population dynamics is critical for addressing many key
questions about the human past, including the origins of modern behavior, the
emergence of agriculture, and the development of states. Although estimates of
past population size are widely employed, current archaeological methods
struggle to adequately account for the fact that the available records of past
human habitation are biased by local geologic processes, which preserve sites of
some ages while destroying others. This can lead to systematic bias in estimates
of past population, erroneous reconstructions of past population dynamics, and
mistaken interpretations of social processes. This project develops a novel
approach that analyzes ages of archaeological sites relative to local
frequencies of landforms of varying ages, using the Bonneville Basin (Utah and
Nevada) as a test case. By providing a method that is capable of more accurately
describing past populations, this project will enable improved analysis of past
human responses to environmental changes as well as the potential impacts of
human populations on past environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaeologists
increasingly turn to assemblages of radiocarbon dates as measures of past
population sizes. Improving the accuracy of this technique by accounting for
landscape change over time will allow us to explore the drivers of past
population dynamics in the Bonneville Basin, especially the interactions between
human demography, subsistence adaptations, land use, and environmental change.
By developing a new methodology for addressing biases in assemblages of
radiocarbon dates, illustrating the potential of the method through this Great
Basin case study, and disseminating the tools that other researchers can use to
replicate the approach, this project will open new possibilities in
reconstructing past population dynamics. In addition, by standardizing an
approach and providing computational tools for coupling the archaeological
radiocarbon record and local landscape history recorded in landform ages, this
work will enable further research that addresses compelling questions including
the role of population dynamics in long-term sustainability and resilience, in
the onset of the Anthropocene, and in such social transformations as the
beginnings of agriculture and urbanism&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.