* 1921545
* STS as a Critical Pedagogy: Harrisonburg, VA - Summer 2020
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Shannon Conley, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2021
* USD 31,232.00

Many educators in Science and Technology Studies (STS) are distributed across a
wide range of institutions, disciplines, and home departments, and rarely find
opportunities to engage other STS scholars interested in pedagogy. STS
pedagogies may be used to help STS students further their education or career
path, to help STEM students critically reflect on their assumptions about
technological progress, and to help social science and humanities students
critically interrogate information, media, and knowledge production. Regardless
of the specific learning site and objective, important pragmatic questions
remain about how to conduct STS pedagogy as a practice informed not only by STS
theories and methods, but also by critical pedagogies from other traditions.
This project will benefit society by developing and codifying effective STS
pedagogical strategies and researching STS pedagogical interventions as sites of
knowledge production and theoretical inquiry. It will also help to create a new
mode of STS engagement and intervention through education and pedagogical
research on STS teaching and learning in K-12, in college/university contexts,
and in museum education and other public engagement arenas. In addition to
scholarly articles, this project will result in a repository of publicly
accessible STS teaching materials for a range of K-12 and higher education
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a two-day workshop on STS
as critical pedagogy to bring together scholars and educators from a variety of
educational contexts and disciplines that employ STS in their teaching. Project
participants include individuals who teach and engage in STS work at teaching-
oriented colleges and universities, K-12 contexts, and other institutions of
educational engagement, such as science museums. Our goal is to create a new
subfield within STS - 'STS as Critical Pedagogy' - that seriously considers STS
pedagogies as learning interventions and areas of legitimate scholarly inquiry.
This subfield will foreground pedagogy within STS and create a space in which
pedagogical work can be rigorously theorized and assessed by a community of STS
scholars. The two-day workshop will be held at James Madison University in
Harrisonburg, VA in the summer of 2020. The timing of the workshop is oriented
towards being as inclusive and accessible as possible to bring together a
diverse group of individuals from a variety of institutional and teaching
contexts. The workshop will be held over the summer months to accommodate
individuals from teaching-oriented institutions, who might have significant
course loads and teaching responsibilities, and otherwise might not be able to
attend a meeting during the school year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.