* 1921955
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: DNA-based Sensing, Communicating, and Phase-Separating Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Gaurav Arya, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 481,250.00

Robotic materials are an emerging class of materials that integrate actuation,
sensing, communication, and computing functions. Examples include artificial
skins with embedded electronics for sensing, and composites with adaptive
texture morphing for camouflage. While there has been significant progress in
developing macroscopic robotic materials, integrating robotic functions at the
nano to microscale remains a challenge. DNA is as an excellent candidate for
creating such robotic nanomaterials because it enables fabrication of
nanostructures with unprecedented complex geometry and reconfigurability. This
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award
supports fundamental research to enable development of robotic DNA materials
with sensing, communicating, and phase separating functions, integrating
multidisciplinary expertise in DNA nanotechnology, single molecule measurements,
and molecular modeling. The team will create DNA nanostructures that sense the
local environment and assemble those structures into larger systems that
transmit signals or exhibit collective behaviors. This will enable materials
that change their structure, adapt their properties, or modify their environment
in response to external triggers, which could have a range of applications in
nanomanufacturing, biological sensing, energy harvesting or storage, lab-on-a-
chip systems, and drug delivery. This project will also provide unique training
opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students in DNA nanotechnology,
molecular robotics, single-molecule measurements, and multi-scale modeling. The
researchers will organize workshops to facilitate sharing of new materials
design and modeling methods and develop curricula in robotic nanomaterials.
Furthermore, this project's findings will be integrated into outreach programs
in Central Ohio and North Carolina to generate interest in science and
engineering from the next generation workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic
materials that integrate sensing, actuation, and communication and processing of
information at nano- to microscales can provide many technological benefits to
society, with applications ranging from nanomanufacturing to medicine. This
research investigates the forces, signals, and mechanisms that enable the
development of DNA-based robotic materials that sense forces under various
loading conditions, communicate signals over long distances, and exhibit phase
separating functionalities. To achieve these functions, the team will leverage
the well-defined nanoscale geometry and dynamic properties of DNA nanostructures
and the specificity and programmability of DNA binding interactions. Multi-scale
molecular modeling methods will guide the design of DNA devices with targeted
structural, mechanical, and dynamic properties with feedback from single
molecule characterization methods. The team will create materials via
hierarchical self-assembly that leverage individual device properties and
interactions between devices to expand sensing capabilities, transmit signals
via propagated conformational changes, and exhibit collective behaviors driven
by local interactions. This will provide a foundation to develop new and complex
robotic materials from the nano- to micron-scale that operate at room
temperature in aqueous environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.