* 1921911
* The New Mobilities of the Anthropocene: Animal Migration, Infrastructure Development, and Wildlife Population Management
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Casey Huckins, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 397,760.00

The objective of the proposed research is to examine the history of conservation
and restoration efforts for three iconic migratory species of the north:
woodland caribou, coaster brook trout, and common loons. All three species have
been the focus of decades of restoration efforts, yet all three remain at risk
in northern landscapes. The project seeks to understand what we can learn from
past efforts at understanding and managing migratory species, with the ultimate
goal of contributing to more sustainable strategies in the Anthropocene.
Although project is located within the upper Great Lakes basin, it is expected
to generate results that will provide insights for other scientific and
regulatory contexts, particularly those that concern extractive industries and
their effects on migratory species. Broader impact activities will include a
professionally-designed website; educational activities with Indigenous
communities and the Great Lakes Research Center including a webinar and
presentations at a public information session; and media outreach activities
including interviews on regional and national podcasts and radio
broadcasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a project to engage in
interdisciplinary research; specifically, it adds new dimensions to
environmental history and STS by incorporating spatial considerations. The PI
and her collaborator will examine the recent emergence of movement ecology as a
science, analyzing the ways new military technologies allowed migrating wildlife
to be tracked and thereby making the invisible visible. They will then analyze
ways that emerging infrastructures of the Anthropocene threaten persistence of
the migratory species that are becoming newly visible. Methods from spatial
history will enable them to visualize and analyze ways that the mobility of
wildlife, extractive industries, and contaminants influenced efforts to
conceptualize and then manage migratory species. To spatial history, they will
integrate STS tools of discourse analysis, enabling them to analyze ways that
government agencies negotiated growing pressures from extractive industries to
open boreal watersheds for development. The project will combine ecology,
environmental history, and broad STS approaches in an integrative research
project that will serve to advance each of these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.