* 1921260
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identity Theft Remediation and the Production of Economic Insecurity
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Gil Eyal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 32,356.00

Identity theft is often considered one of the fastest growing and most pressing
financial crimes in the United States. Each year it affects millions of
Americans and results in financial losses for businesses and consumers in the
tens of billions of dollars. Many victims also report negative emotional and
physical effects and face inaccurate credit reports, unanticipated debt, and
rejection for financial accounts, loans, or insurance. While prior research
links these latter consequences to the complicated steps for resolving identity
theft, it fails to offer an explanation for why individuals struggle to "recover
their identities." By exploring that process in depth, this project will assess
the efficacy of contemporary processes for resolving identity theft and their
consequences for American households.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates identity theft resolution from the perspective of victims and the
organizations they navigate. Through in-depth interviews with victims, it
explores how individuals go about resolving identity theft and details the
financial and emotional toll that experience takes on them and their families.
It also examines the perceived issues and challenges facing organizations and
government agencies involved in the remediation process by interviewing staff
and observing work in key organizational contexts. Together, these methods will
elucidate how managing personal data contributes to economic and other forms of
insecurity in American households, as well as how actors negotiate risk and
trust to repair breakdowns in expert systems for identification-sociotechnical
systems central to the generally smooth operation of countless economic and
political processes in everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.