* 1921813
* University of New Haven CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (SFS): Super Cyber Operatives (SCOs)
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Liberty Page, University of New Haven
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,396,435.00

The University of New Haven is the first designated National Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Operations in the state of Connecticut. The program focuses
on producing students with strong hands-on technical skills coupled with
multidisciplinary, entrepreneurial and research mindsets. The university also
enables students to operate in competitive environments by having them
participate in a multitude of cyber competitions. The approach will be extended
to cohorts of SFS Scholars. All SFS scholars will undergo a rigorous curriculum
augmented with research and experiential opportunities and will be a part of the
university's competitive cyber collegiate teams. SFS scholars will also
participate in a variety of well-established outreach activities such as the
yearly GenCyber Agent Summer Academy, and one-day Girl Scouts of Connecticut
Cyber Agent Camp. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal aim of this project is to
meet the rising need for highly-skilled, out-of-the-box thinking cybersecurity
professionals to protect the nation and enter its governmental workforce. The
University of New Haven proposes Connecticut's first CyberCorps Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program that will produce the next generation of Super Cyber
Operatives (SCOs) that will be ready to enter the government's cybersecurity
workforce. By leveraging existing infrastructure and initiatives, the CyberCorps
SFS SCOs program will focus on selecting undergraduate seniors (first semester)
from the Cyber Operations paths to become undergraduate SFS Scholars. These
students will then complete their MSc degrees as graduate SFS Scholars in
Cybersecurity &amp; Networks. The students will intern at a federal, state,
local, or tribal government organization in a position related to cybersecurity
within their first two years as an SFS Scholar. Specifically, the program aims
to develop SFS Scholars that: (1) are deeply technical doers yet
multidisciplinary thinkers, (2) possess entrepreneurial and applied research
mindsets, (3) are competitive yet team-oriented, (4) value diversity and
inclusion, and (5) are highly effective technical
communicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.