* 1921841
* How to Collect Humans: A Video Ethnographic Approach to Fieldwork in Paleontology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Wesley Shrum, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 105,795.00

To many, the process of scientific discovery can seem complex if not mysterious.
But finding our earliest human ancestors can also seem like a matter of luck.
This project documents a group of paleontologists at two of the most exciting
fossil sites in the world. Paleontology is a classic discovery science: the game
is to find fossils in a high risk/high payoff area. Teamwork, heat, and hardship
occasionally produce global headlines on human ancestors. The fieldwork team is
unique: the only such expedition run by a Kenyan scholar in collaboration with
an American woman scientist. 'How to Find Humans' documents this fieldwork using
video ethnography to (a) collect extensive footage, (b) assemble a curated
selection of this footage for both scholarly and public access, (c) edit the
footage to produce audiovisual outputs for use in teaching, public awareness of
the discovery process, and advancing STS understanding of fieldwork. These broad
impacts on education, scholarship, and public engagement include the production
of teaching videos and a public archive of audiovisual materials. A series of
short videos are being created as teaching aids for undergraduate and graduate
education in both science and STS. Students, scholars, and the public will see
scientists and fossil finders as they examine and discuss rocks and fossils,
make decisions on whether to collect them, and try to understand their
significance in the human timeline. Unlike traditional documentaries that
present after-the-fact versions of science, the project presents science in the
making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fieldwork itself occurs at two main locations:
one is a new site that has already produced some evidence on the earliest
anatomically modern humans, tentatively dated as having lived 200,000 years ago.
The other is the first site to reveal that more than one species of human
ancestor was present near the origin of our lineage nearly 3.5 million years
ago. It has yielded the earliest stone tools, long predating the origin of our
species. Both sites are at the cutting edge of evolutionary studies. The project
contributes to the field of science and technology studies in two major ways.
First, a deeper understanding of fieldwork in science will emerge through
systematic observation and recording of paleontologists at the cutting edge of a
science that has always been controversial within science, education, and the
public. Second, this project and the method of video ethnography will provide
the basis for a general approach to collaborative work in the field sciences
going forward. Among the project outcomes are a documentary to educate the
public and the development of video ethnographic methods that can be transferred
to study fieldwork in other scientific settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.