* 1921546
* Collaborative Research: Sundowner Winds EXperiment (SWEX) in Santa Barbara, California
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Robert Fovell, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 264,945.00

Wildfires are among the greatest natural hazards in the Western U.S. and other
parts of the world. The numerous tragic events in recent years in California
have exposed the great vulnerability of the population to wildfires and the
critical need to improve understanding and enhance predictability of windstorms
in complex terrain. Coastal Santa Barbara County (SB), with a population
exceeding 130,000 inhabitants, is among the most exposed communities to wildfire
hazards in southern California. The Santa Ynez Mountains rise abruptly from
coastal SB separating the Pacific Ocean on its south face from the Santa Ynez
Valley on its north face. Downslope, dry and gusty windstorms are frequently
observed on the southern-facing slopes of the Santa Ynez Mountains. These winds
typically intensify around sunset and throughout the night, and are known as
"Sundowner winds" or "Sundowners". They are considered the most significant
fire-weather regime in coastal SB and pose hazardous conditions to aviation.
They have enhanced the severity of all major wildfires affecting the SB coastal
population. Therefore, improved weather warnings and forecast lead time,
including spatiotemporal specificity of where winds will be strongest, are
critical to increase resilience to wildfires. Sundowners exhibit large
spatiotemporal variability and are driven by unique complex mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sundowner Winds Experiment (SWEX) will investigate
these unique aspects of Sundowners to advance the understanding and
predictability of these winds, while providing rich data sets for developing new
theories of downslope windstorms in coastal environments with similar geographic
and climatic characteristics. This will be accomplished with strategic
meteorological observations of the atmospheric processes hypothesized to
modulate Sundowner winds intensity and spatial variability. These results will
significantly contribute to improve the predictability of windstorms in complex
terrain in coastal environments, with significant impacts to large communities
living in fire prone areas. The project will provide key outreach materials for
dissemination to government agencies and the media and will educate the public
about fire weather and natural disasters. Moreover, the project will support the
development of new educational courses, and the training of undergraduate and
graduate students, including minorities, in six universities in the U.S.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sundowners spatiotemporal characteristics are controlled
by complex interactions between atmospheric processes occurring upstream, in the
Santa Ynez Valley and San Rafael Mountains, and downstream due to the influence
of a cool and stable marine boundary layer. The SWEX campaign is designed to
enhance spatial measurements to resolve local circulations and vertical profiles
from the boundary layer to the mid-troposphere, and from the SB channel to the
Santa Ynez Valley. These observations will be used to test hypotheses concerning
the mechanisms controlling Sundowner winds, evaluate mesoscale simulations and
improve lead time forecasts of Sundowners. More specifically, the multi-sensor
platforms and aircraft will be utilized to investigate how the structure and
dynamics of the marine and continental Boundary Layers (BL) influence mountain
flows during Sundowners and undisturbed periods, including intensity, timing and
geographic characteristics of downslope winds, temperatures and humidity. These
measurements will enable to examine underlying mechanisms relating high
amplitude mountain waves, critical layers, and surface wind intensity leeward of
the Santa Ynez Mountains. These observations will be utilized to investigate how
variations in BL structure and tropospheric stability control mountain wave
flows and the lee-slope jet, and the importance of these mechanisms for the
predictability of Sundowner winds. SWEX brings cutting-edge science, the state-
of-art facilities at National Center for Atmospheric Research and multiple
instrumental platforms to bear on this important problem. It will build linkages
with those responsible for predictions and fire response in a region that is
representative of many areas with similar vulnerabilities. SWEX will improve the
capability of the National Weather Service to forecast weather hazards in the
Los Angeles area, specifically in coastal SB. Thus this project has substantial
broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.