* 1921617
* Workshop: Historical and Social Perspectives on the Life Sciences Concerning Life and Death: Naples, Italy, June 23-30, 2019
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Janet Browne, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2022
* USD 24,996.00

This award provides partial support for an international workshop; it provides
funds for ten individuals from the US to participate in an international
residential collaborative workshop that is to be held in Naples Zoological
Station, Italy, in June 2019. The workshop theme is "Life and Death," and all
participants are expected to discuss in depth six aspects of the theme, moving
from early notions about living beings in the Early Modern period to the latest
research programs around the world that are attempting to probe the limits of
contemporary science and technology. The total number of faculty at the workshop
is limited to ten and student participants to twenty-five; the grant will
support four faculty members and six graduate students or post-doctoral fellows
from US academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop theme, "Life
and Death," engages with the way that thinkers in the European tradition have
asked fundamental questions about the function and purpose of the living body.
It is an important topic in the history of biology, and it connects closely with
related issues in sociology, technology, and ethics. One aim of the workshop is
to familiarize participants with different modes of scientific thought, both
across historical time and in different cultures and geographical regions.
Additional importance to the theme derives from the fact that biologists and
social scientists today are carefully exploring the ambiguous boundary between
life and death as expressed not only in the human body, as in hospital
situations, the course of diseases, the definition of death, ageing, and
forensic pathology, but also on the cellular level, in cell rejuvenation, stem
cell physiology, and cancer research, as well as in changing cultural ideas
about theology and the question of an afterlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.