* 1921670
* RUI:  Functional Evolution of Cytochrome P460 and Cytochrome c'-beta
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Colin Andrew, Eastern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 05/31/2024
* USD 356,874.00

In ammonia-rich environments (e.g. fertilized fields and wastewater treatment
plants), certain types of bacteria use iron-containing heme enzymes to convert
fixed nitrogen to nitrous oxide (N2O)- a potent ozone-depleting greenhouse gas.
This project will study the molecular basis for heme-based N2O formation; this
knowledge is relevant for developing more efficient agricultural practices along
with reducing atmospheric pollution. By studying the influence of molecular
structure on heme-catalyzed N2O formation, this project will also inform the
design of synthetic enzymes for biotechnology. Undergraduate research is a key
feature of this project, providing students with skills, experiences and
motivation for future scientific career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The means by which cytochromes P460 react with
hydroxylamine to produce N2O has received recent attention, with a focus on
enzymes from nitrifying bacteria. By contrast, little is known about the
equivalent enzymes in methanotrophs. This project will focus on structure-
function relationships in two evolutionarily related c-type heme proteins from
the methanotroph, Methylococcus capsulatus (Bath): 1) a hydroxylamine oxidizing
cytochrome P460 (McP460); and 2) a nitric oxide (NO)-binding cytochrome c'-beta
(McCP-beta). Crystal structures of these proteins reveal common tertiary
structures, but very different distal heme pockets; McP460 contains a Lys-
porphyrin cross-link and a highly polar distal pocket tailored to enzymatic
function, whereas McCP-beta has evolved a hydrophobic distal heme environment
for NO binding. Specific aims are to (i) characterize reaction intermediates in
McP460-catalyzed hydroxylamine oxidation and N2O formation, along with the
influence of the P460 Lys-porphyrin cross-link and distal pocket hydrogen-
bonding residues; and (ii) define the role of the McCP-beta 'distal Phe cap', as
well as heme chemistry pertinent to its functional evolution from N2O generation
to its proposed NO-binding role. A battery of physicochemical techniques will be
utilized to study wild-type and variant proteins, including spectroscopy (UV-
visible absorption, resonance Raman, FT infra-red, electron paramagnetic
resonance), kinetic techniques (stopped-flow, freeze-quench and flash
photolysis), as well as gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, X-ray
crystallography, density functional theory, and potentiometric
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.