* 1921251
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Understanding the neural basis for sensorimotor control loops using whisker-based robotic hardware platforms
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Sarah Bergbreiter, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2021
* USD 274,359.00

This project will construct robots in order to understand how animals gather
information through the sense of touch and how animals use touch information to
perform complex behaviors. The results will be important to both neuroscience
and engineering. On the neuroscience side, the results will address how the
brain combines information about movement and touch, thereby improving our
understanding of stroke and brain injury. On the engineering side, the work will
develop novel robots and sensors that use touch to sense object location, shape,
and texture, to track fluid wakes in water, and to sense the direction of
airflow. These capabilities will improve the ability of robots to work in
challenging environments; for example, robots could explore dark areas more
easily or provide surgeons with a better sense of touch during surgery. To train
the next generation of scientists and engineers, both undergraduate and graduate
students will help construct the robots and will explore industry- and
government-related applications of whisker-based touch sensing. The research
team will investigate technology transfer opportunities in robotics and
medicine, flow sensing, instrument placement, corrosion detection, three-
dimensional tactile profilometry, and compliance sensing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental scientific rationale for the work is that
understanding how animal nervous systems process complex sensory and motor
information necessarily requires quantification of the input. However, it is
currently impossible for neuroscientists to record from all primary sensory
neurons involved in a particular sensorimotor behavior. The three stages of this
project exploit the whisker system of mammals in an endeavor to completely
quantify whisker-based input and early neural processing in the rat (Rattus
norvegicus) and the harbor seal (Phoca vitulina). The first stage of work will
focus on the development of modular, reconfigurable, artificial whiskers that
can sense both touch and fluid flow. The materials, manufacturing, and sensor
designs necessary for whiskers at multiple length scales will be investigated
and signals from the whiskers will be represented based on known coding
properties of primary whisker-sensitive neurons in the trigeminal ganglion (TG).
The second stage of work will involve the construction of whisker arrays that
anatomically match those of the rat and the seal. These arrays will be used to
develop combined hardware and software models of the responses of the entire
population of TG neurons. Finally, in the third stage of work, the whisker
arrays will be mounted on robotic platforms, and the robots will be put through
the same head movements as real animals during natural behavior. This process
will allow us to simulate the entire TG neuron population response during
complex, natural behaviors. Overall, the project will help unlock the basis by
which low-level but powerful neural circuits confer animals with flexibility and
resourcefulness in sensing and movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems
(NSF-NCS), a mulitdisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human
Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences (SBE).