* 1921182
* RUI: Collaborative Proposal: Tectonic controls on arc evolution and petrogenesis, central Sierra Nevada Ancestral Cascades arc, California
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Keith Putirka, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 190,661.00

Recent studies of active volcanoes show that volcanic eruptions are often
triggered by earthquakes, which occur in response to plate tectonic forces. But
the active faults on such volcanoes cannot be directly examined as they are
deeply buried by sediments and earlier erupted volcanic materials. The PIs of
this study have discovered three Miocene-age volcanic centers in eastern
California, in a region called the Walker Lane that, through uplift and erosion,
have exposed the rarely-seen roots of Cascade volcanoes. Their work has both
scientific and societal broader impacts. First, because the active Lassen
Volcanic Center in northern California is also in the Walker Lane region, their
proposed work will be directly applicable to understanding eruption triggering
mechanisms there, and at other active Cascade volcanoes. Their recent work has
also uncovered the largest volcanic eruption rates known in either the modern or
ancient Cascades, and their new work will delimit the tectonic conditions that
allow for very large volcanic eruptions to occur. In addition, the PIs will be
training a new generation of scientists. Fresno State undergraduate students
will be involved in all aspects of the work. They are mostly first generation
college students, and are often from under-represented groups and low income
families. This NSF support is crucial to bringing research experiences to an
underserved community. Through the Fresno State-University of California Davis
collaboration, Fresno State students will have the opportunity to collaborate
with a PhD student as well as undergraduate field and lab assistants at UC
Davis. Students will take the lead not only on research projects, but on
presentations at professional meetings, and will be co-authors or lead authors
on papers. Most Fresno State students will also serve California's Central
Valley as Geologists after graduation, working on projects that range from
earthquake hazards to groundwater quality. This early support for their research
experiences thus pays dividends to the Central Valley many years after the grant
is over. The project is supported by both the Petrology &amp; Geochemsitry and
Tectonics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ancestral Cascade volcanoes of
central California that the PIs and their students will study are the ancient
analogs of active volcanoes, such as Lassen Peak and Mt Shasta in northern
California, or Mt. St. Helens in Washington. The ancestral Cascades formed from
about 16 to 5 million years ago and have been uplifted at the eastern edge of
the Sierra Nevada Mountain range. Uplift and erosion have exposed 5 km of
structural relief on three volcanic centers. The PIs will take advantage of
these deep exposures to map the geologic faults that allowed these ancestral
Cascade volcanoes to develop. Their earlier work showed that volcanoes develop
in what are called transtensional basins; the faults that form these basins
allow pathways for magmas to reach the surface. Their new geologic maps and age
dates will constrain the timing of both fault activity and volcanic eruptions,
and will allow a test whether the volume and style (explosive vs. effusive) of
volcanic eruptions is directly related to the magnitude of fault activity. One
of their hypotheses is that episodes of active transtensional faulting will
allow deeper, hotter magmas to be erupted. The PIs will analyze the compositions
of the lava flows, and use thermodynamic models, to determine whether the magmas
were stored in deep or shallow reservoirs prior to eruption. The PIs have also
discovered a suite of lavas that represent the single largest eruption rates
ever recorded in either the modern or ancient Cascades. Their new data will
determine whether such large eruptions tapped sources that are unusually deep or
hot, and whether such episodes are controlled by fault activity. With these
results, it may be possible to examine earthquakes at modern volcanoes to
predict eruption volume and style.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.