* 1921646
* Integrating Data- and Model-based Methods to Enable Improved Heart Surgery Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Chun Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This award contributes to the national health, prosperity, and welfare by
investigating the use of data-driven computer models and 3D printing technology
to improve surgery planning for patients suffering from Aortic Stenosis. Aortic
Stenosis is among the most common and severe valvular heart disease conditions
and is generally addressed surgically through Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Replacement (TAVR). Despite the overall survival benefit, the TAVR surgery may
result in adverse outcomes such as paravalvular leakage, which is associated
with hospital readmission, congestive heart failure, and increased one-year
mortality. Computer models of a patient's valve may help improve surgical
outcomes. The goal of this project is to produce a functional model of a heart
valve in order to augment leakage data from real patients with experimental data
based on 3D printed valves so as to develop more reliable predictive models for
surgical planning. The research has the potential to significantly improve
surgical outcomes in practice for cardiologic treatment and intervention and
help reduce adverse outcomes of such surgeries. The award supports a graduate
student whose research lies at the intersection of data science and additive
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the idea of embedding
microstructure in the 3D printed polymer to tailor its mechanical properties and
mimic real human tissue. Finding the optimal configuration of the fiber insert
is an extremely difficult problem because the optimization needs to be executed
in an infinite dimensional functional domain. The project utilizes advanced
statistical modeling techniques to make this optimization problem tractable.
Specifically, a new functional input-functional output co-kriging model will be
developed that relates the stress-strain curves to the fiber insert shapes. A
key feature of this modeling technique is a new spectral distance correlation
function that makes the model invariant to translations, which is a desirable
property for the tissue mimicking problem. Furthermore, advanced techniques in
experimental design and Bayesian model calibration are employed to obtain 3D
printed valve data and merge them with available historical
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.