* 1921065
* Parallel sensorimotor processing in avoidance responses.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Catherine von Reyn, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

If, at a basketball game, a basketball is deflected into an unsuspecting group
of spectators, some will duck, others will freeze, while others may make
defensive arm gestures to protect their head. This project seeks to determine
the neural mechanisms that enable a single stimulus (like an approaching
basketball) to generate a rich repertoire of behavioral responses. To tackle
this question, this project investigates visually-evoked avoidance behaviors in
the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster. Drosophila, like humans, are capable of
generating diverse behaviors to an object approaching on a direct collision
course. Drosophila also provide cutting edge genetic tools for precisely
manipulating and recording activity from specific neurons during these
behaviors. This project applies these tools to uncover the neural pathways
involved in these behaviors and determine how their activity generates
behavioral diversity. Upon completion of this project, these findings will apply
broadly to understanding how behavioral diversity arises and how appropriate
behavioral responses are selected. This research may guide future efforts to
restore behavioral responses in neurodevelopmental disorders and
neurodegenerative diseases. This work may also support the development of
assistive therapies to aid patients who have difficulties in selecting or
executing actions. Finally, through educational outreach, experimental tools and
outcomes will be disseminated through hands-on activities and active learning
paradigms that target communities underrepresented in STEM careers and higher
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When faced with a looming stimulus, like a
predator approaching on a direct collision course, Drosophila select amongst a
range of behavioral possibilities, including running, freezing, and flight
initiation. Drosophila also exhibit flexible control over the duration and
timing of these behaviors to optimize their chance of survival. Here, newly
discovered, genetically and electrophysiologically accessible sensorimotor
pathways in Drosophila melanogaster are probed to uncover how behavioral
responses are selected and coordinated. Nine of these pathways project within
regions of the brain that process the visual features of an approaching object
and terminate on motor centers in the ventral nerve cord (fly spinal cord) that
control the leg and wing movements of avoidance maneuvers. Preliminary data
support the hypothesis that the selection and coordination of avoidance
maneuvers results from differential activation timing across these pathways. To
evaluate this hypothesis, the research objectives will (1) link pathway activity
to behavioral responses and (2) determine the mechanisms underlying differential
activation timing. Objectives will be delivered by employing a newly developed
behavioral assay, computer vision algorithms for detailed kinematic tracking and
behavioral analysis, whole-cell electrophysiology in behaving animals, and
computational modeling. As the ability to generate diverse collision avoidance
behaviors is conserved from flies to humans, the neural substrates and
mechanisms that drive looming evoked behaviors in Drosophila will provide models
for how these behaviors emerge within larger nervous systems, and provide
general principles for how actions may be selected through parallel sensorimotor
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.