* 1921688
* Workshop - Understanding Mathematical Explanation: Uniting Philosophical and Educational Perspectives; Spring 2020; New Brunswick, NJ
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Juan Pablo Mejia-Ramos, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 26,870.00

This award supports a workshop to develop new insights about the nature of
mathematical explanation by bringing together philosophers of mathematics,
epistemologists, psychologists, and mathematics educators to discuss how
developments in their own fields could meaningfully contribute to the
development of an account of mathematical explanation that unites these multiple
perspectives. Invited speakers and attendees will be given several opportunities
during the workshop (in panels, working groups, and informal settings) to engage
in significant work on cross-cutting themes. The workshop organizers also plan
to use targeted advertisement in local schools of education and school districts
to attract interest among pre- and in-service teachers to attend the conference.
As a broader impact, workshop organizers expect that these results will have a
significant impact on educational work on mathematical explanation, and that
this will in turn lead to new understandings and teaching methods that will
ultimately impact teachers and students of mathematics at all educational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notion of explanation is central to both
philosophy and education. These disciplines have made significant developments
concerning the role and character of explanations in scientific inquiry and in
the classroom. However, the notion of explanation in the field of mathematics
has proved to be particularly challenging; both philosophers and educators are
unclear about what is needed in a mathematical explanation so that it goes
beyond merely demonstrating that some mathematical phenomenon is so to
explaining why it is so. Since here has been little influence of philosophical
accounts of mathematical explanation in educational research, and vice versa,
the workshop organizers expect that bringing together experts in these fields
and some related fields in a workshop setting has potential to advance our
knowledge and understanding of the notion of mathematical explanation in the
both fields. They plan to enhance that potential by inviting speakers who are
not only experts in the study of explanation and understanding from their own
disciplinary perspective, but also open to crossing traditional disciplinary
boundaries and to using different theoretical and methodological traditions in
their own work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.