* 1921157
* Enabling the Next Generation of Hazards Researchers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Terri Norton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 669,646.00

This project will (1) foster the development of scholars with a career-long
commitment to research on hazards, risk, and disasters; (2) contribute to the
nation's future research capacity and infrastructure in these areas; and (3) add
important original scientific knowledge to the areas of hazards, risk, and
disasters by increasing interdisciplinary, convergent scholarship. This project
builds on previous successful mentoring projects funded by CMMI with some
important innovations. First, this project will expand the substantive
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary content by including coverage of coupled
hazards-society modeling, disaster health, and emerging technologies. Second,
the project uses research on successful mentoring to design an early career
faculty mentoring program that maximizes beneficial impacts for mentees,
develops the skills of new mentors, and is transferable to a broad range of
research mentoring contexts (e.g., university-based programs, other NSF
programs). Third, there will be a greater emphasis on preparing mentees to
pursue funding via the NSF's CAREER mechanism. Fourth, this project will
establish a formal partnership between the Enabling Program and the Natural
Hazards Center at the University of Colorado Boulder to improve program
visibility and institutional capacity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The program
consists of several key elements: (a) a cohort of 20 Fellows who are in tenure
track positions at research universities, (b) 10 senior scholars that will serve
as Mentors to the Fellows, (c) a program Advisory Committee, and (c) a project
Leadership Management Team consisting of the Principal and Co-Principal
Investigators and several supporting members. This project is crucial to the
advancement of knowledge in the interdisciplinary hazards/disasters/risk field,
which relies on a continuous influx of young scholars committed both to their
own disciplines and to the theoretical and applied aspects of this broad field.
The significance of the program lies in developing and empowering a cadre of
researchers who can understand and address the complex interactions between the
social, built, and natural environment associated with hazards and disasters. In
terms of broader impacts, the project will create a diverse set of scholars
versed in the systematic explanation of social causes and consequences of
disasters, which is critical to improving all phases of disaster management.
Results will be disseminated, including a description and assessment of the
transferable mentoring model, through journal article publications and
participation in the annual Natural Hazards Research and Applications Workshop
in Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.