* 1921490
* Collaborative Research: Behavioral Consequences of Excessive Confidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Eric Stone, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 293,472.00

A common lay theory states that a lack of confidence is a barrier to performance
in many areas of life, such as athletic and scholastic performance. The
assumption is that an underperforming individual could better live up to their
potential if they only could enhance their confidence. This stands in stark
contrast to conclusions from behavioral decision research, which finds that
people are generally overconfident. By this account, increasing confidence
without concurrently increasing knowledge should produce a host of negative
outcomes, such as maladaptive risk taking and ignoring relevant information.
This work attempts to reconcile these views, by showing that unjustified
confidence in knowledge (i.e., confidence after controlling for knowledge) has
both positive and negative effects, and that the resulting impact on decision
outcomes is situation-specific. By doing so, this work will help inform
interventions that target people's confidence levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish this goal, this 4-year research project introduces a theoretical
framework for investigating the effects of unjustified confidence in knowledge
and uses this framework to advance our understanding of how unjustified
confidence influences decision outcomes. This project leverages a mixture of
research designs, including survey-based and experimental studies. Phase 1, in
year 1, will lay the groundwork by identifying the most promising interventions
for increasing and decreasing confidence and scoping promising psychological and
behavioral mechanisms by which confidence can influence decision outcomes. Phase
2, in years 2 and 3, will test individual pathways from unjustified confidence
to decision outcomes. These studies will build up to Phase 3, in year 4, which
will involve a large-scale test of how unjustified confidence affects
psychological processes (such as expecting good decision outcomes), how these in
turn influence behavioral processes (such as risk taking), how these effects are
influenced by environmental factors (e.g., ease of use of new information), and
how these ultimately influence decision outcomes. This project will end by
constructing a comprehensive model of the consequences of confidence, which will
guide future research and interventions to improve decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.