* 1921273
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: On Terror and Trauma: Governance, Law and Post Traumatic Stress Syndrome
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Brinkley Messick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,137.00

While contestation of the Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder paradigm is as old as
the diagnostic category itself, the debate about what PTSD is and how to
compensate victims remains unsolved to this day. Existing scholarship has
examined how community organizing for compensation rights by Vietnam veterans,
rape survivors, and high-risk workers has influenced the recognition of PTSD as
a diagnostic category. But the intertwined juridical and scientific procedures
through which PTSD evidence is indeed produced have received scant attention
from the social sciences. The present research explores the production,
circulation, and contestation of evidence substantiating trauma and determining
its financial compensation following the November 13, 2015 (11/13) terrorist
attacks in France. This will allow for a reassessment of the significance of
PTSD's characterization as a mental illness with a unique etiology providing
grounds for legal prosecution in the constitution of distinct forms of public
health policy-making and humanitarian assistance in the U.S., Europe, and the
Global South. Findings from this research will address audiences across
academia, government and civil organizations that aim to improve the management
of emergency psychological care and the indemnification of victims of mass
violence.

To achieve these goals, the research explores the technologies of evidence
production in two economies of 11/13-related PTSD investigation: (1) the legal
determination of the parameters for PTSD compensation and (2) the forensic
reporting of PTSD diagnostic criteria in 11/13 survivors and the determination
of their etiology. Data are collected from participant observation and semi-
structured interviews with state insurers of the Guarantee Fund for Victims of
Acts of Terrorism (FGTI), neuropsychologists of the National Institute of Health
and Medical Research involved in biomedical research on PTSD in 11/13 survivors,
and two associations that represent 11/13 victims to the FGTI. By investigating
the intersection between law and neuroscience in their treatment of PTSD claims,
the project will provide insight into the entanglement of practices of
evidentiary proof, protocols for testifying, and biotechnologies in the politics
of life of contemporary societies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.