* 1921973
* DMREF:Collaborative Research: GOALI:  Accelerating Discovery of High Entropy Silicates for Extreme Environments
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Elizabeth Opila, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,312,500.00

Non-technical Description: The efficiency of turbine engines used for power and
propulsion can be increased by operating at higher temperatures. However, this
approach is limited by available materials that can withstand these extreme
environments. In this Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our
Future (DMREF) project, the discovery of new materials that enable higher
temperature turbine operation will be accelerated through computational methods
that are validated with experimental results. Materials to be studied include
mixed rare earth silicates for potential high temperature coatings of turbine
engine components. Coatings currently under development use a single rare earth
element in the silicate. Mixing various combinations of the fifteen rare earth
elements in the silicates provides opportunities to discover and optimize
desirable coating properties, including low thermal conductivity and high
stability in the reactive turbine engine environments. High throughput
computational approaches will be used to understand trends in material
properties as the composition is varied. The concept of accelerated material
discovery will be taught to the university students involved in the project and
the application and importance of materials in engines will be demonstrated to
elementary students through outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: This research will accelerate new understanding of the interplay of
cation complexity on phase stability of high entropy rare earth silicates in
extreme environments. The computation-experiment-feedback loop coupled with
machine learning and high throughput computation will result in heretofore
unrealized linkages of entropy-induced material stability, thermal properties,
and corrosion resistance. The project will result in advances in fundamental
understanding and discovery of novel materials that can be designed for specific
extreme environment applications. The computational approach to materials
discovery will utilize AFLOW: high throughput property prediction. These
predictions will be tested by characterizing rare earth silicates synthesized
via solid state sintering, chemical techniques for improved cation mixing, and
gas phase pulsed laser deposition of thin films. Phase stability and chemical
disorder will be characterized through use of techniques including X-ray
diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. Resulting stability of rare
earth silicate mixtures will inform improvements in the computational approach
for materials discovery. Additionally, computational approaches will be used to
predict phonon transport and thermal properties. These predicted thermal
properties will be compared against thermal conductivity measurements as a
function of temperature through use of time domain and steady state
thermoreflectance, and hot disk techniques. Environmental stability will be
experimentally characterized using "steam-jet" testing, an extreme environment
laboratory test creating high-temperature, high-velocity, reactive steam
representative of the combustion environment. Results from both the thermal and
environmental testing will be used to validate and advance the computational
approaches and property-based materials discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.