* 1921089
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2019 IFIP Networking Conference (IFIP NETWORKING)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Lu Su, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

This travel grant is used to support US based graduate students to attend the
International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) Networking 2019
Conference, to be held in Warsaw, Poland from May 20 to May 22, 2019. The
Networking series of conferences is the International Conference on Networking
organized by the IFIP Technical Committee on Communication Systems (TC6)
initiated in 2000. The main objectives of the IFIP Networking conference are to
bring together members of the networking community from both academia and
industry, to discuss recent advances in the broad and quickly-evolving fields of
computer and communication networks, and to highlight key issues, identify
trends, and develop visions for the networking domain. Attending the IFIP
Networking conference is highly valuable for graduate students. Not only will
they be exposed to the state-of-the-art in the field, but they will also have
the opportunity to interact with peers from institutions worldwide, meet with
leading researchers, and take part in discussions that are likely to shape the
future of the field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This award will
support approximately fifteen students. It encourages participation by students
who would normally find it difficult to attend, and will play an important role
in promoting diversity in the IFIP Networking conference attendees. The travel
grants will target graduate students, in particular female and underrepresented
minority students from minority-serving institutions that are not traditionally
represented in the IFIP Networking conference. Priority will be given to the
students who will substantially benefit from attending this conference but have
limited travel funds, as well as junior graduate students who will attend the
conference for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.