* 1921184
* Workshop on Buddhism and Comparative Constitutional Law: Chicago, IL Fall 2019
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Tom Ginsburg, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 78,821.00

This proposed workshop promises to open up a new subfield in comparative
constitutional studies. There is a large and rich literature on the relationship
between Islam and constitutionalism, and an older historical literature on the
central place of Canon law in the Western legal tradition. Writing on Buddhist
law is scarce in general, and especially so with regard to constitutional
thought. This is particularly problematic when Buddhist actors are playing an
important role in the constitutional politics of many countries. To date, policy
analysis and scholarship has not fully grappled with the growing importance of
Buddhist actors and institutions on the practice, conceptualization and
formation of constitutional law. This workshop and its outputs will therefore
help inform policy understandings of the interaction of these two major forces
in years to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will produce publications
and collaborations, supporting new researchers and identifying a clear research
agenda for studying Buddhism and public law both within the academy and the
policy community. Co-chaired by two scholars with complementary training and
expertise--in political and comparative approaches to constitutional law and
historical and social scientific study of Buddhism, respectively--it will
consist of six panels, bringing together scholars of law and socio-legal studies
with scholars of politics, history and religion, including graduate students and
early-career scholars. Panelists will produce original research on Buddhism and
constitutional law in particular Asian jurisdictions, while also reflecting from
comparative perspectives, including international law, American and Asian
constitutional law, and other traditions of religious law (Hindu law, Islamic
law, Canon law). One panel will place contemporary constitutional practice and
politics in a longer span of pre-nineteenth-century Asian history, grounding
discussions of the constitutional present in the region's rich historical
settings. The workshop will produce an edited volume in a prominent series and a
journal section, while also supporting graduate student mentoring and informing
policy-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.