* 1921608
* Student and Post-Doctoral Researcher Travel Support at IMCS 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Peter Hesketh, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 20,000.00

The NSF award will primarily support students and Post-Doctoral researchers
travel to IMCS 2020 conference. The International Meeting on Chemical Sensors
(IMCS) will be held on Montreal May 10-14th 2020. This meeting will be the 18th
in the series of international meetings that were initiated in 1983 in Fukuoka,
Japan. The IMCS meetings are interdisciplinary covering all aspects of chemical
and biosensors for gases, vapors and liquids. Sensor technology is widely
applied to human medical diagnostics and health and fitness monitoring. The
demand for environment sensing and development of sensor technology to determine
the effects on human and animal health are critically important. In addition,
with recent developments in changing weather patterns, and the impact of green-
house gases and their adverse effects on the environment. We anticipate sweeping
changes to the application of sensors to medicine, air quality monitoring, food
safety and water quality in the near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of the International Meeting on Chemical Sensors (IMCS) held on Montreal May
10-14th 2020 is to bring researchers together at all levels
(MS/PhD/undergraduate students, post-docs, early career, and senior researchers)
from diverse field to present and discuss new development and cutting-edge tools
related to all aspects of chemical sensing technology. In particular: (1) to
provide an opportunity to new and established researchers in their fields to
develop collaborations across disciplines, (2) to facilitate networking and
career-building opportunities for the younger researchers, and (3) to enhance
participation of women and under-represented minority groups in this field. This
conference in particular will be of great benefit due to the interdisciplinary
nature of chemical and biosensing. Bringing the scientists and engineers
together for a four day meeting under beautiful surroundings in Montreal, it
will foster interactions amongst Chemical Engineers, Bioengineers, Chemists,
Electrical Engineers, Mechanical Engineers, Materials Scientists, Computer
Engineers and business involved in sensor and sensor related technology. The
conference provides opportunity for young scientists and engineers to build
their careers, by interacting in person with colleagues, including more senior
researchers. The meeting is strive to promote diversity of participants of
students and post-doctoral researchers. In providing travel support, priority
will be given to women, young researches and underrepresented minorities, who
might not be able to attend for financial reasons. The past participants at IMCS
have come from these different disciplines and from over 35 countries around the
world. The plan for the meeting includes four plenary talks, approximately 40
invited talks, in addition to oral papers and posters. Speakers will be selected
from submitted abstracts. The IMCS meeting will be advertised through ACS
publications, ECS publications and mailing lists in addition to web pages for
the meeting program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.