* 1921341
* The Evolution of DNA Replication Timing in Great Apes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Amnon Koren, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,053,160.00

The evolution of DNA replication timing in great
apes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although humans and our closest primate relatives
(e.g., chimpanzees) are ~99% identical at the genetic level, there are clearly
many differing traits, such as cognitive abilities, language, upright posture,
and many more. This project will explore one genetic mechanism that could help
explain those differences: the variation in the timing of DNA replication. This
project will measure the progression of DNA replication across the chromosomes
of many humans, chimpanzees, and other great apes. Subsequently, the project
will identify differences, reconstruct their evolutionary trajectory, and link
DNA replication variation to mutation rates, gene expression and possibly, the
evolution of new traits. As part of the societal impact of the project, results
will be disseminated to current and prospective veteran undergraduate students,
a group which is under-represented in leading universities. Veterans have a high
interest in STEM fields but often do not have the same opportunities to engage
in biological research. The research will additionally involve undergraduate and
graduate students and will develop an accessible platform for visualization of
the computational data generated in this project, which will be widely shared
with researchers and the public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;DNA is replicated
according to a defined temporal order referred to as the DNA replication timing
program. DNA replication timing interfaces with gene regulation and influences
mutation rates and patterns. As a result, it holds the potential of affecting
evolution in non-trivial ways. On the other hand, we know very little about how
DNA replication timing has itself evolved. This project will measure DNA
replication timing across the genomes of ~100 humans and chimpanzees as well as
other great apes, using whole-genome DNA sequencing. The generated replication
timing data will be used to identify variations, infer their evolutionary
patterns and genetic basis, and link them to human-specific molecular and
phenotypic traits. Genes that are known to have evolved since human-chimpanzee
divergence will be specifically studied for replication timing variations, and
other candidate genes identified based on replication timing divergence
patterns. Reciprocally, patterns of replication timing variation among great
apes will be used to infer the dynamics of replication timing evolution,
including the birth and death of DNA replication origins, and changes in DNA
replication timing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.