* 1921418
* EAGER: L-Band Radar Ice Sounder for Measuring Ice Basal Conditions and Ice-Shelf Melt Rate
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* S. Prasad Gogineni, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2021
* USD 298,697.00

Predicting the response of ice sheets to changing climate and their contribution
to sea level requires accurate representation in numerical models of basal
conditions under the ice. There remain large data gaps for these basal boundary
conditions under the East Antarctic Ice Sheet as well as in West Antarctica,
including basal melt rates under ice shelves. This project will develop and test
a prototype ground-based radar system to sound and image ice more than 4km
thick, detect thin water films at the ice bed, and determine basal melt rates
under ice shelves. The team will work with European partners (France, Italy,
Germany) at Dome C to conduct deep-field Antarctic testing of the new radar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build and test an L-band radar system
(1.2-1.4GHz) with peak transmit power of 2kW. In addition to sounding and
imaging thick ice, detection goals include resolving thin water films
(&gt;0.5mm). Such a system would target glaciological problems including site
selection for ice in the 1.5-million-year age range, basal stress boundary
conditions under grounded ice, and melt rates under floating shelves. By
demonstrating feasibility, the project aims to influence sensor selection for
satellite missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.