* 1921199
* RII Track-2 FEC: Harnessing the Data Revolution for the Quantum Leap: From Quantum Control to Quantum Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* John Marston, Brown University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,591,659.00

Quantum information science is poised to deliver transformative applications in
the areas of quantum computing, networking, privacy, and sensing. In addition to
the importance of quantum information science for understanding of basic quantum
science, quantum information advances have strategic relevance for both national
security and the economy of future information-based societies. However, as ever
larger and more complex quantum devices are constructed, a key challenge is to
control them in a way that preserves their fragile quantum nature. To achieve
the required level of control, it is essential to precisely identify crucial
properties and features of the quantum system, material, or process of interest.
This project addresses the identification of key properties by using a
bootstrapping approach, combining today's small quantum computers with large-
scale classical computing resources to design the next generation of quantum
computers. This approach will allow to systematic refining of large quantum
systems, and engineering of devices with better functional properties such as
intrinsic resistance to errors. Specifically, the project will use a combination
of machine learning to screen candidate materials with desired properties,
quantum simulation of promising systems using available intermediate-scale
quantum processors to refine adaptive learning strategies, and experimental
validation of the fundamental microscopic material properties. The
transformative goal of this research is to develop improved robust and accurate
control of large-scale quantum systems. By integrating big data, quantum
simulation, and experimental validation to solve fundamental challenges in
quantum information science, the project aims to synergistically leverage the
benefits offered by these diverse and powerful tools. The collaborations and
techniques developed will build a unique center of excellence for quantum
information science, in response to a recognized national priority. The local
infrastructure combined with a highly trained quantum-literate workforce will be
instrumental in ensuring American competitiveness in quantum technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EPSCoR proposal brings together a team of
researchers from Brown University (RI) and Dartmouth (NH) to investigate the use
of novel data science methods to address two key challenges in quantum science:
(i) System identification and quantum control of complex systems; and (ii) Many-
body simulation of quantum materials. As ever larger quantum systems are
constructed, a key challenge is to precisely identify the system Hamiltonian
(even more generally, the underlying dynamical model) and to precisely
manipulate it as desired. A key feature of the proposed work is to use quantum
bootstrapping to both systematically refine our understanding of a quantum many-
body system, and to engineer novel systems with desired functional properties,
such as topologically protected states that may permit encoding of quantum
information. This effort involves a combination of machine learning to screen
candidate materials with desired properties, quantum simulation of promising
systems using intermediate scale quantum processors to refine adaptive learning
strategies, and experimental validation of fundamental microscopic materials
properties. The transformative goal of the collaborative research is to develop
both Hamiltonian and open-system (e.g. Liouvillian) identification approaches to
characterize unknown quantum systems, by using algorithmic learning with
experimental data obtained by highly controllable magnetic resonance techniques.
The project will develop tools to account for environmental noise to enable
robust, high-fidelity control of quantum dynamics. The collaborations and
techniques developed will allow building of a unique center for quantum
information science research in the US, with long-term research capabilities.
The participating graduate and undergraduate students will form a valuable
quantum-literate workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.