* 1921698
* Scholars Award: Insecurity: Disability, the Great Depression, and the New Deal State
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Audra Jennings, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 07/31/2023
* USD 190,709.00

This project researches how the social and scientific framing of disabled
citizens' bodies shaped New Dealers' efforts to relieve the suffering wrought by
the Great Depression and effect long-term economic security. The New Deal
propelled momentous state growth and transformed Americans' expectations of the
federal government. This research aims to uncover how perceptions of ability,
inability, and disability guided that growth. It analyzes ideas about disability
and policy, while investigating and centering the actual experiences of disabled
Americans who increasingly became the objects of policy meant to correct,
contain, understand, and erase a central element of their identity. Disabled
people often suffered extreme poverty during the Depression as economic
constriction allowed employers to further narrow the physical qualifications for
work, but physicians and social scientists presented conflicting ideas about how
best to address disability. Most of the policy responses New Dealers developed
made disabled people the objects of care and study, while disabled people
themselves often sought opportunities for work. This focus on disability created
new avenues for the federal government to provide medical care and for
physicians, healthcare workers, and a broad range of scientists and social
scientists to influence policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of the policies New
Dealers developed to address disability, and the ideas that informed them,
continue to shape the lives of disabled Americans. While refined and expanded
over time, the fundamental systems New Dealers imagined, created, and
implemented to deal with disability remain. Much of the inaccessibility of the
U.S. economy and society - policies, unmet needs, and underlying ideas that
contributed to disabled people's economic and social marginalization - also
remains. These ideas and systems shape the inequality disabled Americans
continue to experience: disabled Americans earn significantly less than their
non-disabled peers and are more than twice as likely to live in poverty.
Moreover, disabled Americans are significantly less likely to have completed
high school or college than non-disabled adults. Today, at roughly 19 percent of
the population, disabled Americans constitute the largest U.S. minority group,
and the only minority group that anyone could potentially join at any point.
This research seeks to understand how and why these systems were put in place,
knowledge that will help in improving the existing systems or developing new
ones that will facilitate better economic inclusion for people with
disabilities. Drawing on extensive archival and government documents, this
project aims to bring the disability history of the New Deal into the public
sphere to inform and contextualize significant, contemporary debates and help to
illuminate useful paths forward by making the path we have already traveled
clear. The New Deal forged the modern U.S. state's relationship with its largest
minority group. Only by engaging with the New Deal's ongoing legacies can the
United States create policy that fulfills the New Deal promise of economic
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by STS and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.