* 1921873
* DMREF: Design of Organic-Inorganic Membranes for Extreme Chemical Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Roshan Joseph, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,738,439.00

Non-Technical Description: People use many chemical products in their day-to-day
lives. Medicines, makeup, fuel, glues, and plastics are all chemicals. Making
these products requires separating mixtures of many chemicals into single
streams of pure chemicals. About one tenth of the world's energy use goes to
purifying chemicals. Purifying chemicals with membranes could lower this energy
use by ninety percent. Membranes are very thin materials with very small pores
that separate chemicals by size and type. Unfortunately, current membrane
materials do not work for many purification processes. Plastic membranes are
easy to make in large amounts but dissolve in many chemical mixtures. Inorganic
membranes are hard to make in large amounts but are stable in most chemical
mixtures. This project explores a new way to add inorganics to plastic
membranes. These new membranes are easy to make in large amounts and more stable
in chemical mixtures. Because these inorganics can be added to plastics in many
ways, trial-and-error testing is impractical. Instead, this project uses
computational simulations and data analytics to speed up discovery of the best
membranes. Students on this project will be trained in membrane science,
computational simulations, big data science, and materials testing. This project
also supports computational materials science in Georgia Tech's open-access,
student-run Materials Innovation and Learning Lab (The MILL). The MILL provides
students with free access to materials research tools. Hundreds of students get
trained on these research tools each year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: This research project will expand a recently discovered class of
hybrid membrane materials created via vapor phase infiltration (VPI), a gas-
phase process that infuses polymers with inorganic constituents intermixed at
the atomic level. These hybrid membranes show dramatically enhanced stability in
organic solvents while retaining salient membrane properties of high permeance
and discerning selectivity. Because the design space for such membranes -
including polymer chemistry, inorganic chemistry, and hybrid microstructure - is
enormous, traditional Edisonian-based materials development methods are
impractical. To address this challenge, the research team combines expertise in:
(1) phenomenological theory of VPI materials synthesis, (2) membrane and
separation science, (3) materials simulations and data-driven design, and (4)
advanced statistical algorithms that incorporate known phenomenological physics
with limited initial data. Efforts in each of these areas will rapidly steer the
search towards chemical, morphological, and processing spaces of opportunity.
Specifically, this project will focus on the design of materials synthesis
processes for targeted membrane chemistries and microstructures. The outcomes of
this research will be (1) the creation of tangible hybrid membranes based on
polymers of intrinsic micro-porosity with superior performance and stability,
(2) the identification of key physiochemical descriptors for controlling
structure and performance in these hybrid membranes, and (3) the development of
new strategies for handling data sparsity and physical phenomena integration
into materials informatics-based design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.