* 1921021
* Support of Student Participation in the 2019 Meeting of the North American Membrane Society (NAMS)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2019
* Andrew Zydney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,390.00

This award will provide partial travel support for 24 U.S.-based undergraduate
and graduate students to attend the 2019 Meeting of the North American Membrane
Society (NAMS) in Pittsburgh, PA on May 11-15, 2019. NAMS is a premier membrane
conference, providing outstanding technical sessions across the full breadth of
topics within membrane science and technology. The theme of the 2019 meeting is
"Membrane Separations for Emerging Water, Energy, and Health Applications,"
which aligns with several Grand Challenges recently identified by the National
Academy of Engineering. The meeting has a rich history of engaging graduate
student researchers directly through targeted programs and award opportunities.
The goal of this project is to extend these opportunities to undergraduate
students interested in membrane science and technology but who are not yet
committed to pursuing the field as a career. The targeted undergraduate
mentoring program will ensure the students take full advantage of the technical,
social, and networking opportunities available to them at NAMS 2019. Early
engagement in a professional society/conference will provide students with
motivation and encouragement to pursue advanced degrees in their respective
fields and, subsequently, develop a healthy and diverse workforce.

The NAMS organizing committee is comprised of diverse North American
researchers, and invited speakers from academia, industry, and government labs
feature prominently in the program. The meeting will feature five technical
workshops, over 30 technical sessions, daily plenary sessions, a poster session,
and abundant unstructured discussion periods to catalyze new collaborative
relationships and research ideas. The 2019 NAMS meeting will cover the following
topics: (1) membrane materials - chemistry and characterization; (2) membrane
processes - fundamentals and improvements; and (3) membrane applications - water
treatment, energy, and biological/food. Historically, hundreds of graduate
students participate in the NAMS meeting and engage in unique professional
development and training opportunities. This travel supplement will extend these
opportunities to undergraduate students through a targeted mentoring program.
Undergraduate students will be paired with senior graduate student mentors who
will serve as meeting guides. Throughout the meeting, the students will engage
in immersive professional and technical development opportunities tailored to
their needs. The program's effectiveness will be assessed through surveys and
observation of student outcomes. It is anticipated that the award of travel
subsidies will attract diverse young scientists in the field and enhance the
membrane science and technology workforce.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.