* 1921854
* DMREF: Tuning Liquid Crystallinity in Conjugated Polymers to Simultaneously Enhance Charge Transport and Control Mechanical Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ralph Colby, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,758,000.00

Non-technical Description: The proposed computationally-guided approach will
provide an accelerated materials design framework useful for both academic and
industrial efforts to accelerate the development of conjugated polymers for
flexible electronics. The work is designed to leverage progress in the
prediction and measurement of fundamental properties of conjugated polymers, and
move forward along the materials development continuum. Key efforts integrate
theory, simulations, and experiments, both through the development of new tools
and by refining concepts of how microstructure governs charge transport in
conjugated polymers. Furthermore, the Principal Investigators will develop an
ambitious outreach pilot program that uses research activities as tools for
improving educational opportunities and outcomes for students at non-PhD
institutions (such as community colleges). Penn State is a unique microcosm of
the broader higher education ecosystem, because it consists of a central
research-intensive campus that is integrated with 19 largely two-year
commonwealth campuses serving more diverse student populations - making Penn
State an ideal incubator to explore the use of research as a recruiting and
retention tool. In collaboration with the Leonhard Center for the Enhancement of
Engineering Education at Penn State, the proposed work will establish a data-
driven program to translate computational tools from the proposed technical
objectives into web-based research experiences targeting Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) students at Penn State commonwealth
campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The work within this
proposal leverages previous advances to predict the persistence length, glass
transition temperature and nematic-to-isotropic transition temperature. The
proposed project aims to further advance computational materials design, by
developing tools capable of accelerating the prediction of mechanical and
conductive properties. Three computational tools will be developed: coarse-
grained models based on force-matching to accelerate computational design of
liquid crystalline semiflexible polymers, chain-shrinking simulations to predict
the effect of liquid crystallinity on entanglement, and tight-binding models to
explore the role of packing and disorder on charge transport. The combination of
simulations and experiments will be crucial to generate accurate coarse-grained
simulations capable of predicting liquid crystallinity through the Principal
Investigators' approach that combines molecular dynamics simulations with self-
consistent field theory calculations. This will enable the systematic
computational exploration of backbone and side chain architectures that are
validated with selected synthesized model materials. Simulations and experiment
will also be crucial to incorporate nematic order in the Principal
Investigators' unified theory of polymer entanglements, and thereby provide a
tool capable of predicting rheological properties (e.g. mechanical properties)
of conjugated polymers from the chemical structure. Furthermore, tight-binding
models will predict the role of packing and local disorder on charge transport,
to explore the hypotheses that layered disordered phases can play a crucial role
in promoting efficient charge transport by facilitating pi-stacking. Such models
will be validated by measurements of the charge mobility as a function of
temperature and within various crystalline, liquid crystalline, or isotropic
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.