* 1921523
* Bayesian Empirical Likelihood: Data Analysis Tools with Applications in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Steven MacEachern, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

This research project will develop a cohesive set of Bayesian data analysis
tools for non-generative models. A generative statistical model provides a
complete technical description of a phenomenon. Such a model is detailed enough
that one can generate a full data set from it, including observations at the
individual level as well as the population level. In essence, the generative
model provides access to an artificial world. These models are prevalent in the
physical sciences where there is the possibility of having a full and complete
technical description of the world. In contrast, many applied fields make use of
non-generative models. This type of model is based on theory that describes the
key features of a phenomenon while leaving minor features unspecified. These
models have proven their worth in a variety of fields, including econometrics,
the main area of application considered in this project. The project will focus
on Bayesian methods that have traditionally relied on generative statistical
models. The Bayesian paradigm provides a rich environment for the development of
data-analytic techniques for identification of deficiencies in models and
remediation of the effects of shortcomings of the data. The project will develop
a full suite of analogous Bayesian inferences and diagnostics for non-generative
models and will implement them in substantive empirical contexts from
econometrics. The project involves international and multidisciplinary
collaboration between the three investigators with direct opportunities for
their students. Often working with students from underrepresented groups in STEM
fields, including women and minorities, the investigators will engage in cross-
mentoring to deepen the students' views of both statistics and econometrics and
to provide them with insight into the strengths and weaknesses of the
educational systems in the US and Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will take techniques developed for data analysis with generative models
and adapt them for use with non-generative models specified by a set of
(generalized) moment constraints. Within this context, empirical likelihood
enables a form of likelihood-driven inference based on an empirically derived
likelihood function satisfying the moment constraints. As many existing data
analysis techniques are likelihood based, the project will consider empirical
likelihood versions of these models. The eventual goal is to improve moment-
based model data analysis by expanding the toolkit for the moment-based modeler.
The researchers will: 1) Develop a suite of case influence diagnostics within
the Bayesian empirical likelihood context and investigate the theoretical and
empirical properties of these diagnostics; 2) Develop Bayesian empirical
likelihood methods for hypothesis testing, model comparison, and model
averaging, with attention to formulation of the null hypothesis; and 3) Apply
the tools developed under points 1 and 2 to a range of econometric applications;
for example, to the modeling of asset prices and short-term interest
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.