* 1921567
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Digital Magnetic Handshake Materials, Structures, and Machines
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Paul McEuen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,170,142.00

Non-technical Description: Manufacturing of complex objects is the key engine of
technological progress. Learning to build smart, digital, and mechanically
functional objects at the microscale could be as revolutionary as human-scale
manufacturing. This grant will support research to develop a new way of meeting
this challenging goal. It combines two technologies: modern magnetic information
storage, which can create tiny magnets in any pattern desired, and ultrathin
flexible materials that can bend in response to tiny forces. These will be
combined with the design principles of colloidal systems, polymer physics, and
molecular biology to create intelligent, functional objects, machines, and
materials. The pieces will interact in a way analogous to the way DNA bases bind
together, with magnets playing the role of the base pairs, and the thin
materials playing the role of the DNA backbone. The magnetic information will
determine how multiple strands connect and form complex structures and micron
sized machines that can be controlled with external magnetic fields. These
materials will ultimately have fundamental impacts on micro-engineering, with a
range of potential applications, from materials to medicine. As such, this
research will promote the progress of science and ultimately benefit the US
economy and society. This research borrows concepts from a variety of fields - a
multi-disciplinary approach that will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering and
science education. For example, macroscopic analogs will be adopted into lending
kits that will be used to explain the basic principles behind base paring in DNA
and its assembly into DNA origami structures to impoverished communities in
upper Appalachia.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This
grant will support research aimed at building a new platform for self-assembly
that uses panels with magnetic handshakes - microscopic patterns of magnetic
dipoles - that enable panels to bond together using specific, intelligent
interactions analogous to Watson-Crick base pairs in DNA. By fabricating these
panels on nm thin elastic strands grown via atomic layer deposition, the panel
sequence will determine how multiple strands connect to one another and form
complex untethered structures and micron sized machines that can be manipulated
with external magnetic fields. These handshake panels will be programmed using
either magneto-optic recording (micron scale) or commercial scanned magnetic
write head (50 nm scale). The resulting magnetic colloids, strands, or nets will
be released from the substrate into solution, and allowed to bend, move, and
assemble according to their designed interactions. The approach of the grant is
to integrate design, macroscale models, advanced simulations, and experiment, to
master the programmed self-assembly of these magnetic handshake materials.
Overall, this strategy both takes advantage of the complementary binding
principle behind current state of the art 3D DNA based assembly and overcomes
many of its limitations, including vastly expanding the range of operating
parameters such as temperature, solvent, etc. The resulting structures can be
fully integrated with other lithographic elements (electronics, optics, etc.)
and will have broad applications in sensing, actuation, and microrobotics at the
cellular scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.