* 1921722
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Accelerated Design and Deployment of Metal Alloy Surfaces for Chemoresponsive Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Nicholas Abbott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2023
* USD 606,957.00

Non-technical Description: This project seeks to accelerate the discovery and
deployment of chemically-responsive materials, based on liquid crystals
interfaced with metal surfaces, that are capable of generating optical outputs
when exposed to targeted small (gas phase) molecules. The class of liquid
crystalline materials to be developed in this project have high technological
potential due to their ability to sense specific organic molecules of importance
to a range of chemical industries, law enforcement, defense, and medicine. Prior
efforts to develop this class of materials were hampered by the need to perform
large numbers of laborious experiments. In contrast, the methodology to be
advanced in this project will use iterative cycles of electronic structure
computations, syntheses of new molecules and advanced materials characterization
to improve all three aspects of the approach, and thus accelerate the
realization of chemically-responsive liquid crystals. More broadly, the project
will contribute the training of a next generation workforce versed in a new,
accelerated materials deployment paradigm for rapid design and development of
functional materials. The transdisciplinary team of investigators leading the
project will develop new instructional materials as well as new programs for
public outreach efforts and engagement of underrepresented groups. The team
leaders have a record of entrepreneurism, and students and postdoctoral fellows
engaged in this project will be mentored in entrepreneurial approaches to
technology deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project
aims to move chemoresponsive liquid crystals (CLCs) along the materials
development continuum by focusing on industrially important analytes (e.g., NO,
Cl2 and ClO2) that bind weakly to metal cations and thus cannot be detected
through use of previous CLC designs. Specifically, through iterative improvement
of electronic structure calculations, organic synthesis, and thermophysical
property measurements, the team seeks to develop an exciting new class of CLCs
based on interactions of liquid crystals with tailored metal and alloy surfaces.
A key aspect of this project is that it aims to exploit a convergence of ideas
from the surface science and catalysis communities, which have extensively
studied metals and alloys, and the soft matter community, which has not, to
create new classes of stimuli-response materials. Feedback into the surface
science community on the effects of organic ligands on metal and alloy surface
properties is anticipated. The work will also advance synthetic methodology
leading to functional organic mesogens that possess tailored interactions at
metal and alloy interfaces. The efforts of the team will be integrated by data
management that interfaces to US national databases, thus contributing to
national infrastructure by promoting access to data and metadata for the
scientific and industrial community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.