* 1921644
* Perceptual and Mnemonic Differences Across Cultures
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Angela Gutchess, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2022
* USD 229,554.00

Does cultural background impact how people perceive the visual world and what
they remember? Many assume that psychological processes are universal and not
affected by native country or culture. But recently there has been increased
appreciation of the ways in which an individual?s background can impact
perceptual or memory processes. Prior work on cultural differences has largely
considered memory and visual perception as separate processes and most of the
work on visual processes has been restricted to evaluating face perception. The
current project examines whether cultures differ in the visual features they
preferentially perceive: Do they tend to perceive global, overall shape or fine
detail? Does culture affect how quickly each type of visual information is
processed or whether it dominates conscious experience? Does any difference in
perception affect later memory for scenes? These are issues of global importance
and will contribute to the development of a globally-minded workforce by
exposing students and trainees to cross-cultural research. The investigators
will also engage in outreach activities at a diverse local high school.
Participating in these outreach activities will also train members of the team
in effective scientific outreach and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four
experiments will investigate cultural differences in 1) the relative dominance
of high versus low spatial frequency information in vision, for stable percepts
as well as those that compete dynamically for dominance, 2) brain markers of
early attention processes versus markers of expectation or salience, using
electroencephalography (EEG), 3) short-term memory, in comparison with
perceptual judgments, and 4) measures of sensitivity (i.e., ability to
accurately distinguish different types of information) versus response bias
(i.e., a tendency to respond in a particular way). Extant models of visual
perception and memory were predominantly developed based on the study of "WEIRD"
subjects (Western, educated, and from industrialized, rich, and democratic
countries). By systematically comparing across cultures, this research project
will increase understanding of the interplay of culture, perception, and memory
processes in our species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.