* 1921034
* WIDE ANALYSIS OF LOW-ENERGY PLASMONICALLY-POWERED CASCADED DYNAMICS IN LIQUIDS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Luat Vuong, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2023
* USD 388,531.00

Nontechnical description: Surface plasmons are collective oscillations of
electrons at the interface between a metal and an insulator. In the physical,
biomedical, and environmental sciences, metal nanomaterials are well-known to
absorb and concentrate light through plasmonic effects. The energy from surface
plasmons has been shown to power a variety of novel chemical, thermal,
electrical and mechanical phenomena. This project addresses recent observations
of plasmonic interactions in liquid-dispersed metal nanoparticles onto which
weak magnetic fields are applied. Results from this study explain how the energy
of plasmons is transferred to their surrounding environment, and thus relate to
profound environmental, biological, and physiological effects. Interdisciplinary
and data-intensive research activities provide versatile technical training for
future science professionals. The principal investigator is also actively
engaged in teaching in New York City public high school College Now! programs,
mentoring high school students who have successfully advanced to the Intel
International Science and Engineering Fair, and organizing a new discussion-
centered Research Conference in Hong Kong, with the aim of accelerating and
disseminating knowledge of plasmon energy
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The project is centered on
understanding the longer-lived light-induced changes in plasmonically-absorbing
nanofluids, particularly those that result from the simultaneous illumination of
low-intensity light and static magnetic fields. The formation of vapor around
nanoparticles is studied, and the dynamics of the vapor-encased nanoparticles
are imaged, enabling transformative analytical models of the multi-phase
hydrodynamics. The dovetailed study of the near-field and far-field behaviors is
essential for designing future optical probes and interpreting the optical
response of nanofluids. The principal investigator also characterizes the novel
thermophoretic, thermoelectric, and electrokinetic behavior of bulk nanofluids
by analyzing the near-field behavior of plasmonic 2D substrates surrounded by
liquids. The wide analysis and approach may pinpoint elusive and anomalous
behaviors associated with plasmons to explain the observed critical nucleation
of dissolved gasses in liquids on plasmonic surfaces, which is currently not
understood.