* 1921771
* Higher-Order Color: From Cones to Postreceptoral Mechanisms
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Rhea Eskew, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2024
* USD 556,806.00

Color vision has often been considered a model system for understanding brain-
behavior relationships: the sensory inputs are well-defined, the initial
processing in the eye is fairly well-understood, and for the most part the
dimensions of conscious color experience (hue, brightness, and saturation) are
agreed-upon. Yet there is no consensus on a theory of how the color visual
system accomplishes its most basic tasks: detection, discrimination, and hue
appearance. The experiments in this comprehensive study will provide a complete,
computational model for the basic operations of human color vision. The model is
fully mechanistic, in the sense that it is built from simple circuits that could
easily be built into artificial vision systems that use color for detecting
objects, recognizing faces, and decoding emotions. The model will offer concrete
hypotheses for other neuroscientists to test: it makes predictions for studies
of single-cell physiology as well as for functional neuroimaging. The model can
even be used in applied domains such as human factors engineering, textiles, and
marketing, example fields where understanding color discrimination is vital. A
subset of the model has already been tested and shown to provide remarkably
successful predictions for detection, color matching and color discrimination in
limited conditions. What is needed is the basic data to set the model parameters
in all of color space. The proposed project will provide that data, fit the
complete model, and test its application to multiple perceptual
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 1986, when failures of the 'cardinal axis'
color model were discovered by Krauskopf and colleagues, the field has lacked an
agreed-upon model of the postreceptoral mechanisms of color detection and
discrimination. In our previous work, we showed that a simple model, with only 8
mechanisms, can account for detection and color matching in one plane of color
space, and pilot data shows it also accounts for forced-choice discrimination at
threshold. No other color mechanism model has been shown to account so well for
so many different perceptual phenomena. The project will extend our previous
studies in two ways: (1) whereas the previous experiments were limited to a
single plane in cone space, the new ones will explore the entire 3-dimensional
space of color stimuli; (2) two additional procedures, forced-choice chromatic
discrimination and hue scaling, will be used to define the properties of the
color mechanisms and test the model predictions. All the measurements will take
place under three different chromatic noise masking conditions, and all the
subjects will be tested in all of the conditions, to allow for individual
differences. Because it builds upon our prior successes, the research is highly-
likely to solve the central problem in the field, developing a fully-computable
model to explain detection and discrimination in the full 3D color
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Behavioral Systems Cluster in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems participated in co-funding of the
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.