* 1921724
* URoL: Epigenetics 2-Collaborative Research: Revealing how epigenetic inheritance governs the environmental challenge response with transformative 3D genomics and machine learning
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Blake Meyers, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,552,118.00

This project seeks to define how plants respond to environmental challenge.
Understanding plant responses to environmental stress is important to secure our
future national interest in maintaining agricultural productivity and preserving
the environment. This project will advance the understanding of how elevated
carbon dioxide alters plant form on both the molecular scale of DNA
organization, as well on the scale of plant growth. This proposal asks whether
these plant responses will last generations, and if so, tests the mechanism of
inheritance. Additionally, this project promotes the training and development of
a diverse future science-enabled workforce. The product of this research will be
a predictive model for the lasting consequences of environmental challenge on
growth patterns across the plant kingdom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is unclear how
environmental challenge broadly alters plant form, and whether the resulting
changes are inherited epigenetically to the subsequent generations. This
proposal establishes a team with expertise in genomics, phenomics, data
visualization, image analysis, machine learning, modeling, and analysis of three
dimensional (3D) shapes for the common goal to bridge the environment / genotype
/ phenotype gap. The transformative aspect of this proposal is the novelty of
the data analysis. The team has cutting-edge expertise in the mathematical and
computational analysis of plant form in 3D space. However, the analysis of
genome regulation hasn't changed for a decade and is stuck in 2D. The
researchers propose to use their expertise on 3D shapes to elevate the standard
genomic analysis to 3D, therefore opening doors to new discoveries based on the
relation between genome regulation and plant form. By utilizing diverse plant
species, well-characterized mutants, and machine learning, the researchers will
deliver a computational algorithm to predict and model across the plant kingdom
how environmental challenge regulates plant form, and which of these aspects are
epigenetically inherited to the next generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.