* 1921840
* CyberCorps Scholars: Mentoring for Success through a Community-Based Life-Cycle Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Lonnie Decker, Davenport University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,985,719.00

The new CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service (SFS) program at Davenport
University (DU) will support and prepare a total of 28 students for
cybersecurity careers in the federal, state, local, and tribal government
workforce. This program will help address the shortage of cybersecurity
professionals in Michigan and across the U.S., while diversifying the cyber
defense field, with a focus on recruiting veterans, minorities, and women. DU's
distinctive SFS program will leverage: the efficacy of the cascade mentoring
model; a robust experiential learning curriculum, including industry-based
research and public and private-sector internships; experience administering the
Department of Defense's Cybersecurity Scholarship Program (CySP) (formerly IASP)
and Information Security and Assurance Center (ISaAC) programming; engagement in
collegiate cyber defense competitions; and a student-centered cybersecurity
faculty with diverse expertise and industry experience. DU will produce cohorts
of diverse SFS Scholar graduates who have not only mastered a rigorous
cybersecurity curriculum and gained ample industry-based experience in cyber
defense but have also developed skills in collaborating with peers, creating
connections within the cybersecurity community, and mentoring up-and-coming
cybersecurity students. In partnership with Michigan K-12 institutions,
community colleges, and industry, DU will develop a Cyber Education Taskforce
that will identify and address gaps in the pipeline through outreach, mentoring,
cohort development, and experiential learning. The program's strategies will be
evaluated and disseminated to serve as best practices for replication at other
National Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education (CAE-CD)
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DU is designated as a CAE-CD and a Center of
Digital Forensics Academic Excellence. The goal of DU's SFS program is to
address the urgent shortage of cybersecurity professionals in Michigan and
across the nation by directly supporting Scholars and by building DU's capacity
to recruit, support, retain, and graduate future cybersecurity students in
coordination with Grand Rapids educational partners. DU's SFS program will
support 24 undergraduate and four graduate Scholars enrolled in cyber defense
degree programs. Nine of these undergraduates will begin as sophomores enrolled
in the Cyber Security Program at Grand Rapids Community College and then
transfer to DU's College of Technology (CoT) to complete their bachelor's
degrees. SFS Scholars will pursue degrees in one of six CoT cybersecurity
bachelor's programs or in one of three cybersecurity master's programs. Methods
for supporting and retaining SFS Scholars include new cohort-building
activities; cascade mentoring opportunities with faculty, alumni, industry
professionals, and peers; career preparation and internships; academic support;
and enhanced research experiences. DU will leverage its track record in placing
students in public sector cybersecurity positions to ensure that SFS Scholars
will be well-equipped to serve government agencies, with federal agencies in the
executive branch, and to fulfill their service obligations. To expand both
internal and external cybersecurity capacity, DU will work with community
partners in cybersecurity education to implement a Community-Based Life Cycle
approach, which will improve coordination to address attrition at various time-
points in the cybersecurity education pipeline through the creation of mentoring
relationships for SFS Scholars and other students who follow them in the
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.