* 1921006
* Improving Data Quality of Advanced LIGO Gravitational-Wave Searches
* MPS,PHY
* 01/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Marco Cavaglia, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 01/31/2022
* USD 398,453.00

This award focuses on a specific task which is mission critical for the success
of gravitational-wave astrophysics in the next few years: the improvement of
data quality collected by the LIGO Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory
(LIGO) detectors in future observing runs. Research will focus on (1) using
existing techniques to identify and remove non-astrophysical noise in the data
stream, and (2) developing new methods to build predictive models for detector
noise. Broader impacts on the development of gravitational-wave astrophysics
will consist in improving LIGO's search pipelines and the performance of the
detectors. Educational and public outreach initiatives will strengthen programs
aimed at yielding knowledgeable teachers with enough physics content to
effectively teach physics courses in school. New initiatives to promote science
among diverse segments of the population will be developed through
collaborations with educators in other
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Removing non-astrophysical artifacts from
gravitational-wave data is crucial for reducing instrumental noise non-
stationarity, extending the detector network duty cycle, and increasing the
statistical significance of gravitational-wave candidate events. Improvements in
these areas, in turn, boost parameter estimation of the gravitational-wave
detections and enable refined astrophysical interpretations of the signals.
Personnel funded under this award will analyze data from LIGO detector output
and auxiliary sensors with the goal to isolate and identify sources of noise
affecting LIGO's gravitational-wave searches. Results from these investigations
will be fed back to LIGO Laboratory commissioners and instrumentation
researchers to assist in the mitigation of instrumental and environmental
disturbances. At the same time, Mississippi students and researchers will
develop new, fast, reliable and accurate methods to model instrumental noise in
interferometric gravitational-wave detectors. Machine learning-based algorithms,
such as genetic programming, will be used to build predictive models to uncover
the origin of non-astrophysical noise in the detectors.