* 1921773
* URoL:  Epigenetics 1:  Characterization and dissection of DNA methylation and animal color changes in an African cichlid
* BIO,EF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* SEBASTIAN ALVARADO, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 549,994.00

Across the animal kingdom, pigmentation patterns are subject to change in novel
and fluctuating environments. Color variation among cichlid fish in the East
African Great Lakes is a hallmark driving their speciation in one of the largest
adaptive radiations recorded among vertebrates. This project will explore how a
"molecular switch", DNA methylation, can change the function of genes in the
pigment cells of a color-changing cichlid fish adapting to the algal blooms of
Lake Tanganyika. The study of these reversible color changing processes will
improve the understanding of the fluidity that exists between a static genome
and an animals' need to adapt to an ever-changing environment. The principal
investigator (PI) will carry out this research at an institute that primarily
serves under-represented minorities in science at the undergraduate and graduate
level in the largest most ethnically diverse urban area in the world. In
addition to training opportunities in his laboratory, the PI will share the
relevance of environment-by-gene interactions to underprivileged youths during
two-week workshops held in Santiago, Chile, where the PI will teach the
relevance of the genetic determinants that affect human health and disease and
the plastic molecular mechanisms that change with socio-economic position,
adversity, and mental illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Animal pigmentation is a
salient trait across the animal kingdom that allows an individual to become
cryptic, predatory, or sexually attractive. The project will use Astatotilapia
burtoni, an African cichlid fish, with robust and reversible color morphs to
develop the understanding of the role DNA methylation plays in the function of
pigment-bearing cells during changes in pigmentation. Previous work by this PI
has shown that these morphs are accompanied by alterations in DNA methylation of
the Endothelin Receptor B promoter and this project will expand this role in the
field, across the genome, and through their upstream signaling cascades. Using a
combination of satellite imaging, in situ measurements of lake morphology, high
throughput sequencing, pharmacology, and cell sorting, the project will
characterize and dissect this ecologically relevant trait that is ubiquitous
throughout the animal kingdom. The strength of this proposal lies within its
interdisciplinary integration of environmental measures in the field to reveal a
comprehensive understanding of visual ecology with experimental validation
carried out in the laboratory. The project will also resolve the function of
pigment-bearing cells across an entire animal into enriched cell populations
that directly correspond to the trait in question, thus eliminating hurdles of
cell heterogeneity that typically limit the interpretation of these studies. It
is anticipated that the findings from this study will be widely relevant to the
field of evolution, visual ecology, and cellular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.