* 1921047
* AF: Small: Quantum Computational Pseudorandomness with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Fang Song, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 10/31/2020
* USD 268,826.00

Pseudo-randomness, an efficient approximation for true randomness, has become
indispensable in algorithm design, coding theory, cryptography and complexity
theory. This project aims to develop a comprehensive theory of computational
pseudo-randomness in the setting of quantum information processing. These
pseudo-random objects and tools can be useful in quantum algorithm design and
quantum complexity theory. The computational approach of this project to some
problems outside the conventional territory of computing could stimulate further
collaboration between computer scientists, quantum information theorists and
physicists. Course development, assisting the development of local ``Women in
CS'' chapter and ``Women in Tech'' events, establishing interest groups in
quantum computing at the university to attract underrepresented students, as
well as outreach to high school students are an integral part of this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This specific focus is on computational
pseudorandomness, which is indistinguishable from true randomness as far as
efficient observers are concerned. There are three major objectives: 1)
formalize and design pseudorandom quantum states and quantum operators, in
analogy to two basic classical pseudorandom objects -- pseudorandom generators
and pseudorandom functions; 2) investigate their applications in computer
science, especially in quantum cryptography such as constructing quantum money,
quantum authentication, and a novel primitive of tokenized cryptography. This
requires developing appropriate quantum security models and designing new
schemes; 3) develop other quantum pseudorandom objects and explore applications
beyond computer science such as understanding black holes and thermalization in
physics. The proposed pseudorandom objects and techniques to be developed can
provide more efficient solutions to some proposed applications or even overcome
some no-go results in the information-theoretical setting. This study
complements the work on quantum state and unitary designs, which are statistical
approximations to the quantum Haar randomness. Together, they can reveal more
insights to the fundamental properties of quantum information. The computational
lens of studying problems beyond computer science can be fruitful
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.