* 1921777
* Standard Grant: The Lithium Trade
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Javiera Barandiaran, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 189,727.00

Lithium is used in light-weight, rechargeable batteries for electric vehicles,
mobile devices, and renewable energy systems. Now in high demand, the global
market for lithium is changing rapidly, raising expectations of growth and fears
of economic busts and environmental harm. For instance, there is the desire to
ensure a stable supply of lithium, while elected officials representing lithium
mining communities hope to attract new industries. These communities also worry
about the environmental consequences of increased extraction, as do
multinational companies whose brands rely on marketing a sustainable product.
Although booming demand has given these concerns urgency, similar concerns about
the distribution of benefits and harms have historically shaped the extraction,
trade and governance of other minerals important to global energy systems, such
as oil, uranium and copper. This project asks how lithium production since the
1960s compares with the production of these other minerals. Stakeholders engaged
across lithium's production chain will find this information useful in
developing policies that respond to these disparate expectations and that are
environmentally and socially responsible. Findings will be disseminated to
various stakeholders through publications and public talks. This project will
provide research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students
in the Spanish language, broadening participation from under-represented
students. It will also build collaborative partnerships with scientists
assessing the impacts, opportunities, and challenges posed by new clean energy
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a comparative analysis of
lithium production, identifying the forms of expertise that have participated in
production, who had access to these forms of knowledge, their influence on
national development policies, and the consequences for how quantities of
lithium have flowed through global production networks. Research will take place
over a two-year period in various archives that maintain records of the
relationships between corporations, state agencies, military offices, and the
scientists who pioneered lithium mining. Tracing these relationships through the
Cold War years and into the rise of free-trade globalization, the principal
investigator will analyze how technical and industrial capacity were created and
distributed. They will also examine lithium development policies and the
comparisons to copper, uranium, or oil stakeholders used over time to justify
these policies. The research will advance theories of how natural resources,
science, and technology are understood to produce positive development outcomes.
The findings will also contribute to academic and policy debates about how to
assess the benefits and sustainability of lithium extraction over long periods
of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.