* 1921576
* Collaborative Research: Colorado-Washington Security Scholars Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Yan Bai, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,573,430.00

The University of Colorado at Colorado Springs (UCCS) and the University of
Washington Tacoma (UWT) jointly propose to establish a new CyberCorps (R):
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program called Colorado-Washington Security
Scholars Program (CWSSP). CWSSP will leverage the host institutions'
cybersecurity degree programs and their existing formal collaborations to
provide multiple pipelines in generating highly qualified and committed
professionals to join the government workforce in cybersecurity. CWSSP will
provide scholarships to student scholars in the UCCS Computer Science Department
and the UWT School of Engineering and Technology so that the scholars can learn
the technical skills and knowledge to address the evolving and emerging
cybersecurity issues. The project emphasizes teamwork and collaborations and
will produce cybersecurity professionals who can investigate cybersecurity with
a systems approach, combining multiple expertise domains so that they can
effectively collaborate with each other in remote settings. This is a key
scenario that often happens in addressing cybersecurity research problems.
CWSSP, built on collaborations between institutions, will fully take advantage
of its cross-campus platform to learn and practice remote collaboration skills
and to provide a model scholarship/education program and a blueprint for future
inter-institution education programs. The project will also engage
underrepresented students in state-of-the-art cybersecurity research and provide
them with leadership experiences. CWSSP will support six doctoral, eighteen
masters?, and twelve undergraduate students, in multiple cohorts, who will be
prepared to work on cybersecurity and privacy problems across sectors to secure
the national defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CWSSP will advance cybersecurity
research and education by promoting collaboration and resource sharing in
cybersecurity and actively involving governmental agencies. To advance
cybersecurity education, CWSSP will introduce a cross-campus curriculum and
incorporate unique team-based approach to cybersecurity education and deliver
effective mechanisms to incorporate teams and conferences/workshops in formal
education. The CWSSP program will also have strong outreach to external
organizations in cybersecurity by getting them involved in the CWSSP teams and
the CWSSP conferences. By extending the collaborations outside of the host
institutions, CWSSP will drive the student scholars to make connections with the
cybersecurity professionals in the government sector and work/research on the
cybersecurity problems which can have stronger real-world impacts in the
protection of the nation's information infrastructure. The CWSSP graduates will
be equipped with the cybersecurity knowledge and understanding, relevant
technical skills, and teamwork and collaboration skills to help ensure their
readiness to participate in the government's cybersecurity
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.