* 1921271
* Collaborative Research: Transparency and the Rule of Law
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Timothy Frye, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 92,625.00

Scholars and policymakers agree that strong legal institutions are essential for
economic development and democratic governance, yet efforts to improve the rule
of law in post-communist and developing countries have frequently been stymied.
Recent experience offers little hope for successful top-down reforms, as
entrenched elites are well-placed to undermine such efforts. This project
therefore contributes to the study of law and social science and to the
development of effective policies for building the rule of law by shifting
attention to an innovative bottom-up, citizen-led effort to improve judicial
transparency: the videotaping of court hearings by civil society organizations.
The study's focus on Ukraine is particularly timely given that the United States
has in recent years devoted extensive resources to support Ukrainian rule-of-law
reforms in recognition of Ukraine's prominent role in ongoing geopolitical
conflicts between Russia and the West. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will
consist of a large-scale field experiment. Random assignment of court sessions
to "treatment" (videotaping) and "control" (no videotaping) conditions will
facilitate rigorous evaluation of citizen-led transparency initiatives' impact
on key elements of the rule of law, including judicial outcomes, judges' and
prosecutors' adherence to procedural rules, and lawyers' perceptions of the
judiciary's fairness and independence. Analyses will draw on surveys of lawyers
and administrative data collected from Ukrainian courts. The research will
result in a novel data set covering approximately 2000 court sessions from five
Ukrainian cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.