* 1921332
* Engaging Early Career Polar Scholars in the North Pacific Arctic Conference and Network: Honolulu, HI - August 14-16, 2019
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Nancy Lewis, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports travel for four early career scientists to the North Pacific
Arctic Conference (NPAC) as panelists and participants from 2019 through 2021.
The short-term objectives of the proposed project are: 1) to introduce promising
next generation scientists with expertise in the Arctic region to existing
knowledge and leadership policy-relevant international networks; 2) to provide
them with the additional knowledge, experience, inspiration, and opportunity
they need to become future leaders of the region; and 3) to ensure the early
career scientists represent the diversity of the region by including women and
Indigenous participants. In the longer-term, the project aims to develop the
skills for these early career scientists to step into future regional leadership
roles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will fulfill its objectives by
inviting four high-caliber early career scientists to the two-day NPAC
conference in each year. They will be included as full participants in the
conference proceedings, first as panelists; second as contributors to the
published NPAC conference proceedings; and third as participants in high-level
virtual networks associated with the NPAC community. Upon the conclusion of the
conference, they will continue on as participants in these virtual networks and
also be given the opportunity to contribute their written works the East- West
Center's Asia Pacific Bulletin and Asia Pacific Issue
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.