* 1921299
* Social and ecological infrastructure for recidivism reduction: New Haven, CT - March 2020
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Stephen Pfohl, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,950.00

This award supports a conference about applied research on innovative social and
ecological approaches to prisoner reentry and recidivism reduction. It focuses
on making connections between social scientific theory and the environmental
sustainability programs, procedures, policies and practices that are improving
correctional outcomes and community environments. The conference will bring
researchers and practitioners together to share ideas about leading-edge
prisoner re-entry services, create connections for future research and capacity-
building, and articulate the theories, practices, and possibilities of a nascent
field that has tremendous potential to strengthen systems of public safety and
justice. Overall, the event will create a space where long-standing researchers
share the state of the field, emerging practitioners and scholars are introduced
to key issues in current research, and groups of scholars and practitioners
strategize about advancing frontiers of social scientific theory. Research
collaborations, knowledge, and training that are generated as a result of the
conference will contribute to improving the delivery of educational, vocational,
and therapeutic services for prisoner re-entry and recidivism reduction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will advance theory in an emerging field by
introducing participants to key concepts, methods, objects, and sites of study
across the multiple disciplines that relate to social and ecological
infrastructure for recidivism reduction. Building on the research about "green"
or "environmental" policies, programs, and practices related to recidivism
reduction, the event will identify new areas for knowledge production through
cross-fertilization of research perspectives. The conference will also lay the
groundwork for methodological and theoretical innovations in the study of crime,
recidivism reduction, and public safety from a social-ecological approach. In
order to advance scientific theory, the event is intentionally structured with
the following session types: integrative plenaries to highlight main themes;
research presentations that share key findings; trainings for improving research
effectiveness; focus groups that develop a research agenda; and networking to
foster collaboration. These sessions will assist practitioners in improving data
collection or evaluation, inform researchers about emerging practices for the
development of empirically grounded theory, and enable participants from
government to make well-informed connections across scales and places for
effective recidivism reduction strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.