* 1921926
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Low Cost, High Strength and Ductile Mg Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* James Howe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,299,150.00

As the lightest of all structural metals, magnesium (Mg) alloys have great
potential to be used in many applications where weight is critical to
performance and efficiency, including the automotive, rail and aerospace
industries. Yet wrought Mg alloys remain underutilized, due to a high processing
cost. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
award supports fundamental research which could lead to efficient processing of
high strength, high ductility Mg alloys through fundamental understanding of the
relationships among processing, the micrometer-scale structure of the material,
and performance. This project will educate a diverse group of students and
postdoctoral fellows, providing them with the skills required to function within
interdisciplinary teams comprised of computational and experimental researchers,
as they perform work of benefit to the US manufacturing, transportation, and
defense sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the researchers will
investigate nanoscale solute clusters which form in the early stage of
precipitation, known as Guinier-Preston (GP) zones, to understand how they
contribute to materials properties, in particular to a recently observed
increase in strain rate sensitivity. New computational methods that extend
beyond transition state theory will be used to assess the kinetics of
dislocation-GP zone interactions. Experimental assessments will be made using a
combination of strain rate jump and repeated stress relaxation testing together
with crystal plasticity modeling. The structure-property relationships
established in this work will be used to guide alloy design strategies involving
GP zones. This project also aims to predict the atomic structures and
thermodynamic properties of GP zones in Mg alloys using first-principles-based
computational approaches. To validate and guide these modeling efforts,
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and electron energy loss spectroscopy
(EELS) approaches are employed to probe the atomistic- and electronic-scale
structure of the GP zones. These combined efforts will close the knowledge gap
pertaining to the interplay between the free energies of solute mixing, phase
formation and interfaces, and the coherency strains which are responsible for
the formation and morphology of GP zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.