* 1921485
* Cybersecurity Scholarship-for-Service Renewal at The University of Arizona:The AZSecure SFS Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Salim Hariri, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,186,232.00

The University of Arizona's (UA) AZSecure SFS program seeks to further expand
and develop training of service-motivated students to be critical public
defenders of America's cyberspace. To support this, UA has obtained a
designation by the National Security Agency (NSA) and the Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) as a Center of Academic Excellence (CAE) in Cyber Defense (CAE-
CD), Research (CAE-R), and Cyber Operations (CAE-CO), making UA one of the few
public institutions with all three prestigious CAE designations. In 2018, UA was
granted Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) status by the Department of
Education, the first of Arizona's three state universities to receive this
designation. Through targeted recruitment efforts, the program's goal is to
increase the representation of women, underrepresented minorities, and active or
veteran military members in cybersecurity fields. The program is deliberately
multidisciplinary, integrating cybersecurity education and research across the
campus. Due to the success of the university's SFS program and as direct
evidence of program sustainability and institutionalization, the UA recently
launched a multidisciplinary MS in Cybersecurity program. In addition, in 2018
UA developed a new industry-focused Scholarship-for-Industry (SFI) program with
significant funding from the college and university. This project will help fuel
a sustained, institutionalized cybersecurity education program that will have
significant impacts on the state of Arizona and the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program consists of an innovative curriculum that
combines coursework with hands-on experiential learning through research,
teaming students with experienced faculty mentors to develop deeper expertise
than coursework alone can provide. University of Arizona will continue to focus
the current efforts on building a program for Arizona, and to capitalize on its
many geographic strategic advantages. Arizona has a higher percentage of
Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) and a greater number of military bases than
many states. By leveraging its four-year colleges, working professionals with an
undergraduate degree, and military veterans and reservists reentering civilian
life, UA have a diverse and talented recruitment pool to draw from. The goal is
for these groups to account for at least 50% of the university's qualified
applicant pool and a commensurate part of accepted scholarship recipients. The
proposed SFS program renewal fuses education and experiential learning through
research to produce knowledgeable professionals in key and emerging
cybersecurity domains, such as: cyber threat intelligence, large-scale
vulnerability assessment, social engineering, and cybersecurity big data. Its
innovative and cross-disciplinary curriculum includes dedicated coursework and
significant research with world-class faculty mentors. The program will
contribute to meaningful curriculum development, sustained institutionalization
of critical cybersecurity education, and a well-trained workforce of
cybersecurity professionals for the U.S. government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.