* 1921042
* Collaborative Research: Building a Multi-User Database of District Court Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Robert Howard, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 07/31/2023
* USD 132,240.00

Despite the obvious importance of the Federal District Courts, less scholarly
attention has been directed to these courts, particularly as compared to studies
of the U.S. Supreme Court or the U.S. Courts of Appeal. In part this is because
available databases have not been disseminated in the most user-friendly format
and because they lack important variables. Foremost among these underutilized
datasets is the Integrated Database (IDB) of federal district court decisions
distributed by the Federal Judicial Center in conjunction with the
Administrative Office of the United States Courts. However, even though the IDB
has been publicly available since the 1980s, it is almost never used by social
scientists studying the courts because IDB does not contain information on the
identity of the judges presiding over trials nor on the litigants of the case.
Because of this, scholars are unable to incorporate attitudinal/ideological and
litigant characteristic variables in models of judicial behavior. This research
addresses this shortcoming by supplying judge and litigant information for a
sample of the IDB, thus rendering the database more useful to scholars and
providing researchers with the opportunity to utilize the IDB to examine
decision making at the federal trial court level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will use the new data to examine and test party capability theory,
which asserts that the "haves" come out ahead. The research will examine the
conditions under which federal district court judges render decisions according
to the characteristics and resources of the litigants and the attitude/ideology
of the judge. The research uses a two-prong strategy to code this additional
information. Initially, the plan will code a random sample stratified by year of
4000 cases per year for ten years, to collect information regarding litigant
type using the comprehensive categories developed by Songer for the Courts of
Appeals database. Because this initial stratified random sample is likely to
include a vast majority of procedural terminations decided before the case goes
to trial, the plan will code an additional "over-sample" of 1000 merits
terminations per year. This will provide a dataset of 5000 observations per
year, across ten separate years, containing both procedural terminations
(generated through the initial random sample) and merits terminations (based on
the initial random sample and subsequent over-sample). Moreover, instead of
picking a single ten-year period, the research will code the sample of 5000
cases from every other year over a 20-year period, 1995 through 2015. This time
span allows the tracking of institutional changes to the district courts across
four presidential administrations. Collecting this information will allow
scholars to conduct various analyses on the preliminary motions and evidentiary
motions potentially leading to settlements rather than trials, as well as the
situations in which the merits of a dispute are litigated in a
trial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.