* 1921325
* Improving Filler/Suspect Similarity in Eyewitness Lineups Using Facial Recognition Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Amanda Bergold, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,895.00

Eyewitness lineups are an essential investigative tool for solving crimes.
During a lineup, eyewitnesses view a group of 6-8 individuals and are instructed
to indicate which, if any, of the individuals is the perpetrator of the crime.
Lineups typically include only one individual whom the police view as a suspect,
and other known innocents called fillers. Selection of the suspect by the
eyewitness is taken as evidence of guilt and often leads to arrest and
prosecution. Thus, developing procedures for conducting lineups that maximize
the likelihood that eyewitnesses will select guilty suspects while minimizing
the likelihood that they will erroneously select innocent suspects is crucially
important for the fair administration of justice. Past research suggests that
lineups where the suspect stands out from the fillers, referred to as biased
lineups, reduce identification accuracy, resulting primarily from an increase in
false identifications of innocent suspects. Lineups in which the suspect
resembles the fillers so closely as to be hard to distinguish from them also
reduce identification accuracy, making the task too difficult for otherwise
reliable witnesses. Current guidelines thus instruct lineup constructors to
attain a "sweet spot" of similarity where suspects are similar enough to
fillers, yet not too similar. Implementing these guidelines in actual practice,
however, has proven challenging because there is no universally agreed upon way
of measuring filler/suspect similarity, nor has existing research clearly
delineated a method to achieve the "sweet spot" of similarity that can be used
in the field. The main goal of this project is to enhance eyewitness lineup
constructors' ability to include fillers with appropriate levels of similarity
in their lineups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project seeks to develop
foundational knowledge about how filler/suspect similarity affects eyewitness
identification accuracy, and, in doing so, lays the groundwork for new tools
that could enable lineup administrators to better optimize similarity to improve
accuracy. The project will exploit an emergent technology--facial recognition
software--being widely embraced by law enforcement agencies to create lineups,
but which has heretofore been largely unexamined by eyewitness researchers.
Using a novel experimental platform built upon an underlying database of over
570,000 potential filler photographs, the investigators will conduct two studies
that experimentally measure how filler/suspect similarity--measured
algorithmically in a manner widely accessible to other researchers and
practitioners--relates to eyewitness accuracy, and how its relationship with
eyewitness accuracy compares to that of traditional similarity measures. To
validate their findings, the investigators will then conduct a prospective study
where they apply the facial comparison algorithm to a new set of lineups to
predict those most likely to generate accurate identifications, and then assess
the accuracy of these predictions. Should the validation study prove successful,
the project's findings could be used to develop new field tools enabling lineup
administrators to more easily implement guidelines regarding filler/suspect
similarity. Better adherence to these guidelines can improve the quality and
accuracy of lineup identifications which will, in turn, reduce the incidence of
wrongful convictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.