* 1921726
* Dakota State University CyberCorps SFS Renewal
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Thomas Halverson, Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2025
* USD 5,018,042.00

Dakota State University will continue its participation in the CyberCorps SFS
program to supply highly-qualified people to the government's cybersecurity
workforce. Participants of the program will help serve the rapidly expanding
demand for cybersecurity professionals needed to secure the national defense.
This project will provide scholarship recipients with the education, skills, and
competencies needed to play an effective role in the national security space
through experiential learning opportunities. Realizing a need in the workforce
for diverse perspectives, viewpoints, and backgrounds, the team will work with
Dakota State University's organizations supporting underrepresented populations
including: Women in Science and Technology (WIST), CybHER, Office of Diversity
Services, Veterans Affairs, and area tribal groups. The university also pays
special attention to the support and retention of these participants.
Scholarship recipients are expected to make broad impacts to education,
community, and overall advancement of the cybersecurity field. To make these
broader contributions, students will participate in and support outreach events,
summer camps, security events, conferences, internships, applied research, and
workshops. Overall, the project will have an immediate impact on bettering the
nations' cybersecurity posture with well-qualified individuals committed to
public service. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dakota State University's CyberCorps
program has been a quality source of cybersecurity professionals and boats a
100% job placement ratio of graduates. The project's intended goals are to 1)
Recruit quality individuals from diverse and underrepresented populations; 2)
Provide applied and hands-on learning experiences based on real-world demands;
3) Engage participants in supporting broader contributions to the cybersecurity
community; 4) Supply the government's need for highly trained and dedicated
individuals to contribute towards strengthening the national defense. Dakota
State University was designated as one of four original Centers of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Operations (CAE-CO) in 2012 and is furthered by designations
as a Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense (CAE-CD, 2004) and a Center
of Academic Excellence in Research (CAE-R, 2012). DSU is also one of eight CAE
Regional Resource Centers (CRRC). The institution's involvement in the CAE
community is complimented by the program team's close working relationships
varying government agencies including: National Security Agency (NSA), Navy
SPAWAR, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Lab (JHU-APL), Los Alamos
National Lab, Idaho National Lab, MITRE, Sandia National Lab, and the State of
South Dakota's Bureau of Information Telecommunications (BIT). Such
relationships ensure that graduates of the program align with and accomplish the
intended outcome of the CyberCorps SFS program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.