* 1921361
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Subduction Channel Processes - Borehole Sampling at Active Serpentinite Mud Volcanoes on the Mariana Forearc
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Seewald, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 325,305.00

The Mariana Trench is the deepest location on Earth, resulting from the
subduction of the Pacific Plate under the Philippine Plate. Fluids that were
trapped in the pores and minerals of the Pacific Plate are liberated during this
subduction. These fluids react with rock in the overriding Philippine Plate to
produce a slurry of mud and fluids that are very alkaline (with a pH up to 12.5,
more alkaline than Clorox), yet support microbial life that thrives in such
extreme environments. The discharge produces the largest mud volcanoes on Earth,
some spanning 50 km in diameter and several kilometers in height. Probing the
mud volcanoes by sampling fluids from boreholes drilling into them, provides the
means to examine processes that occur at depth during subduction. The subduction
zone environment is the epicenter for most large earthquakes on Earth, and the
fluids that flow through subduction zones can be connected with that earthquake
generation. Moreover, the reactions that occur to produce the fluids provide
energy that can support a wide variety of microbes, a subseafloor biosphere that
is present throughout what has been referred to broadly as a "deep crustal
aquifer".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team proposes to the sample fluids
and dissolved gases from this ascending slurry in three mud volcanoes that tap
different pressure (depths ranging from 10 to 20 km) and temperature conditions
at depth. These ascending fluids discharge from scientific boreholes that were
emplaced during International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expedition 366.
Prior to sampling these fluids, CORK-Lite instruments will be deployed to enable
sampling operations. This infrastructure will also provide for a range of
potential experimentation and monitoring efforts that can be used in the future.
Specifically, the project will: (i) design, fabricate, and deploy CORK-Lites,
(ii) sample discharging fluids with gas-tight and large volume sampling systems,
(iii) analyze collected fluids for a range of solutes, dissolved gases, and
isotopes, and (iv) measure borehole pressure and fluid discharge rates. The
CORK-Lites will be sealed at the end of the field program for future
experimentation and monitoring efforts. Results from this effort will test a
model of abiotic methane formation, constrain the extent of serpentinization
during the initial stages of subduction, set limits on potential microbial
metabolic capabilities, and resolve water-rock reactions and solute
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.