* 1921790
* A mechanistic and predictive understanding of temporal variations in the onset of sediment motion
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Elowyn Yager, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 382,753.00

The movement of rocks along river beds, called sediment transport, is essential
for estimating river channel stability and therefore risks to infrastructure and
human lives during floods. Sediment transport predictions are also used to help
restore rivers for numerous aquatic species. Despite its importance, sediment
transport is notoriously difficult to predict, and this project will investigate
how changes in river bed structure (e.g. rock arrangement) influences sediment
transport. Such information will then be used to improve sediment transport
predictions. Through a collaboration with artists, sculptures will be
temporarily placed in rivers to serve as 1) flow obstructions (e.g. boulders and
wood) that provide habitat for a range of fish species, and 2) public outreach
installations through signs posted near the sculptures with links to websites
containing information and videos about the science of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Errors in sediment transport predictions can be partly
explained by the common assumption that the onset of sediment motion always
occurs at the same flow magnitude in a given river. Large temporal changes in
the onset of sediment motion can occur because of variations in the channel bed
structure. The goals of this proposal are to better understand these temporal
changes in bed structure and to use this understanding to accurately predict the
onset of sediment motion. Laboratory experiments and a mechanistic theory are
used to identify and quantify the channel bed parameters that control variations
in the onset of sediment motion. This theory will be tested using field
measurements in a well instrumented channel and could replace the often
arbitrary choice of a single flow magnitude that causes the start of sediment
movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.