* 1921263
* Transient Thermo-Fluid Behavior in Metal Laser Powder-Bed Fusion Process: Exploring the Size Effect in Making Small Features
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Li Yang, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 424,043.00

Metal additive manufacturing in the laser powder-bed fusion group has greatly
enabled novel designs with sophisticated part geometry of cellular arrangements
or optimized topology for applications like lightweight high-strength
structures, nature-inspired biomedical implants and high-efficiency heat
exchangers, etc. Such integrated design and manufacturing innovations have the
potential to realize products that improve the quality of life and maturing the
technological capability of the U.S. industry. However, in making components
with complex geometries, there are many small features (e.g., 0.5 mm or less)
which do not share the same processing characteristics as larger sized bulk
components. These unknown characteristics pose difficulty in ensuring part
quality and impedes adopting the laser powder-bed fusion to produce parts with
delicate features. This award addresses the above-mentioned challenges by
advancing the process science in tackling small length scales, where the process
characteristics become sensitive to the feature dimensions. The fundamental
science that needs to be explored is the time-varying response of the
temperatures and the molten flows in high-power laser scanning of metallic
particles of stochastic distributions during short scanning. Further, outreach
activities with the Women in Manufacturing, Kentucky Chapter will establish a
platform that helps engage women to promote a diverse manufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
size effect in the metal laser powder-bed fusion process, in particular, to
elucidate the coupled dynamic thermal and fluid fields during the start and end
of laser scanning. The research focuses on one-dimensional line scans, two-
dimensional raster-area scans and three-dimensional individual strut
fabrications for the process physics study, as well as lattice-included
specimens for mechanical evaluations related to the small geometry and process
conditions. A two-stage approach will be employed to numerically study the
process: a discrete element method to simulate powder particle spreading and
multi-physics modeling to simulate the thermo-fluid phenomena for single-track,
single-layer as well as multi-layer single strut fabrications, with particular
emphases in the melt-pool dynamic response and solidified morphology. The
experimental study will employ a laser powder-bed fusion system using titanium
alloyed powder to fabricate designed specimens, with melt pool measurements and
microstructures analysis to validate the process model and quantify the size
effect on process characteristics. The research, if successful, will unveil the
basic comprehension of the thermal and fluid behavior during short-distance and
small-area laser scanning. The knowledge obtained will be practical for
effective additive manufacturing of complex geometry parts with improved and
reliable quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.