* 1921783
* CCRI: Planning: Planning to Develop a Body Language Dataset for the Artificial Intelligence Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* James Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This CISE Community Research Infrastructure (CCRI) planning project aims to form
a community of researchers galvanized around the creation of a very large scale,
high-quality annotated video dataset for broad use by the affective computing
community, especially for computational understanding of human bodily
expressions in the wild. Computational understanding of body language for
emotional expressions in real-world environments is a fundamental and
challenging research topic. Breakthroughs in this technological area have the
potential to enable a large number of innovative applications including personal
assistant robot, social robot, and multimedia information retrieval. The
planning project will encourage the scientific community to take a
multidisciplinary and holistic approach to the problem of body language
understanding. The project aims to gain deeper insights into useful data
collection for computational and data-driven modeling of emotions based on body
language. Ultimately, by analyzing and harnessing a large quantity of carefully-
collected affective data, using state-of-the-art machine learning and
statistical modeling methodologies, future intelligent systems can be empowered
with new capabilities of understanding human emotions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
planning project will involve researchers in computer and information sciences,
social and clinical psychology, statistics, and data ethics. A workshop will be
organized in conjunction with one of the leading international conferences in
the research area. The team will reach out to relevant communities to attract
researchers to participate in the workshop. At the workshop, a data-driven
emotion modeling competition will be organized using a preliminary dataset that
the team has collected. Winning teams will be invited to present their results
at the workshop. The workshop will also feature panels and discussion sessions
to solicit input from the broader community on the design and implementation of
the potential data infrastructure. The planning effort will result in a
publication on the consensus reached at the workshop on the community's need for
this data infrastructure and the detailed specifications on various aspects of
the data collection effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.