* 1921839
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Conductive Protein Nanowires as Next Generation Polymer Nanocomposite Fillers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jessica Schiffman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,434,641.00

Stretchable electronics have the potential to enable new innovations in
technologies for communications, healthcare, security and beyond. Soft-filler,
soft-matrix nanocomposites are desired for most stretchable electronics
applications. Conventional nanocomposites embed thin, hard, and brittle
conductive materials such as metal nanowires or carbon nanotubes into
stretchable elastic polymers, which provide electronic function, but fail during
stretching cycles due mechanical mismatch. This Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports research for the
understanding, development and manufacture of a new class of soft electronics.
This work is a collaborative computational-experimental research approach to
understanding the fundamental processing-microstructure-property relationships
in conductive protein nanowires, and to design nanoscale protein wires to be
highly conductive, mechanically soft fillers that match the host polymer
properties to create a superior nanocomposite. Calculations of protein-polymer
interactions will inform the synthesis and fabrication of protein-based
nanocomposites with enhanced elasticity and conductivity, which will be
confirmed by advanced microscopy, electronic, and mechanical testing. This
research merges disciplines including microbiology, polymer chemistry, materials
processing, electronics, and molecular modeling in a powerful feedback loop.
This award also supports educational activities which emphasize participation
from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM, including a multi-day
workshop series on innovation, team building, work-life balance, and
entrepreneurship through which participants gain the confidence and skills
necessary to succeed as scientists, engineers, and entrepreneurs, thus promoting
future economic and societal advancement. This work has the potential to bring
the U.S. to the forefront of flexible electronics development, while training
the next generation workforce to maintain this competitive
advantage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing soft electronics requires a
nascent class of filler that exhibits high conductivity yet remains chemically
and mechanically compatible with the host matrix. Conductive protein nanowires
or pili function as the conducting element of protein-based soft electronics.
Molecular simulations with coarse-grained models will survey the interplay of
pili amino acid sequences and exposed surface peptide residues with soft
materials chemistry to create a data-rich system that establishes foundational
design principles for pili fillers in soft polymer matrices. The inherent
aqueous dispersion properties of conductive pili enable the design,
characterization, and production of both bulk pili-polymer nanocomposites and
electrospun pili-polymer nanofiber mats with well-distributed filler. Advanced
electron and scanning probe microscopy will interrogate the structural and
electronic properties of the pili and provide a feedback loop that refines the
molecular models. Directed agglomeration of pili into bundles and electrospun
pili-elastomer fibers will also enable studies on the scalability of this new
nanocomposite platform. Molecular models will ultimately unveil surface peptide
sequences that improve processability and functionality of new pili strains and
pili-polymer nanocomposites that are validated by rheology, microscopy,
transport, and tensile testing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.