* 1921413
* Collaborative Research: Revisiting the Low-Frequency Variability of the Extratropical Circulation Using Non-Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) Modes and Linear Response Functions
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Pedram Hassanzadeh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 386,030.00

One dominant pattern of the atmospheric circulation variability in the
extratropical troposphere of both hemispheres is the oscillation between
stronger and weaker westerly jet streams with a time scale longer than 10 days.
Such low-frequency variability of extratropical westerly jet streams is called
the annular mode. The annual mode influences the day-to-day weather and extreme
events in the middle and high latitude regions and is therefore of great
interest to understand. The annular mode in winter hemisphere also influences,
and is influenced by, the stratospheric polar vortex. This project seeks a
deeper understanding of the factors that control the annular mode. The outcome
of this work will potentially transform the understanding of jet stream
variability and weather in the middle and high latitudes. The outcome could also
lead to advances in predictability past the current weather prediction barrier
of about 10 days, and lead to improvements in capabilities of climate models.
Furthermore, the new quantitative framework will aid the interpretation of the
range of outcomes predicted by comprehensive climate models. These outcomes have
the potential to advance the national and global efforts aimed at preparing for
climate change and weather-related extremes, resulting in significant socio-
economic benefits. This project will support the education and training of two
PhD students and a postdoctoral researcher, thus preparing the next generation
of atmospheric dynamists and climate scientists. Some of the tools developed
during this work will be used by the PIs in their undergraduate and graduate-
level teaching to help the students with visualizing and quantifying some
aspects of the jet stream variability. Also, the project will engage K-12
students in climate and computer modeling-related research through several STEM
outreach programs at Rice and Stanford.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
novel analysis methods will be developed, and will be employed along with
computer models and observational data to gain a deeper understanding of this
variability of the jet streams. Furthermore, a new framework will be developed
to quantitively link this variability in the present day to variability in the
future. This framework will integrate the response of the jet stream variability
and polar vortex to various climate forcings, such as greenhouse gas increase or
ozone depletion. The specific tasks of this project are 1) examining the
coupling between the barotropic and baroclinic annular modes in observations and
in climate models; 2) developing an eddy feedback model for propagating annular
modes; 3) understanding stratospheric influence on the tropospheric annular mode
in both hemispheres using numerical experiments; 4) studying low-frequency
variability modes and fluctuation-dissipation relationship in climate model
simulations to better evaluate the fidelity of the climate change projections in
these simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.