* 1921517
* Upgrade of a Triaxial Rock Deformation Apparatus to Measure the Rheology of Subduction Megathrusts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Melodie French, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 102,379.00

Earthquakes are felt as elastic waves that shake the ground, but the cause of
these waves is slip along faults kilometers beneath the surface. Not all faults
produce earthquakes, however, and the reasons that some faults slip
destructively in earthquakes, whereas others slip so slowly that they do not
produce elastic waves are not entirely known. The faults associated with the
greatest hazards are found at subduction plate boundaries, such as the Pacific
Northwest of the United States. These faults create the largest earthquakes and
associated tsunamis, but they are also the least understood. Whether a fault
slips destructively or not is controlled by the mechanical properties of the
rocks within the fault zone. This proposal will fund the upgrade of equipment
that will be used to measure the mechanical properties of rocks from subduction
plate boundary faults. The results of these measurements will be used to
determine how the rocks present in a given region determine how the faults slip,
whether in an earthquake or less destructively. The measurements made by this
equipment will, therefore, contribute to improved models of seismic hazards for
populous regions, such as the Pacific Northwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
physical properties of rocks along the subduction plate boundary are thought to
affect the depths of transitions between aseismic and seismic slip, and
phenomena such as slow slip, low-frequency earthquakes, and tremor. However,
there is still considerable uncertainty about which lithologies and which
properties control these processes in subduction zones, in part because the
minerals present in subduction zones are both more varied and more challenging
to study. This award will upgrade a triaxial rock deformation apparatus donated
to Rice University for the purpose of studying the constitutive behavior of
rocks present along the subduction plate boundary. The apparatus will be used to
measure the constitutive behavior at temperatures that span the seismogenic zone
(500 degrees C) and over 8 orders of magnitude in strain rate. These
constitutive relations can then be used in models of fault slip along subduction
megathrusts to understand how far landward and seaward earthquakes might
propagate, which will inform seismic hazards associated with ground shaking and
tsunamis, respectively. The project will fund the development of a rock
deformation laboratory by an early career PI and the upgraded apparatus will be
used by students to conduct their thesis research. Lab members will communicate
to the public about this research through a social media
account.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.