* 1921821
* Workshop: Furthering Integrated History and Philosophy of Science via Methodological Pluralism; July 2020, Blacksburg, Virginia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jutta Schickore, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 30,906.00

This award provides support for a workshop to integrate two distinct fields,
history of science and philosophy of science. A substantial number of scholars
on both sides of the disciplinary divide started an international,
interdisciplinary initiative in 2007 to advance the integration of these two
fields. It was thought early on that it would necessary to develop a unified
methodology to bring about integration. But attempts to do so only served to
bring to light very substantial difficulties. The organizers of this workshop
propose an alternative methodological approach that would serve to integrate
these two disciplines together that advocates pluralism in methods. Discussion
will focus on how the community can be cohesive, and how new scholars can be
mentored, if there is no single methodology serves to define the field. It will
also focus on the development of a dynamic and flexible repository of Integrated
History and Philosophy of Science (Integrated HPS) works as an essential tool
for capturing the contours of such a community and for allowing for effective
mentoring and orientation of early career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
organizers of this workshop contend that the field of Integrated HPS needs a
pluralistic framework for the analysis of the full sweep of science in past and
present, combining philosophical analysis and historical evaluation of science
in diverse ways. The workshop will bring scholars from both fields together to
make progress towards articulating a new understanding of the field,
characterizing the Integrated HPS community as a community of problem solvers.
The conference discussion will investigate a problem-centered and pluralistic
methodology for integrated HPS that benefits from the diverse approaches
emerging in recent HPS scholarly literature. Workshop participants will begin
discussion and planning for an eventual publishing and repository project that
goes well beyond the conference itself and can serve as a model for other
interdisciplinary fields of study in the humanities and social
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.