* 1921411
* Collaborative Research: Cestode phylogeny and genomics
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kirsten Jensen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 286,810.00

Tapeworms are parasites that include numerous species of medial and veterinary
importance in mammals as well as thousands of species that parasitize
essentially all other groups of vertebrate animals. Yet, we know little about
the evolution of the major groups of tapeworms. Not only does this hamper our
ability to treat tapeworm infections of medical and veterinary importance, but
it also limits the use of tapeworms as model parasite systems to help expand our
understanding of food web connections and ecosystem health, and to help inform
fisheries management practices. This project aims to generate the molecular and
morphological data required to substantially expand our understanding of the
evolution of tapeworms. In doing so, it will transform tapeworms and their
vertebrate hosts into one of the best known host/parasite systems globally,
allowing this system to reach its full potential. The training provided to
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers will equip them with
transferable STEM skills. Furthermore, information about tapeworms will be made
publicly available on-line to diverse audiences of all ages by creating a key to
the major tapeworm groups, developing an e-book version of a children's book on
tapeworms, and building upon an existing global cestode database.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent global survey has identified tapeworm lineages
hosted by sharks and rays as central to the diversification of the Cestoda. This
class currently comprises 19 orders. Preliminary phylogenetic work suggests that
the current ordinal classification of the class substantially underestimates
lineage diversity, especially within the groups of elasmobranch-hosted cestodes.
The proposed work aims to provide a robust phylogeny of the class based on
targeted gene capture of 738 loci for 960 species of tapeworms. Cestode higher-
level classification will be revised to reflect monophyletic groups, informed by
new morphological and molecular data. The generation of complete genomes for 20
species spanning the approximately 200-million year gap between the cestodes of
medical and veterinary importance for which such data are currently available
will provide insight into patterns of taxon-specific gene family evolution
across cestodes. Genomic analyses have been designed to take advantage of the
multiple independent transitions between marine and non-marine habitats,
elasmobranch and non-elasmobranch definitive hosts, and invertebrate and
vertebrate final intermediate hosts that have occurred over evolutionary time to
identify signatures of parallel evolution. Such signatures are anticipated to
provide valuable insight into environmental factors that may have played a role
in the evolution of parasite systems with complex life
cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.