* 1921370
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Economic and Socio-political Geographies of Immigration in Suburbia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Megan Ybarra, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 07/31/2021
* USD 16,432.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project will examine the effects
that processes of migration and the economic and socio-political geographies of
suburbia have on the daily practices of immigrants and families whose members
have different citizenship or immigration statuses, or mixed-status families. As
immigrants settle in increasing numbers throughout US suburbs, the rescaling of
immigration policies to the local level affect an estimated 11 million
undocumented immigrants, with significant impacts on suburban towns and mixed-
status families. This research will consider the significance of the everyday
navigation practices of different migrant communities in suburbia by advancing
theories in political geography, cultural placemaking, and ethnic studies. This
research project centers on the specific insights offered by suburban residents.
The findings will contribute to better understanding how the increase in the
immigrant population across many midwestern states has led to divergent
approaches in local immigration enforcement, particularly across post-industrial
cities, with implications for human well-being. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish an independent research career.

The doctoral student will use a mixed methods approach to examine the
relationship between the local politics of immigration and economics, and how
they structure the lives of suburban communities. Specifically, this research
examines (1) how the issue of immigration shapes local approaches to economic
revitalization; and (2) how and why some immigrants and mixed-status families
alter their everyday practices to navigate local contexts. These research
questions will be answered through a content analysis of city council meeting
notes and news media sources, participant observation at local cultural events
and organizational meetings, key informant interviews with city officials and
local leaders, in-depth semi-structured interviews with immigrants and mixed-
status families, and participatory photovoice documentation. Photovoice will be
used to create a booklet which will be used as an educational tool for community
members and local officials. The study will investigate these questions in
Chicago, Illinois, and will provide new insights into how processes of
immigration and mixed-status families shape local economic revitalization
projects in post-industrial suburbs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.