* 1921887
* Collaborative Research:  Uncovering and Utilizing the Dynamic Interplay between Work Recovery and Resilience
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Charles Calderwood, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 82,767.00

All employees will, at some point, encounter workplace adversities such as work
overload, role ambiguity, interpersonal conflict, abusive supervision, or work-
family conflict. Thus, there is a critical need to identify pathways through
which employees can achieve work effectiveness and wellbeing, despite facing
difficulties. Work resilience -- positive adaptation despite adversity at work
-- is an advantageous tool that offers a path to success despite adverse
experiences. We propose one unexplored way to increase resilience is through
recovery, in which non-work time is used to recuperate from fatigue and negative
mood built up during the work day. This project's goal is to understand how
psychological (e.g., detachment from work, relaxation) and physical (e.g.,
sleep, exercise) recovery experiences relate to work resilience. Determining
behaviors that improve resilience which are under individuals' control during
their non-work time has the potential to benefit individuals, teams, and
organizations across every occupation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to uncover and model the dynamic interrelationship of psychological
and physical work recovery experiences with work resilience. This project: 1)
assesses potential psychological (fatigue) and physiological (heart rate
variability) mechanisms that link work recovery and resilience; 2) examines the
differential effects of alternative work recovery experiences (i.e.,
psychological and physical) on work resilience; and 3) delineates the temporal
dynamics between work recovery and resilience, uncovering potential cumulative
and reciprocal effects. We will conduct two experience sampling research studies
using (a) a sample of traditionally employed participants who work during
standard weekly business hours and (b) a sample of shift workers - employees who
work alternative shifts that at least partially fall outside the daytime shift
range (e.g., night shift and rotating shift employees) - to test the current
model. Each study is a four-week daily survey study in a sample of 100 working
adults that incorporates both objective behavioral and physiological indicators.
By explicating the relative importance of different recovery experiences
contributing to work resilience and the dynamic relationship between work
recovery and resilience, this project could provide a theoretical foundation to
enhance organizational effectiveness and employee wellbeing despite unavoidable
adversities. Findings will be shared with research outlets, business
practitioners, policy makers, and community members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.