* 1921526
* Advances in Skin Color Measurement: Reliability, Validity, and Feasibility of Portable Devices for Field Research in the Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Rachel Gordon, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 389,197.00

This research project will advance knowledge of the measurement of skin color in
survey field research. Skin color is a frequently used measure of race and
ethnicity. Interviewer-coded skin color is simple to collect in the field, but
researchers use coarse and subjective categories. Handheld instruments for
objective physical measurements of skin color have advantages of increased
replicability and precision, but adoption in the social and behavioral sciences
has been limited. This project will determine whether a new generation of
portable devices for color measurement are practically feasible and
scientifically sound for use in measuring human skin tone in large-scale field-
based survey research. The investigators also will seek to better understand how
physical measures of skin color compare to interviewer-coded skin color scales.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved throughout the project.
Results will be disseminated not only to other scholars and teachers, but also
to policymakers, practitioners, and the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will conduct the empirical
and translational work necessary to bring tools for measurement of skin color
into broad use in field settings in the social, behavioral, and economic
sciences. Although handheld devices have been widely used in some fields of
medicine and physical anthropology, there is varying standardization of
measurement protocol and little adoption in other fields. This project will
evaluate the reliability of handheld measurement devices and of self- and
interviewer-rated categorical scales of skin color; establish their validity in
relation to social, behavioral, and academic outcomes; and assess the
feasibility of each approach. The study population will include individuals from
a wide range of racial and ethnic backgrounds, drawing from a data collection
site at one of the most diverse universities in the country. Specific guidance
regarding methods of skin color measurement for field-based studies will be
produced, along with cost information, technical recommendations, and template
research protocols and budget sheets. By generating these resources, the project
will improve both internal and external validity of skin color data,
facilitating cross-sample and cross-cohort comparisons. The investigators will
identify the strengths and limitations of conventional skin color rating scales
that primarily assess a single dimension of lightness-to-darkness, providing
evidence of the need to incorporate measures of undertones (such as redness and
yellowness) to better align with contemporary multifaceted and fluid conceptions
of race-ethnicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.