* 1921415
* Guidance of attention by task-irrelevant information
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sarah Shomstein, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 654,941.00

Attentional selection is a mechanism by which sensory information that makes up
our environment is selected for further, detailed, and more efficient
processing. Given that attended information is privileged by the brain,
understanding and predicting what information is granted access to brain
processing becomes an important endeavor. It has been argued that salient events
(those that are very different from the surrounding environment) as well as
information that is related to the current goal (i.e., task-relevant) are
granted such access. The current work aims to extend this arguably simple notion
of attentional orienting, to test the hypothesis that attentional selection can
depend on may factors other than salience and task relevance. A better
understanding of critical factors that determine how attentional selection is
distributed in a scene could be used in various applied fields such as: design
of interactive and ergonomic panels (e.g., car dashboards, instrumental panels,
airplane cockpits, air traffic control monitors); enhanced training programs
across multiple industries ranging from training drivers and machine operators
to security personnel (e.g., airport baggage screeners) to neurologists reading
X-rays for evidence of cancer; and developing new beneficial rehabilitative
programs for persons suffering from various attentional disorders (Attention
Deficit Disorder, visuo-spatial neglect,
etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given a critical mass of knowledge
acquired on how salient and task-relevant aspects of the scene contribute to
attentional allocation, the time is ripe to probe various ways in which task-
irrelevant properties of the environment constrain attentional allocation. The
proposed research program tests a set of novel predictions regarding the
influence of task-irrelevant properties of the scene to attentional selection.
Our goal is to rigorously test the hypothesis that task-irrelevant information
(such as semantics, affordances, size, diagnosticity), constrains attentional
selection by directly acting on spatial and object representations. While
extensive past research has demonstrated that relevant information constrains
attentional selection, we ask a more fundamental question whether different
types of task-irrelevant information impinge on attentional control even when
not directly relevant to the current goal. Predictions will be tested in real
world scenes, and by utilizing real world objects. Both, behavioral profile
(with the use of various psychophysics and eye-movement techniques) as well as
the neural underpinnings of this mechanism (by employing neuroimaging
techniques), will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.