* 1921598
* Acquisition of surveying equipment (UAVs, GNSS receivers) and associated hardware and software to support research and undergraduate training at the University of Alaska Southeast
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Eran Hood, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 38,143.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program award
supports acquisition of three survey-grade unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for
airborne topographic mapping, hardware and software for associated Structure
from Motion (SfM) photogrammetric processing, and two Global Navigational
Satellite System (GNSS) receivers and antennas for ground-based surveying. The
requested instrumentation will support faculty and student research and research
training at the University of Alaska Southeast in Juneau, AK. The investigators
will engage students in hands-on experiential learning using the requested
equipment and are active in public outreach discussing avalanche and glacial
lake outburst flood hazards and the effects of changing climate on regional
mountain glaciers. The University of Alaska Southeast is a Native Alaskan
serving institution and the PIs are active in outreach to Native Alaskans
through extant University programs and through contact with the Central Council
of Tlingit and Haida in Juneau. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects that
will take advantage of the UAVs for topographic mapping include process-based
studies of glacier-ocean interactions, glacier lake outburst floods,
sedimentation and erosion, and avalanche dynamics. Field areas will include the
Mendenhall glacier, Mt. Juneau avalanche field, and Taku glacier, all located
very close to the University but comprised of rugged and largely inaccessible
terrain across Southeast Alaska. The UAVs and related GNSS base stations will
permit topographic surveys in this challenging terrain with unprecedented
accuracy and speed to observe rapidly changing mountain glaciers, glacial lakes
and avalanche prone areas in a safe manner and with direct implications for
monitoring potential hazards and mitigating loss of life and infrastructure in
the municipality of Juneau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.