* 1921774
* Pathways to the Future of the Arecibo Observatory (AO) Workshop; San Juan, Puerto Rico; February 17-20, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2019
* Noemi Pinilla-Alonso, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Robert Moore
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,999.00

This grant is to organize the "Pathways to the Future of Arecibo Observatory
(AO) Workshop" to be held February 17-20, 2019 in San Juan Puerto Rico. AO's
cornerstone research facility is a 305-meter diameter spherical reflector,
located in Barrio Esperanza, Arecibo, Puerto Rico. This facility has a unique
cluster of instruments, making it a center of excellence with exceptional
capabilities to enhance our knowledge in the Space Sciences. The observatory
continues to be a magnet for Hispanic and other underrepresented groups. It has
extensive educational resources for students, teachers and the public. This
workshop is being hosted by the new management of AO, the University of Central
Florida (UCF), with the goal of promoting innovative ideas for new research
activities at AO. The workshop provides a meeting space so that key
stakeholders, community scientists and local students and teachers can come
together to create a shared vision of future research to be conducted at AO. It
is expected to harness the expertise and forward-thinking leadership of the
participants to help create tangible ways to promote cutting-edge research and
involve wider participation from the scientific community. A broad range of
science is carried out at AO and no single science meeting covers all of topics
in one place. Therefore, this workshop was conceived to bring all stakeholders
together in one place at one time. This workshop seeks to widen the AO research
and science plans for the next decade or so, and the technical improvements that
will be needed to guarantee the success of that research. An expected outcome is
that the discussions facilitated by this workshop will help maintain AO's status
as one of the premier research institutions in the world, and Puerto Rico as the
location where breakthrough discoveries can and will happen in the next decade.
Furthermore, white papers generated from this meeting may be used to inform
Decadal Surveys being facilitated by the National Academies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following overarching question will be addressed at
the workshop: What key scientific questions, emerging science opportunities, and
technical advances will scientists be pursuing in the next decade? The
discussion is expected to lead to the development of next-generation instruments
using existing infrastructure and broaden their scope beyond traditional
approaches of doing science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.