* 1921429
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO:  Collaborative Research: Focusing a quantitative lens on Synthetic Phototrophic Communities
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,006,402.00

Microbial communities populate nearly all environments on our planet. These
environments include the human gut, the surface of corals in the oceans, and
plant roots in the soil. In these communities, bacteria interact with each other
to sustain environmental health. Understanding these interactions will reveal
factors that establish robust, productive communities. This project will focus
on bacteria isolated from hot spring mats of Yellowstone National Park. A deeper
understanding of the physical and metabolic conversations among bacteria that
thrive in this extreme environment will be gained and used to model these
interactions. New courses on microbial consortia will be developed and shared by
all participating Universities. The PIs will also develop programs in
partnership with local science museums and TV stations to encourage science
literacy and community involvement. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on extremophile bacteria isolated from the hot spring mats of
Yellowstone National Park. The approach will be to query the entire bacterial
community within the mat as well as synthetic combinations of the bacteria grown
under defined conditions in the laboratory. The application of sequencing and
metabolomic technologies will reveal key metabolic pathways among members of the
community under different light and nutrient conditions and over the diel cycle.
The work will evaluate the hypothesis that microbial communities act like an
integrated machine rather than as individual species grown under axenic
conditions in the laboratory, and that this integration maintains
functionalities critical for life in natural habitats. Experiments will also be
performed to analyze how abrupt changes in light intensity, temperature and
microbial composition impact mat growth, structure, electrical and metabolic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is supported by
the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.