* 1921229
* Business and Human Rights: Explaining Variation in Justice and Remedy for Corporate Human Rights Violations
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Tricia Olsen, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 244,972.00

Claims of corporate human rights abuse are ubiquitous. Despite widespread
interest on this topic on the part of scholars, businesses, states,
international bodies, and human rights groups, no systematic cross-national
study yet exists to document claims of corporate human rights abuse. This
project will create the first, global database of human rights abuses by
businesses and related remedy or justice efforts - the Business and Human Rights
Database (BHRD) - to better understand how firm-, state-, and global-level
factors shape the likelihood of abuse and access to remedy for such abuses, when
they do occur. Understanding when and where abuses are likely to occur and how
victims, states, and corporations respond to such claims is important for a)
advancing the business and human rights scholarship by building on a successful
pilot project; b) influencing policy debates by providing systematic data,
rather than a small number of well-known incidents; and c) inspiring the next
generation of human rights scholars. In addition to the scholarly contribution,
the project will produce two tools,an interactive, searchable BHRD website and a
BHRD Index, the latter tracks company-level human rights performance over time.
These tools will ensure a broader impact and will inform best practices by
allowing academic, policy, practitioner, and business researchers to easily
access the data for their own purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Why do claims of
corporate human rights abuses emerge? And, why do some claims achieve remedy for
those abuses while others do not? Drawing on related streams of literature from
human rights, political science, and management scholarship, this research
employs a multilevel analysis that seeks to understand when and where victims
make their claims known and why such claims are addressed through judicial or
non-judicial remedy processes in some cases and not others. This research
project is comprised of four phases. First, building on a successful pilot
project of corporate human rights abuses in Latin America, the team will
complete a global Business and Human Rights Database between 2006 and 2018.
Using a unique coding tool, the BHRD team will systematically collect publicly
available information about the type of abuse (when, where, and what type of
abuse), firm- and state-level responses (content of response, from whom), and
access to remedy efforts for the claim (judicial and/or non-judicial remedy), if
any. Second, this database will allow the PI to test hypotheses about business-
related human rights abuses and access to remedy to fill important theoretical
gaps in the business and human right scholarship. Third, the PI and her team
will use existing networks to disseminate scholarly and policy papers to
academic, governmental and business groups. The final phase will ensure the
project's broader impact, by launching a searchable, interactive website to make
the global BHRD user-friendly and widely accessible and developing a BHRD Index
so that interested parties can track firms' human rights record. The PI will
also seek to inspire and train a new generation of human rights scholars and
practitioners. Ultimately, the long-term goal of this project is to reduce
corporate human rights abuses and improve access to remedy when abuses do
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.