* 1921503
* Collaborative Research: Building a Computational Thinking Foundation in Upper Elementary Science with Narrative-Centered Maker Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Cathy Ringstaff, WestEd
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 899,781.00

Introducing students to computational thinking is critical for workforce
development. Because the elementary grades are a crucial time for developing
students' dispositions toward STEM, integrating computational thinking into
elementary students' science coursework is of paramount importance. The project
centers on the design, development, and investigation of InfuseCS, an
interactive learning environment for computational thinking that features maker-
based digital storytelling and problem-based learning. Students will be
introduced to computational thinking by working together in small groups to
conduct computational model-based scientific investigations and creating
narrative programs that generate interactive science narratives. The project
will advance understanding of how to help upper elementary students learn about
computational thinking in the context of science by conducting studies of
students using the InfuseCS interactive learning environment in public
elementary schools in California and North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate how problem-based learning and computational thinking
can be integrated with maker-based digital storytelling to create effective and
engaging learning experiences in physical science. In conjunction with this
investigation, the project will also explore how to best support teachers
implementing narrative-centered maker activities that are deeply infused with
problem-based learning. The project will have three thrusts. First, it will see
the design and iterative refinement of the InfuseCS narrative-centered maker
environment, which will be implemented at partner elementary schools in
California and North Carolina. Second, it will develop, implement, and refine
professional development materials for upper elementary school teachers. The
professional development will include both face-to-face and online activities
with the goal of preparing teachers to use the narrative-centered maker
environment effectively and with fidelity in their classrooms. Third, the
project will conduct focus groups, semi-structured interviews, classroom
observations, and classroom implementation studies in the co-design of the
narrative-centered maker environment. The project will investigate how the
narrative-centered maker environment supports students in developing improved
computational thinking competencies, improved understanding of disciplinary core
ideas in physical science, and improved attitudes toward computational thinking
and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the STEM + Computing
Program, which seeks to study the applied integration of computational thinking
and computing within disciplinary STEM teaching and learning in early childhood
education through high school (PreK-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.