* 1921356
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: URoL : Epigenetics 2: Predicting phenotypic and eco-evolutionary consequences of environmental-energetic-epigenetic linkages
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Roger Nisbet, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 598,697.00

Living organisms may acclimate to environmental changes through epigenetic
modifications to DNA, which alter the way genetic instructions are interpreted
without altering the DNA code itself. While these modifications to organismal
phenotype or function can be reversible, some of them may be inherited by
offspring, potentially producing multiple, heritable outcomes from a single
genome and affecting ecological and evolutionary outcomes. This project uses
symbiotic, metabolically complex reef building corals as a model system to test
the connections between physiological, epigenetic, and metabolic states, and
predict how population and community dynamics are influenced by epigenetically-
modulated phenotypes. This work will advance biological knowledge by delineating
fundamental links (Rules of Life) between ubiquitous organismal energetic
processes, epigenetics, and eco-evolutionary outcomes. The Broader Impacts
activities parallel the project's integrative approach, linking insights from
Environment x Energetics x Epigenetics x Ecology for Education into an E5
platform. The E5 platform will provide i) early career STEM training, ii) local
and global community education, and iii) educational resources for open science,
quantitative approaches, and research reproducibility. Further, this E5 platform
will train and inform the next generation of diverse scientists and public by
combining local and global initiatives focusing on groups underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project examines how nutrient metabolism in the
mitochondria generates cofactors and energy that will instruct the epigenetic
machinery in the cell nucleus to modulate genome function to appropriately
respond to environmental conditions. Environmentally-responsive metabolic
function and energetic-epigenetic linkages act as drivers of complex emergent
phenotypes. To elucidate relationships that are the basis for Rules of Life with
respect to epigenetics, this project will use integrative experimental and
modeling approaches focused on reef building corals to: 1) link nutritionally-
provisioned metabolites with epigenetic and organismal state through seasonal
sampling across environmental gradients; 2) expand current Dynamic Energy Budget
(DEB) models for symbiotic organisms to further integrate critical facets of
nutritional symbiosis and calcification; 3) experimentally modulate metabolic
and therefore epigenetic states through repeated exposure to increased
temperature and nutrients, to test intra- and trans-generational epigenetic
inheritance; 4) use DEB theory to identify shifts in energetics associated with
epigenetic modulation, and link these sub-organismal processes to higher levels
of organization; and 5) integrate findings into a generalizable, predictive eco-
evolutionary model that links nutritional interactions, metabolic states, and
subsequent epigenetic effects to the timescales regulating organismal processes
and eco-evolutionary outcomes. This effort will provide characterization of
environmental epigenetic phenomena in ecosystem-engineering marine
invertebrates. This characterization includes determining the mechanisms and the
degree of epigenetic 'memory' both within and across generations. By including
information on environmental legacies, propagated by epigenetics, this project
will advance both organismal and population-based models and improve capacity to
predict responses to acute and chronic environmental
signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.