* 1921671
* EPCN: Student Travel Grant Support for ACM e-Energy 2019. To Be Held at the Phoenix Convention Center in Phoenix, Arizona, June 25-28, 2019.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Xiaojun Lin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 11/30/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This project will support student travel for attending ACM e-Energy 2019 (The
Tenth International Conference on Future Energy Systems), which will be held at
the Phoenix Convention Center in Phoenix, Arizona, June 25-28, 2019. The
organizing committee will review applications and select 10 candidates that
closely satisfy the participation criteria. Participation of early career post-
docs and students in the ACM e-Energy will contribute to their education and
provide them opportunities for career development by engaging them with the
exchange of the newest ideas on this topic, presentation of their work, and
networking with others. ACM e-Energy 2019 conference will contribute to the
science, engineering and education on future energy systems, which will lead to
the development of future energy systems that are cleaner, more efficient, and
more sustainable. To broaden participation, women and students from
underrepresented groups will be encouraged to apply.

The ACM e-Energy conference is aiming at promoting research and education at the
intersection of computing, communication, and control of energy systems. ACM
e-Energy specifically focuses on the application of new computing, communication
and networking technologies to the control and operation of energy systems.
Although still a young conference (in its 10th year in 2019), ACM e-energy has
established itself as the premiere forum to attract professors, postdocs,
researchers from national labs and industry, and students. Educating and
engaging students and early-career post-doc researchers is one of the key
objectives of ACM e-Energy. This funding will allow students and early-career
post-doc researchers to attend the workshop to present their work, be exposed to
new ideas, and network with other researchers and professors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.