* 1921320
* Effect of hydrodynamic interactions on electrochemical performance of flowable electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 359,320.00

A new type of electrode called a "flowable electrode" has been used in several
emerging energy- and environment-related technologies, such as the
electrochemical flow capacitor for storing electrical energy and capacitive
deionization for treating brackish water. During the operation of a flowable
electrode, a slurry of small, highly porous carbon beads mixed with an aqueous
electrolyte flows into an electrochemical cell and is charged with an applied
voltage. Ions are adsorbed to the interior surface of the carbon beads through
their pores to store electrical charge. Because the porous carbon beads have
enormous interior surface area relative to their mass, they can store or release
a tremendous amount of ions and electrons in a very short time. This process
allows more rapid charging and discharging compared with conventional
rechargeable batteries. The flow capacitor has the potential to achieve 100
times faster charging and 1000 times longer lifetime than Li-ion batteries.
Furthermore, the flow architecture makes it scalable for grid energy storage.
Achieving these potentials requires detailed knowledge about how the detailed
configuration of the slurry affects electrical conductivity and charging. The
electrical network within the slurry consists of carbon particles in
intermittent contact causing electrical pathways to be rapidly disrupted and
reformed. Thus, the entire slurry displays unique behavior in electrical
conductivity and charging characteristics, which are key to the performance of
the flowable electrode. This project will investigate how hydrodynamic
interactions at the carbon particle level affects the critical properties of
flowable electrodes. The results will help improve efficiency of flow
electrodes, which will contribute to sustainable developments in energy and
water resources. The interdisciplinary nature of the project provides rich
opportunities for students from high-school to graduate levels to participate in
the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines experimental and
computational approaches to explore the hydrodynamic interactions of activated
carbon particles with diameters from 1 to 10 micrometers, and the
electrochemical processes of flowable electrodes. Novel microfluidic devices
will be constructed to directly observe particle interactions and,
simultaneously, to measure the electrical or electrochemical properties of the
slurry. Dielectric-rheo setups will be used to measure properties at the
macroscopic level. The computational efforts will employ a new numerical model
to simulate the micro-hydrodynamics of the particles, the topology-varying
electrical circuit of the particle network, and their coupling. The experimental
data will provide critical parameters such as the electrical resistance and
capacitance of the particle network to the computational model. The
computational model will extract effects of shear rate and particle
concentration on the particle cluster characteristics, including cluster sizes,
lengths, and orientations, and their effects on the anisotropic conductivity and
transient charging behavior of the flowable electrode. The studies will produce
knowledge to improve the performance of flowable electrodes in energy and
environment technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.