* 1921281
* Catching up the Science of Problem Properties: The Microspatial Dynamics of Crime, Disorder, and Property Management
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel O'Brien, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,663.00

Criminologists and police departments alike have long sought to understand and
address the stark variation in crime across a given city. In recent years, this
has given rise to an emerging law enforcement strategy that concentrates on
"problem properties" that generate dramatically more crime and disorder than
other properties on their street or in their neighborhood. Such efforts,
however, have gone ahead of the science--at this time there is little
foundational knowledge to guide their design and few evaluations of their
effectiveness. This project will advance the science of problem properties and
translate it into effective interventions by pursuing three questions. First,
what are the microspatial dynamics of crime and disorder at addresses? Second,
what are the implications of a law enforcement strategy that implicitly targets
landowners and tenants for property management and use? Third, how do the
answers to the first two questions interact with street and neighborhood
factors?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage an existing partnership
between the Boston Area Research Initiative (BARI), an NSF Research Coordination
Network, and the City of Boston's Problem Properties Task Force (PPTF). It will
comprise three components. (1) The analysis of archival data provided by BARI's
Boston Data Portal, including 911 and 311 reports of crime and disorder,
ownership information, and other administrative records and social media posts,
will offer insights into the different types of problem properties, as well as
factors that predict their emergence and persistence. (2) Observation at and
nearby problem properties and matched non-problem properties and surveys of
landowners and tenants will provide a richer view of local conditions, patterns
of property management, and interactions with the neighborhood. (3) BARI and the
PPTF will design and conduct an experimental evaluation of problem property
interventions through a randomized control trial. The evaluation will be
interpreted via the data products, analytic techniques, and theoretical insights
generated in Parts 1 and 2 of the project with a focus on questions of crime
displacement and impacts on the behavior of property
owners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.