* 1921946
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Design of surface functionality through surface composition and structure
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Zachary Ulissi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,836,288.00

Multicomponent materials, such as alloys, serve in critical aspects of the
nation's infrastructure, manufactured goods, hardware technologies, and defense
apparatus. Common examples are brass (mixture of copper and zinc) and stainless
steels (mixtures of iron, carbon and other elements such as chromium and
nickel). The main challenge of designing an alloy for a particular application
is understanding how its useful characteristics (cost, hardness, density,
corrosion resistance, chemical properties, etc.) depend on its specific mix of
elements. As the number of elements increases, testing the range of possible
combinations requires the preparation and study of an exponentially increasing
number of alloy samples. The project will develop and apply modern research
tools to vastly increase the rate at which the properties of alloys can be
measured experimentally and/or predicted by computational simulation. The
application of interest is the catalytic production of propylene oxide, a
multibillion-dollar commodity chemical. The investigators will use high-
throughput experimental methods to collect catalytic reaction data from 100
different binary or ternary alloy catalyst compositions concurrently, rather
than one catalyst composition at a time. These experimental methods will be
integrated with machine-learning methods that predict catalytic activity via
rapid computational simulations. Once the performance of these computational
methods has been benchmarked against experiment, they can be deployed for design
of alloy catalysts with more complex compositions, structures and morphologies.
More importantly, once their utility in the design of catalytic materials is
established, such tools can be applied to a wide variety of applications,
accelerating the design of multicomponent alloys for a wide variety of
engineering, product design, and hardware
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMREF project will use the propylene
epoxidation to propylene oxide on CuxAgyAu(1-x-y) catalyst surfaces in order to
improve alloy selection and optimization in the context of catalytic surface
design. The system investigated here will enable efficient tailoring of
variables such as surface orientation and structure; the relationship between
elemental compositions in the bulk and on the surface due to segregation; and
the influence of operational environments on surface structure and composition.
High-throughput methods for alloy catalysis study will make use of composition
spread alloy films (CSAFs) as material libraries, containing gradients of Cu,
Au, and Ag parallel to their surfaces, such that many compositions are found
over a single film. Coupled with a high throughput multichannel microreactor
array, the catalytic activity will be measured at 100 alloy compositions
concurrently, across a range of temperatures and reactant feed compositions. In
addition, the surface composition of the alloy will be measured to determine the
effects of segregation on reactivity. These data will serve to verify high-
throughput computational simulations of catalytic activity. Machine-learning
methods will be developed to expedite atomistic simulations based on interatomic
potentials derived from Density Functional Theory, which is expected to
accelerate the process of filtering the many possible atomistic configurations
of catalytically active sites at an alloy surface. These modeling methods inform
further experimental measurements of catalytic activity and in-situ
characterization of surfaces spanning alloy composition space; CuxAgyAu(1-x-y)
with 0&lt;x&lt;1 and 0&lt;y&lt;1-x. The investigators expect these studies to
yield new computational tools for predicting catalytic activity of alloys,
enabling rigorous and efficient catalyst optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.