* 1921298
* Effect of Hydrogen on the Properties of Fe alloys in the Earth's Core
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Andrew Chizmeshya, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 298,952.00

For more than half a century, scientists have known that the Earth's core - the
3500-km large ball of mostly iron at the center of the planet - has a density
5-10% lower than that of pure iron. This is because the core contains light
elements, such as Si, O, S, C, and H. While the core cools down forming the
solid inner core, light elements segregate preferentially in the liquid outer
core. This process powers in part the magnetic field which shields us from the
solar wind. Furthermore, knowing the composition of the core is critical to
constrain its formation and evolution. Light elements in metallic iron have,
thus, been extensively studied at the extreme pressure and temperature
conditions of the deep Earth. However, because of experimental limitations, the
effect of hydrogen on core materials is still largely unknown. Here, the
researchers investigate how hydrogen affect the properties of the core. Taking
advantage of recent technical developments, they study the iron-hydrogen system
at the high pressure and temperature of Earth's interior. The experiments,
carried out at national synchrotron facilities, quantify the melting temperature
and density of iron-rich alloys. Theoretical calculations at the atomic level
guide the experimental approach and the data analysis. The results improve
current models of the core with implications for the understanding of its
formation, evolution and present-day magnetic field, with numerous ramifications
in Earth Sciences. This two-year project provides support for an early-career
female scientist and a graduate student, and training opportunities for
undergraduate summer interns in state-of-the art Mineral Physics. It also
increases the public awareness of the important role of hydrogen in the Earth
through presentations during open-house events at Arizona State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the team investigates Fe-H, Fe-Ni-H and
Fe-Si-H alloys in the laser-heated diamond anvil cell (DAC), where specimens are
compressed at the tips of two opposing diamonds and heated by focused laser
beams. Target pressures and temperatures are up to 150 GPa (~1.5 million atm)
and in excess of 2000 K. Quantifying hydrogen-iron alloys at these conditions in
the DAC has been challenging because H2 tends to break the anvils on heating.
The team has recently demonstrated that this issue can be overcome by pulsed
laser heating. This technique, coupled with an improved X-ray detection system
at synchrotron facilities, allows the researchers to quantify in situ the effect
of hydrogen on the structure, equation of state, bulk modulus and melting
temperatures of iron-rich alloys. Run products are investigated by electron
microscopy to study their texture and the partitioning of Si and Ni among the
phases in presence. Ab initio calculations guide the experimental approach and
the data analysis. The key questions leading the research are: (1) Does hydrogen
change the crystal structures of iron metal and alloys in the Earth's core? What
is the effect of hydrogen on (2) the equations of state of iron metal and alloys
and (3) their melting temperatures at core conditions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.