* 1921585
* URoL: Epigenetics 2: Collaborative Research: Bumble bee cold tolerance across elevations - From epigenotype to phenotype across space, time, and levels of biological organization
* BIO,EF
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Lozier, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,402,422.00

Understanding how organisms cope with environmental variability is of
fundamental importance in ecology and evolutionary biology. Adaptation to
environmental variation has commonly been inferred by examining how the
appearance of organisms (phenotypes) and their DNA sequences (genotypes) vary
across a broad range of climatic conditions. However, there has been increasing
recognition of additional layers of complexity along the genome-to-phenotype
spectrum that influence responses to the environment by altering expression of
genetic variation. Epigenetic, or non-DNA sequence based, DNA modifications
under different environmental conditions are increasingly considered to be a
potent mechanism that may drive how organisms respond to different environments.
Likewise, the different molecules associated with metabolic activity
(metabolome) can vary among individuals or populations in different environments
or can change under stressful conditions to alter organism function. Species
that occur across altitudes experience rapid shifts in conditions, especially
temperature, over short spatial scales, which provides advantages for teasing
apart how different mechanisms influence tolerance of environmental variation.
This project will focus on thermal tolerance across elevations in wild and
laboratory reared bumble bees, an important group of pollinators that are
threatened by environmental pressures. The project will provide valuable tools
to understand how bee populations overcome environmental stress that will help
predict the stability of bee populations. Post-doctoral fellows, graduate
students and undergraduates at the University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa and
University of Wyoming will be broadly trained in molecular biology, physiology
and computational modeling approaches. A strategy game app to demonstrate how
molecular changes can affect populations and ecosystems under different thermal
conditions will be developed for K-12 students. Results of the study will be
disseminated through an exhibit at a native bee garden within the Stokes Nature
Center in Utah to increase awareness of wild
pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major research goal of the project is to
address the question: How does information flow from genetic and epigenetic
variation through expression of this information to produce intraspecific
phenotypes adapted to abiotic extremes? Thermal physiology experiments on field-
collected and laboratory-reared bumble bees from elevation gradients in the
Oregon Cascade Mountains will be combined with genomic, transcriptomic,
methylomic, and metabolomic analyses. Computational modeling will be employed to
integrate data sets and test how variation in epigenetic modification of DNA in
different populations influences gene expression, and ultimately physiology,
under cold temperature exposure. Specific research questions include: (1) are
bumble bees capable of withstanding similar cold stress exposure regardless of
geographic origin, or do individuals, social castes, and populations exhibit
constitutive variation in cold tolerance associated with local climate? (2) to
what degree do populations exhibit structured variation in DNA methylation,
transcription, and metabolomics across environments versus plastic regulation of
processes in response to cold stress?, and (3) how do epigenetic changes within
individual organisms influence transcription and in turn production of small
molecules to explain variation in cold tolerance across individuals, castes,
colonies, and environments?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.