* 1921587
* Explaining the Nocturnal Maximum in Convection over the Great Plains Through Understanding the Interactions Between the Nocturnal Low-level Jet and Mesoscale Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* David Parsons, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 873,607.00

Although thunderstorms can occur at any time of the day in response to weather
disturbances, such as fronts and tropical cyclones, thunderstorm activity over
most of the planet's land masses tends to most frequently occur in the late
afternoon and early evening. The general timing of these thunderstorm is well
understood as the daily heating of the earth's surface by the sun and the
associated warming and moistening of the lower atmosphere provides the fuel for
these storm systems. Remarkably, however, thunderstorms over the Great Plains
during the summer do not follow this general tendency. Instead, the maximum in
thunderstorm activity over the Great Plains takes place late in the night and
into the early morning hours. This proposal seeks to understand why large
thunderstorm complexes tend to occur at night over the Great Plains during the
summer. The proposed effort focuses on determining whether the atmosphere over
the Great Plains has relatively unique characteristics that lead to this
nighttime maximum and on determining whether storm systems over this region are
maintained through different processes than their late afternoon counterparts. A
framework for understanding these nocturnal storms is important given that the
numerical models utilized to predict weather have difficulty in representing
these nocturnal storms. Accurate predictions of these events are important to
society given that the nighttime thunderstorms can contain high winds, hail, and
heavy rainfall. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this proposed effort seeks
to explain the nocturnal maximum in organized thunderstorm activity over the
Great Plains during the summer through advancing knowledge of the interaction
between the spatial and temporal variations of the nocturnal low-level jet
(NLLJ) and the dynamical processes maintaining nocturnal mesoscale convective
systems (NMCSs). This proposal will utilize observations from the multi-agency
PECAN (Plains Elevated Convection at Night) and the International H2O Project
(IHOP_2002) field campaigns along with numerical simulations and theory. One
aspect of this effort is to investigate the spatial and temporal variations in
the thermodynamics and winds over this region within the context of the new
framework for the NLLJ that shows that the jet is not simply a southerly wind
maximum driven by an inertial oscillation, but a more complicated phenomenon
with a westerly wind maximum above the peak southerly winds and the possibility
of a slow, persistent ascent. This framework means that the NLLJ will impact
convective instability through radiative processes controlling the formation of
the stable nocturnal boundary layer and the heating and cooling on the sloping
terrain of the region along with dynamical processes, such as local mixing,
differential advection, and mesoscale ascent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key
component of the investigation will be to develop a framework that explains how
the NLLJ impacts the vertical profiles of horizontal winds, Convective Available
Potential Energy (CAPE), Convective Inhibition (CIN), and the Level of Free
Convection (LFC). Another aspect of this effort is to focus on the role of bores
and other gravity wave phenomena in initiating and maintaining convection in the
NLLJ environment. Recent research has shown that bores and gravity waves are
often inherent component of NMCSs over the Great Plains. The research team will
investigate how the spatial and temporal variations in these vertical profiles
impact the structure, movement, and evolution of NMCSs and how bores and gravity
waves are generated in the NLLJ environment to impact generations of
NMCSs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.