* 1921629
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Machine learning exploration of atomic heterostructures towards perfect light absorber and giant piezoelectricity
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Vladimir Cherkassky, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,063.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description: Recent discovery of atomically thin
two-dimensional (2D) materials, such as graphene, transition metal
dichalcogenides, black phosphorus, among many others, has opened new
opportunities to atomic level materials control through vertical stacking, i.e.
2D heterostructure. The art of 2D heterostructure materials design is at its
nascent stage, and with the potential library of 2D monolayers that we can
access experimentally amounting to about 1000, just the mere lowest energy
stacking of N monolayers would then lead to 1000N possible heterostructures. Our
program seeks a transformational impact on the discovery process of useful 2D
heterostructures, such as perfect light absorption in the visible spectrum and
giant piezoelectricity, through novel machine-learning (ML)-guided density
functional theory (DFT). We have assembled a team comprising of experts in data
science and the application of ML, modeling of 2D materials and their optical
properties, molecular beam epitaxial growth of 2D heterostructures, and
materials and device characterization. The successful demonstration of these new
designer 2D heterostructures would usher in a new era of efficient and
purposeful materials design methodology. A three-pronged broadening
participation program for all participating groups in this proposal is planned,
which includes undergraduate research, community outreach, and summer
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Research in two-
dimensional atomic crystals has recently focused on their heterostructures, and
the advancements in this emerging field has already led to fascinating
discoveries such as superconductivity and magnetism. However, thousands of
different 2D layered materials and their permutations amount to almost infinite
heterostructure combinations. This research will develop a novel ML-guided DFT
framework, in conjunction with physically motivated atomistic descriptors, which
applies data science in the search for designer heterostructures with targeted
properties. As a proof-of-concept, we will demonstrate heterostructures with
perfect light absorption through optimizing the band nesting between the filled
and empty bands as well as giant piezoelectricity through engineering the
electronegativity dipole moments. These heterostructures identified with the
targeted properties will be grown with ultra-clean state-of-the-art MBE
approaches, and their absorption and piezoelectric coefficients characterized.
Corroboration between experiments and theory will then instruct on possible
improvements to the proposed ML and DFT models and overall strategy. The
successful demonstration of these new designer 2D heterostructures would usher
in a new era of efficient and purposeful materials design
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.