* 1921678
* Learning, Creative Problem-Solving, REM Sleep, and Dreaming
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Ken Paller, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 01/31/2024
* USD 615,991.00

This project explores several aspects of learning and sleep. Memories we have
acquired during the day are reactivated during sleep, causing changes in memory
storage in brain networks. Dreams in particular may contribute to language
learning and problem solving, but one problem with the scientific study of
dreaming is that we gain knowledge of a dream only after an individual has
awoken. In the waking state, dreams may be recalled in a fragmentary or
distorted way, or barely remembered at all. This research will overcome those
limitations by allowing dreamers to communicate about their dream experiences
while they are having the dreams. For example, using eye-movement and muscle-
twitch signals, dreamers can indicate that they are aware of dreaming, and an
experimenter can communicate with a dreamer with softly spoken words or other
sounds. This strategy will open up new avenues for understanding more about the
importance of sleep, with many important implications for
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a set of innovative methods to
advance knowledge of the various cognitive benefits of sleep. Prior studies
showed that spatial memory could be changed during sleep through the method of
Targeted Memory Reactivation (TMR). This approach of strategically presenting
soft sounds during sleep will be modified to investigate whether vocabulary
learning and problem solving can be improved in association with REM sleep or in
association with a dream. To enable this novel perspective on dreaming, people
will be interviewed from within a dream. Experimenters will issue softly spoken
questions, and volunteers will communicate back with a code based on specific
eye movements and muscle twitches, readily measured electrophysiologically, all
while REM sleep is maintained. People typically experience a dream with a high
degree of acceptance and a lack of critical evaluation - they fail to realize
that the experience is merely a dream. In a lucid dream, one gains the elusive
insight of being in a dream. However, lucid dreams can seldom be summoned at
will, and on the rare occasions when people succeed in having a lucid dream in a
lab, they often forget pre-assigned goals. These challenges will be overcome by:
(a) pre-sleep training to strategically link specific sound cues with action
plans; (b) monitoring sleep physiology to coordinate stimulation; and (c)
presenting sounds to remind dreamers to evaluate their experience to determine
if they are dreaming, and to then engage in specific activities such as
rehearsing recently learned foreign words or attempting to reach a solution to a
cognitive puzzle. Increasing the frequency of lucid dreams through these methods
will make it possible to examine cognition during the course of interactive
dreaming. Results from this project will expand understanding of cognitive
capabilities during sleep, and will provide new information on the extent to
which sleep cognition can assist with language learning, problem solving, and
other tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.