* 1921190
* The Effects of Scheduling Regulation on Workers and Families
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Elizabeth Ananat, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 424,405.00

The courts and legislatures have played a large role in shaping today's
workplaces, for example through minimum wages, anti-discrimination policy, and
workplace safety requirements. Historically, legal standards also created the
current U.S. norms around scheduling, including the 8-hour workday and the
weekend. But in recent years, regulation of the labor market has focused little
attention on scheduling, despite the fact that the nature of work schedules has
been shifting dramatically. In particular, while the earlier generation of
scheduling regulation concentrated on preventing employers from extracting too
much labor from workers, many of today's workers fear instead too much
variability and unpredictability in work and pay. Labor advocates have raised
concerns about employers shifting the risk of variable customer demand from
themselves to their employees, by giving workers neither hours nor pay when
demand is unexpectedly low. Such risk-shifting, recent research has shown, can
harm worker health and well-being. Given the demographic changes in both family
structure and the low-wage workforce, many service workers today are single
parents without other adults in the household on whom to rely, meaning that this
risk-shifting may harm children as well. By examining a regulation that
addresses work schedule unpredictability, this project will help identify the
consequences of these new legislative interventions in the employer-employee
relationship. This study will evaluate whether such regulations are feasible to
implement and enforce, at a key time when many jurisdictions are considering
similar untested legislation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research project will
evaluate a new labor law, the Fair Workweek Standard (FWS), which will go into
effect January 1, 2020, in Philadelphia. The research team will gather daily
data from 1,000 low-wage workers with a young child using an innovative survey
tool. Data will be collected in two waves: prior to FWS implementation (fall
2019) and post-implementation (spring 2020). The team has designed a text-
message survey tool to collect detailed daily reports about work schedule
changes and worker and family well-being. The sample will be balanced across
those working in: (1) retail, food and hospitality firms that meet threshold
local and global employment levels and are subject to regulation from the FWS
and 2) otherwise similar firms below those thresholds, which are exempt from the
FWS. The project will answer three key research questions: (1) What is the
impact of the Philadelphia FWS on working parents' schedule unpredictability?
(2) What are the effects of schedule unpredictability on the well-being of low-
wage workers and their families? (3) Are there any unintended effects of the
legislation on working parents' hours, earnings, and
employment?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.