* 1921156
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Legal and Oppositional Consciousness Among Actors in the Central American Refugee Movement
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Catherine Albiston, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 26,610.00

Since 2014, thousands of Central Americans have fled their home countries and
traveled across Mexico to the U.S. border to seek asylum. In response to
increased migration from Central America, the U.S. government has implemented a
number of policies meant to deter migration. Rather than dissuading Central
American asylum seekers, these policies may foster resistance among some asylum
seekers and their U.S. legal allies, including attorneys and legal advocates. In
contrast to undocumented youth in the United States, asylum seekers,
particularly those that have not yet entered the physical boundaries of the
nation state, lack claims to cultural citizenship, let alone formal citizenship.
Yet many make claims against the U.S. state. At the same time, a broad base of
attorneys and legal advocates are engaging with asylum seekers, working en mass
to provide short-term pro bono legal services both before and after asylum
seekers' transnational border crossings. Unlike impact litigation, direct legal
services provision is not traditionally thought to lead to social change, yet it
may be a new form of social movement engagement. How do these diverse actors
think about their actions? Do these individuals consider themselves part of a
social movement? If so, what roles do law and identity play in how they come to
see themselves as activists and how, if at all, does this shift across spaces
inside and outside of the United States? Understanding the role these factors
play in fomenting resistance will have critical implications for both our
understanding of social movements and for U.S. immigration policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining a multi-sited ethnographic field study with
interviews with Central American asylum seekers and U.S.-based attorneys and
legal advocates, this study will provide the first systematic empirical
examination of whether and how these various actors come to view themselves as
part of a broader movement, what has been called the development of oppositional
consciousness. Contributing to the literature on social movements, the legal
profession, and migration, this project maps consciousness among actors in the
social field of the Central American refugee movement and generates a
theoretical model for analyzing the processes through which asylum seekers,
attorneys, and legal advocates begin to view themselves as part of a social
movement. Focusing on the development of consciousness before, during, and after
asylum seekers' transnational border crossing, the study particularly examines
how law, and the punitive policies enforcing law, shapes actors' consciousness;
how actors' identities, including the asylum seeking identity and professional
identity, influence the development of consciousness; and how space mediates
consciousness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.