* 1921959
* DMREF: Data-Driven Integration of Experiments and Multi-Scale Modeling for Accelerated Development of Aluminum Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* David Elbert, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,056,352.00

Traditionally, materials design is an iterative process in which the properties
of the material are gradually improved by adjusting process by which the
material is made. This approach can be accelerated by introducing computational
models into the loop and comparing the output with experimental measurements of
the structure and properties of the material at each step. The cycle is slowed,
however, by the need for humans to be involved at almost every step for data
collection, analysis, and reduction. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize
and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports research to facilitate rapid
adoption of advanced materials into engineering applications by leveraging
modern data science tools to develop a data framework and infrastructure for
seamless integration of experiments and models in complex materials development
problems. This framework will be broadly applicable, allowing researchers to
adopt it to particular problems and allowing the ideas to be integrated across a
wide range of materials and application areas. The concepts and tools developed
will be disseminated through freely-available software, open source modules,
online tutorials, open access data sets, and training for users to apply the
tools in new contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to establish a new
paradigm for the materials design loop in which the flow of data, rather than
individual modeling or experimental tasks, is viewed as central. Modern data
science tools will be leveraged to create the semantic framework and physical
infrastructure necessary for seamless integration of experiments and models in
complex materials development problems. This framework will define and describe
classes of material data, and connections among these classes, that are required
to create an automated data flow in which each experimental and computational
task in the design loop automatically pushes information to, or pulls
information from, a data layer common to all tasks. This will accelerate the
materials design process by minimizing the required human intervention, while
still allowing human input to the loop where essential. A specific instantiation
of this approach will be the implementation of a multi-scale modeling framework
for the resistance of commercial aluminum alloys to spall failure, with
automated connections to advanced microstructural characterization and high-
throughput laser shock testing through a centralized data layer. The design loop
will be closed by further coupling to models of microstructure development
during processing, with machine-learning algorithms trained to optimize the
microstructure to resist the nucleation and growth of spall
voids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.