* 1921061
* Examination and Reconstruction of Alternate Allosteric Networks in Engineered LacI/GalR Transcription Factors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Corey Wilson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2023
* USD 652,145.00

This project aims to understand and predict how proteins (i.e., transcription
factors) that turn genes on-and-off develop the means to process information and
interact with nearby surroundings. The mechanism in which proteins process
signal information is called allosteric communication. While the study of
allosteric communication has been underway for more than four decades, critical
details of these fundamental processes are still poorly understood. This gap in
knowledge prevents scientists and engineers from designing new proteins with
custom-built communication abilities. Accordingly, the focus of the current
project is to elucidate the rules that will enable scientists to build
allosteric communication in a family of transcription factors that process a
broad range of signals. This research will expand the scientific communities
understanding of allosteric communication and enable the development of new
tools that can be used to benefit society (e.g., new and less expensive process
controls for bio-industrial applications, and systems for use in personalized
medicine). Moreover, this project will involve the training and education of the
next generation of scientists, specifically Ph.D. level graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Protein allostery is a vitally important protein
function that has proven to be a vexing problem to understand at the molecular
level. Allosteric communication is a hallmark of many transcription factors used
to control gene expression and have enabled synthetic biologist to reprogram
cells. The specific goal of this research is to leverage the basic structure and
function relationship of the lactose repressor (LacI) to systematically map and
engineer alternate allosteric communication, in several LacI/GalR homologues.
Answering the fundamental question of whether allostery in the broader LacI/GalR
family has been evolved to be controlled by a set of conserved residues or
whether the protein is plastic and predisposed to allostery across different
residue sequences will ultimately give insights into allosteric structure-
function relationships and aid in the engineering of novel transcription
factors. Mapping allostery and determining the evolutionary origin, links, and
mechanism by which allostery is conferred in the LacI/GalR family will provide
crucial knowledge into how other proteins may be designed to exhibit allostery
and how to control and modulate allostery in existing systems. Upon completion,
this study will enable scientist to test assertions with regard to the origin
and molecular mechanics of alternate allosteric communication via the
development of design rules for specific allosteric operations. In turn this
algorithm will produce novel LacI/GalR-based transcription factors for use in a
broad range of biotechnological applications. This project is co-funded by the
Molecular Biophysics and the Systems and Synthetic Biology programs of the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.