* 1921285
* Dewetting and Rewetting in Marangoni Driven Spreading on Complex Liquid Films
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Stephen Garoff, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 11/30/2023
* USD 436,658.00

This goal of this project is to improve aerosol-based drug delivery systems for
people with obstructive lung disease. The distribution of aerosol-based drugs is
strongly affected by airflows in the lung. Controlling the size and density of
drug-containing aerosol droplets can ensure drugs penetrate deep and distribute
uniformly throughout the lungs. However, airflow patterns are altered when lungs
are obstructed by excess mucus deposits or airway constrictions, and aerosol
droplets deposit on or upstream of obstructions. This project will investigate
an alternative strategy that maximizes dispersal of drugs after the aerosol
droplets have landed on the lung airway surface. Surfactant molecules will be
incorporated into the aerosol droplets so that the surface tension near droplets
after they land will vary along the lung surface. The gradient in surface
tension will induce a flow in the thin airway surface liquid (ASL) films that
line the airways. Flow in the ASL will carry drugs past obstructions. However,
if the surface tension gradient exceeds a critical value, the ASL film may
rupture, leaving a dry patch on underlying tissue that would diminish drug
dispersal. This project will assess phenomena that influence film rupture and
address its effects on drug transport. The results of this research will provide
the fundamental knowledge needed to design aerosols that will enhance
distribution of drugs for many obstructive lung diseases, including cystic
fibrosis, pneumonia, and acute or chronic pulmonary infections. Undergraduates
and graduate students will join a multidisciplinary team to carry out the
research and to mentor middle school students who will perform experiments
exploring physical processes in medicine, under the Carnegie Mellon/Colfax
Physics Concepts Outreach Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address two unstudied phenomena in model systems that represent the crucial
Marangoni flow hydrodynamics for aerosol-based drug delivery. The first is
prompted by a recent discovery of the detailed structure of the two-layer ASL.
Consisting of densely tethered mucin chains, the bottom layer of the ASL
resembles a fluid-saturated porous medium. Slip at the interface between the
upper fluid layer and the porous medium is hypothesized to retard dewetting, and
fluid flow out of the porous medium may promote rewetting. Experiments and
modeling will quantify how the lower layer porosity affects dewetting and
rewetting transitions for films of varying thickness and varying surface tension
gradients. The second phenomenon addresses the coupled roles of geometry and
gravity. In a planar geometry, the dewetting transition is dictated by a balance
of Marangoni, or surface tension gradient, stresses and gravitational stresses.
The effect of gravitational orientation on Marangoni forced dewetting has not
been considered previously even though multiple orientations are present for
Marangoni flows on the inner wall of a cylindrical conduit. Experiments and
modeling will quantify how dewetting transitions vary with deposition locus,
cylinder radius and cylinder orientation in Marangoni flows inside a film-coated
cylindrical tube that mimics a lung airway. An optical technique will be used to
track quantitatively the evolution of film height profiles and reveal
occurrences of dewetting or rewetting. This will be coupled with separate
measures of soluble dye (a drug mimic) advection by the Marangoni flow. Models
developed for the project will be tested in experimentally accessible conditions
and then used to predict behaviors in the conditions more typical of the
lung.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.