* 1921135
* Collaborative Research: Ecological Influences on Locomotor Performance in Free-Ranging Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Liza Shapiro, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 150,395.00

Many primate species are partially or completely arboreal, able to move adeptly
over narrow, steep, and bending branches in trees. In this project,
investigators will expand their research on the mechanics of walking and leaping
in wild primates moving in their natural environments, to provide a deeper
understanding of primate arboreality. The team will use advanced and durable
video technologies that permit high-resolution measures of locomotion in the
wild. The results of this project will further our understanding of locomotor
adaptations that are thought to be central to the evolution of our early primate
ancestors. The project will support undergraduate and graduate student training
and will enhance K-12 STEM education and public outreach through high school
programs and collaborations with established science outreach programs at UT
Austin. Findings from this project will be relevant to primate conservation
efforts, science education, and community outreach at the field locations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test hypotheses about the proximate and
ultimate determinants of primate locomotor adaptation through analysis of
fifteen species of free-ranging strepsirrhines and cercopithecoids. The project
expands upon the investigators' previous analysis of quadrupedalism among
platyrrhines and includes a three-dimensional kinematic analysis of arboreal
leaping. The investigators will document locomotor kinematics of primates moving
in their natural habitats using multi-camera, high-speed, high-resolution
videography, sampling arboreal locomotion on a range of substrates and
quantifying standard kinematic spatiotemporal variables. The morphology of the
arboreal locomotor substrates will be quantified using novel remote sensing
methods, with specific measurements including substrate diameter, orientation,
height above the ground, and compliance. By expanding the sampled range of
locomotor behaviors, body sizes, substrates, and taxa, this project will
facilitate a more comprehensive investigation of how substrate variation and
phylogenetic history have influenced primate locomotor adaptation and evolution.
Such knowledge is critical to understanding the adaptive context in which the
distinctive aspects of primate locomotion evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.