* 1921334
* Conference: Support for Three Professional Meetings on Southeast Asian Linguistics; Honolulu, HI - May 2020
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bradley McDonnell, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 43,770.00

The languages of Southeast Asia, including Malaysia and Indonesia, have provided
the field of linguistics with numerous important scientific discoveries
regarding the nature of human language. However, in recent years, venues for
learning about and sharing current research on Southeast Asia languages have
been vanishingly rare within the United States. Thus, this project aims to bring
together scholars to present current research focused on Southeast Asian
languages for an unprecedented week-long event in May 2020 at the University of
Hawaii at Manoa. This week-long event comprises three professional meetings on
the languages of Southeast Asia that have not traditionally been held together
---the Southeast Asian Linguistics Society (SEALS), the International Symposium
on Malay-Indonesian Linguistics (ISMIL), and the International Symposium on the
Language of Java (ISLOJ)---alongside a special series of master classes on
cutting-edge topics in several sub-disciplines in linguistics. SEALS, the
largest of the three meetings, is internationally-recognized as the foremost
conference for disseminating research on Southeast Asian linguistics. ISMIL and
ISLOJ are important venues for two linguistically important yet sorely under-
researched areas of western Indonesia. Thus, by bringing together these
previously disparate meetings, this project promises to foster communication and
collaboration between like-minded scholars who may not otherwise interact. The
special series of master classes leverages specializations of faculty at the
University of Hawaii at Manoa in experimental, theoretical and documentary
linguistics, offering students and scholars from the US and various Southeast
Asian countries important educational opportunities that promise to promote the
progress of the scientific study of human language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funding from the National Science Foundation will be used to increase the
diversity of participants at this week-long event on Southeast Asian languages
by offering funding to US students as well as students and scholars from
Southeast Asia who would not otherwise be able to travel to the United States.
Broadening participation in this week-long event has the potential to be
transformative in forging new collaborations and creating new threads of
linguistics research. The master classes will provide important training at
basic and advanced levels on cutting-edge research methodologies and current
topics in several sub-disciplines of linguistics. These workshops will be
targeted at students and scholars from Southeast Asia because of their potential
to make a significant impact on the future of linguistic research on the
languages of Southeast Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.