* 1921798
* DMREF Collaborative Research: Establishing the platform of quasi-one-deminsional topological insulatros with emergent functionalities
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Robert Birgeneau, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Non-technical Description: Applying the concept of topology to solid state
systems has revolutionized our understanding of quantum phenomena and materials,
and inspired the design of new functionalities in electronic, atomic, photonic,
mechanical, and acoustic systems. For instance, topological insulators (TIs) are
a class of materials that are electrically insulating in the bulk, but host
conductive surface states. Protected by symmetry and topology, these surface
states are immune to impurities and thus enable making near-perfect devices from
imperfect interfaces, which are important for both conventional and quantum
information technology. However, there exist a number of critical challenges in
current TI materials that must be addressed before realizing their full
potential. This project aims at overcoming these challenges by focusing on a new
class of materials, quasi-one-dimensional (quasi-1D) TIs with emergent
functionalities. An iterative loop of theoretical modeling and prediction,
material synthesis, and characterization will be established to discover
different families of quasi-1D TIs and explore their unique properties for
topological phenomena and functionalities. The project's success will shed light
on the realization of topological quantum computing and low-power spintronics
for next-generation information technology and sustainable energy solutions.
Major educational activities will be integrated into the research activities by
performing public outreach, training graduate and undergraduate students,
increasing participation of under-represented groups, providing a new face to
physics and materials science with two women in leadership positions on this
team, and offering open access to research and education outputs to the
technical community and general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: To date, most of the identified TIs are either strongly bonded bulk
materials or layered van der Waals materials. Despite their richness,
fundamental obstacles and limitations exist in exhibiting the decisive
properties and realizing the full promise of TIs, such as the restriction of
surface Dirac cones to a specific cleavage plane, weak electronic interactions
and limited tunability. Remarkably, a quasi-1D structure promises to overcome
these challenges. The goals of this project include design and optimization of
quasi-1D TI candidates, synthesis and characterization, tuning topological phase
transitions by strain and temperature, and seeking 2D TIs in atomically thin
layers of quasi-1D materials. Through complementary expertise and concerted
efforts on theory and computation, material synthesis, spin- and angle-resolved
photoemission spectroscopy, nanofabrication, quantum transport, and neutron and
x-ray scattering, the project is expected to lead to the discovery of novel TIs,
phases and phenomena, controlling topological transitions, and enabling superior
functionalities and fostering quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.