* 1921310
* Multiscale Generalized Correlation: A Unified Distance-Based Correlation Measure for Dependency Discovery
* MPS,DMS
* 09/11/2018,08/31/2020
* Cencheng Shen, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 08/31/2020
* USD 142,651.00

Detecting relationships between two data sets has long been one of the most
important questions in statistics and is fundamental to scientific discovery in
the big-data era. By developing an open-source, robust, efficient, and scalable
statistical methodology for testing dependence on modern data, this project aims
to advance the understanding and utility of testing dependence, tackle a number
of related statistical inference questions, and accelerate a broad range of
data-intensive research. The project incorporates fundamental research in
mathematics, statistics, and computer science to further develop a multiscale
generalized correlation framework to enable discovery and decision-making via
analysis of large and complex data. The tools under development will allow
scientists to better explore and understand high-dimensional, nonlinear, and
multi-modal data in a myriad of applications. The project aims to provide a
unified framework for discovery of relationships between observations in an
efficient and theoretically-sound manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining the
notion of generalized correlation with the locality principle, multiscale
generalized correlation (MGC) is a superior correlation measure that equals the
optimal local correlation among all possible local scales. By building upon
distance correlation and making use of nearest neighbors, the resulting MGC test
statistic is a unique dependence measure that is consistent for testing against
all dependencies with finite second moment, and it exhibits better performance
than existing state-of-art methods under a wide variety of nonlinear and high-
dimensional dependencies. By investigating the theoretical aspects of distance-
based correlations, this project aims to further improve the finite-sample
performance of MGC-style tests, extend its capability to testing dependence on
network and kernel data, and broaden its utility to general inferential
questions beyond dependence testing such as two-sample testing, outlier
detection, and feature screening, as well as applications to brain activity,
networks, and text analysis. Overall, this project intends to establish a
unified methodology framework for statistical testing in high-dimensional,
noisy, big data, through theoretical advancements, comprehensive simulations,
and real data experiments.