* 1921330
* Developing position-specific amino acid carbon isotope analysis as a tool for geobiology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Alex Sessions, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 382,975.00

A longstanding goal in geobiology has been to develop ways of reconstructing and
understanding the metabolic activities of organisms, both past and present, in
their environment. Here the investigator takes a step toward that goal by
developing new methods to precisely measure the abundance of the heavy stable
isotope of carbon (C-13) in different atomic positions of amino acids. His
prediction is that these patterns of isotope abundance will serve as a
'fingerprint' of different metabolic pathways, and when measured in amino acids
from environmental proteins will allow to infer the metabolic activities of
organisms from that environment. He will employ a relatively new mass
spectrometry method (Orbitrap MS) that measures the C-13/C-12 ratios of several
molecular fragments very precisely. These overlapping fragments can then be
mathematically recombined into a model of isotope abundance at each atomic
position. As test cases for the new measurements, he will examine the following
three hypotheses. 1) The pattern of isotope abundance in all amino acids will
differ depending on how the host organism fixes carbon, whether by the Calvin
Cycle (like all plants) or via a number of alternative pathways used by
bacteria. 2) The isotope pattern in the amino acids glutamate and proline will
reflect the growth efficiency of the organism, because of the specific metabolic
connection between these two compounds. 3) The isotope pattern in serine and
alanine will reflect the extent of a process known as photorespiration, which
occurs in plants as temperatures rise and effectively reverses the work of
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
develop position-specific delta C-13 measurements in amino acids as a tool for
geobiologic research. Measurements of isotopic composition at the level of
individual atomic positions will provide unprecedented ability to reconstruct
metabolism, environmental processes, and other geobiologic phenomena. The
investigation will employ existing mass spectrometric techniques described by
Eiler et al (2017) in which the C-13/C-12 ratios of the molecular ion and
various fragment ions of a particular analyte are measured via Orbitrap mass
spectrometry at high mass resolution (up to 500,000 M/Delta M) to distinguish
isobars. The relative contributions of each atomic position of the analyte to
each fragment ion (the 'contribution matrix') must be determined through studies
of labeled compounds, and then the complete position-specific delta C-13 values
can be reconstructed from the fragments. This project will develop measurement
protocols, including contribution matrices, for position-specific delta C-13 in
six amino acids: alanine, serine, glutamate, proline, aspartate, and methionine.
These collectively span all of the major families of carbon skeletons that are
sampled by amino acids. The investigator will use these new tools to explore
three focused hypotheses: 1) Position-specific delta 13-C in all amino acids,
include Ala, Glu, and Met, will reflect the carbon-fixation pathway of the
parent organism. 2) Position-specific C-13 fractionation of C-2 versus C-3 in
Glu and Pro should reflect the extent to which alpha-ketoglutarate is
decarboxylated versus transaminated, which he predicts is proportionate to
growth efficiency. 3) He predicts that C-13 fractionation at C-2 in Ser versus
Ala should covary with the extent of photorespiration, since oxidized RuBP is
recycled via the serine pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.