* 1921491
* Unraveling the Genomic and Molecular Basis of the Dive Response: Nitric Oxide Signaling and Vasoregulation in the Weddell Seal
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2019
* Allyson Hindle, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Peter Milne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 52,812.00

The Weddell seal is a champion diving mammal. The physiology that permits these
animals to sustain extended breath-hold periods and survive the extreme pressure
of diving deep allows them to thrive in icy Antarctic waters. Key elements of
their physiological specializations to breath-hold diving are their ability for
remarkable adjustment of their heart and blood vessel system, coordinating blood
pressure and flow to specific body regions based on their metabolic
requirements, and their ability to sustain periods without oxygen. Identifying
the details of these strategies has tremendous potential to better inform human
medicine, helping us to develop novel therapies for cardiovascular trauma (e.g.
stroke, heart attack) and diseases associated with blunted oxygen delivery to
tissues (e.g. pneumonia, sepsis, or cancer). The goal of this project is to
document specific genes that control these cardiovascular adjustments in seals,
and to compare their abundance and activity with humans. Specifically, the
investigators will study a signaling pathway that coordinates local blood flow.
They will also use tissue samples to generate cultured cells from Weddell seals
that can be used to study the molecular effects of low oxygen conditions in the
laboratory. The project will further the NSF goals of training new generations
of scientists and of making scientific discoveries available to the general
public. The project will train a pre-veterinary student researcher will conduct
public outreach via a center for community health improvement, a multicultural
affairs office, and a public aquarium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
study is to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying the dive response. A
hallmark of the dive response is tissue-specific vascular system regulation,
likely resulting from variation in both nerve inputs and in production of local
signaling molecules produced by blood vessel cells. The investigators will use
emerging genomic information to begin to unravel the genetics underlying
redistribution of the circulation during diving. They will also directly test
the hypothesis that modifications in the signaling system prevent local blood
vessel changes under low oxygen conditions, thereby allowing the centrally
mediated diving reflex to override local physiological responses and to control
the constriction of blood vessel walls in Weddell seals. They will perform RNA-
sequencing of Weddell seal tissues and use the resulting sequence, along with
information from other mammals such as dog, to obtain a full annotation
(identifying all genes based on named features of reference genomes) of the
existing genome assembly for the Weddell seal, facilitating comparative and
species-specific genomic research. They will also generate a Weddell seal
pluripotent stem cell line which should be a valuable research tool for cell
biologists, molecular biologists and physiologists that will allow them to
further test their hypotheses. It is expected that the proposed studies will
advance our knowledge of the biochemical and physiological adaptations that
allow the Weddell seal to thrive in the Antarctic environment.