* 1921045
* Adaptations to Repetitive Flooding: Understanding Cross-Cultural and Legal Possibilities for Long-Term Solutions to Flooding Disaster
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Julie Raymond-Yakoubian, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,019.00

There is growing consensus among Arctic researchers and nations that it is
important to operationalize Arctic scientific knowledge for the purposes of
achieving societal goals, including better understanding and adapting to extreme
events and disasters. In Alaska and throughout the US, persistent and habitual
floods are a particularly expensive and challenging disaster to solve.
Repetitive flooding properties account for only 1% of all properties represented
by the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) yet are responsible for
approximately 38% of the claims made. In Alaska, solutions to repetitive
flooding for Inupiat and other Indigenous communities in the Arctic have not
been forthcoming, despite experiencing repetitive flooding events. Additionally,
there is some indication that policy options for relocation are more challenging
when decision-making occurs at the community level, as it often does in
Indigenous communities, instead of at the household
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses two lines of inquiry into
this complex problem. First, we will analyze relocation policy options for
communities experiencing repetitive flooding. We will do so by analyzing policy
application when and where communities and individuals have relocated in Alaska
and the US, including how bureaucratic discretion has been used in relocation
scenarios. Included in this analysis is mapping the political and economic
costs, historical corollaries, and feasibility of relocation policy solutions -
from creating wholly new agencies, to amending current hazard mitigation and
disaster policies to include a wider range of options for relocation. Mapping
possible solutions to repetitive flooding is critical and might be applied to
hundreds of communities across the United States. Our second line of inquiry is
to examine what constitutes culturally relevant relocation from an Inupiat
perspective. We hypothesize that 'adaptation' is distinct from 'coping,' the
latter being bare survival, while the former is a subjective experience of
wellbeing, following changes in lifeways in response to social and/or ecological
pressure. By analyzing adaptation from an Inupiat perspective, we will better
understand how cultural subjectivities interact with disaster response to inform
culturally-relevant adaptation strategies. The end of our analysis will be to
triangulate these lines of inquiry to understand how cultural multiplicity and
disaster response possibilities are interconnected in successful risk
mitigation. This award is cofunded by the Prediction of and Resilience against
Extreme Events (PREEVENTS) program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.