* 1921059
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Access to Justice Among Victims of Gender-Based Violence
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Susan Short, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Reggie Sheehan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 25,150.00

This project attempts to understand the relationship between law and social
change by asking how people come to view their challenges as problems needing a
legal solution. It examines this question using the case of violence against
women. Despite significant efforts by feminist movements to raise awareness
about violence against women and anti-violence laws enacted by regional
governments, violence against women is not always regarded as a significant
social and legal problem. Violence against women persists at high levels around
the world, and often, the legal avenues available to women in the aftermath of
violence remain underutilized. This project will investigate how women
understand experiences of violence, and how these understandings shape their
decisions to seek legal recourse.

Bangladesh offers an opportunity to advance understanding of factors that shape
women's decisions to access legal solutions in the case of violence. The country
has made remarkable progress in gender equality initiatives, but violence
against women is pervasive and women are limited in their access to justice.
Moreover, the country has several systems of state and non-state legal fora that
add an additional layer of complexity to understanding how individuals
conceptualize justice in the case of violence against women. This project links
the sociological literatures on law, gender, inequality and globalization, and
uses ethnographic fieldwork in Bangladesh in one urban and one rural region with
different legal fora, as well as archival analysis, to study the perceptions of
a range of actors engaged in work relating to violence against women. While
interviews with women will comprise the majority of data collection, the study
will also examine the perspectives of policymakers, activists, non-government
organization officials and academics who help to shape anti-violence laws and
policies. The project will also interview state and non-state legal authorities
that women directly encounter if they initiate judicial procedures for violence.
This study will contribute to scholarship on law and society by adding to
knowledge of how concepts of violence against women and justice are understood,
negotiated, and re-created, and the structural factors that shape women's
decisions to pursue legal recourse following experiences of violence. This
project has relevance for individuals, organizations, and policymakers working
to combat violence against women.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.