* 1921060
* CAREER: Autonomous Underwater Power Distribution System for Continuous Operation
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Nina Mahmoudian, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2022
* USD 352,338.00

This CAREER project responds to an urgent need to develop mobile power
distribution systems that lower deployment and operating costs while
simultaneously increasing network efficiency and response in dynamic and often
dangerous physical conditions. The significant need for an efficient and
effective mobile power distribution system became evident during search and
rescue/recovery missions following the Japan tsunami and the disappearance of
the Malaysia MH370 airplane. The technology outcomes from this project will
apply to a broad range of environments (in space, air, water or on ground) where
the success of long-term robotic network missions is measured by the ability of
the robots to operate, for an extended period of time, in highly dynamic and
potentially hazardous environments. These advanced features will provide the
following advantages: efficiency, efficacy, guaranteed persistence, enhanced
performance, and increased success in search/rescue/recovery/discovery missions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project addresses the following
technology problems as it translates from research discovery toward commercial
application: inflated energy use currently required when the autonomous vehicles
break from mission to return to recharging station; lack of multi-robot
coordination needed to take into account both fundamental hardware and network
science challenges necessary to respond to energy needs and dynamic environment
conditions. By addressing these gaps in technology, this work establishes the
theoretical, computational, and experimental foundation for mobile power
delivery and onsite recharging capability. Moreover, the new technology
developed in this project is universally adaptable for disparate autonomous
vehicles especially autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs). In more technical
terms, this project creates network optimization and formation strategies that
will enable a power distribution system to reconfigure itself depending on the
number of operational autonomous vehicles and recharging specifications to meet
overall mission specifications, the energy consumption needs of the network,
situational conditions, and environmental variables. Such a system will play a
vital role in real-time controlled applications across multiple disciplines such
as sensor networks, robotics, and transportation systems where limited power
resources and unknown environmental dynamics pose major constraints. In addition
to addressing technology gaps, undergraduate and graduate students will be
involved in this research and will receive interdisciplinary education/
innovation/ technology translation/ outreach experiences through: developing
efficient network energy routing, path planning and coordination strategies;
designing and creating experimental test-beds and educational platforms; and
engaging K-12th grade students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
including those from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
engages Michigan Tech's Great Lake Research Center (GLRC) and Center for Agile
Interconnected Microgrids (AIM) to develop experimental test-beds and conduct
tests that validate the resulting methods and algorithms, and ultimately,
facilitate the technology translation effort from research discovery toward
commercial reality.