* 1921205
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Black Youth, Political Learning, and the State in the Era of  Hyperincarceration
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* David Knight, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2021
* USD 23,827.00

Discipline and punishment are routine and politically consequential life events
for many young people, particularly young African Americans. Black youth and
young adults are disproportionately exposed to harsh disciplinary school
environments, high rates of parental incarceration and punitive encounters with
the criminal justice system, and strict penalties under state-level social
welfare policy. Analyses of these trends have given rise to a growing body of
research positing that punitive contact with the state diminishes the political
capacity and efficacy of already vulnerable populations. But this emphasis on
the depressive effects of punitive contact is arguably narrow and eclipses
efforts to ascertain when, where, and how punitive encounters with the state do
in fact generate or inform political action.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
these concerns, the present research examines how African American young adults'
encounters with state and state-sanctioned discipline broadly inform their
political engagement during the early adult years. Methodologically, the project
integrates ethnography, in-depth interviews, and survey data to address the
following questions: 1) How do black young adults' encounters with state-
sanctioned discipline vary in quality and punitiveness? 2) How do these
encounters influence black young adults' political capacities, orientations, and
behaviors? 3) How does institutional context inform black young adults'
political lives and engagement? By addressing these questions, this research
will help scholars and policymakers gain a more nuanced understanding of
processes and channels of political behavior that are often neglected in the
social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.