* 1921857
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Designing Mutable Metamaterials with Photo-Adaptive Meta-Atoms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kaushik Dayal, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 418,118.00

Metamaterials are intricately engineered composites, with properties beyond what
can be achieved with conventional materials. Their unusual abilities are derived
from their structure, rather than being inherited from the constituent
materials. Optical metamaterials are a class of materials that allow
manipulation of light in new ways, including built-in selectivity to
polarization and wavelength, which can permit or forbid propagation of light and
effectively mask the material. These materials have potential application across
a number of sectors, including consumer electronics, defense, telecommunication
and bioimaging, but their development has been limited by a lack of fundamental
knowledge of the synthesis, processing, and compositions that will lead to
optimal structure and performance. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and
Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports research to design and develop active
nano-scale metamaterials through fundamental understanding of the processing-
nanostructure-property relationships. The approach will enable the design of
materials able to manipulate light using tunable building blocks, called meta-
atoms, that interact with light at multiple wavelengths. The research is tightly
integrated with an outreach plan that includes educational activities focused
increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM, as well as
stimulating education initiatives from K-12 to the graduate student
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to solve a fundamental challenge
in powering active optical metamaterials, in particular the ability to couple
actinic energy and direct mechanical adaptation at the nano-scale, meta-atom by
meta-atom. The PIs will test that hypothesis that optimizing the topology of
plasmonic structures which reside on photoactive, nanostructured polymers can
allow coupling of photons from a pump beam into photochromic switches embedded
in an ordered macromolecular network. When a resonant mode coincides with the
absorption of the photoswitches, fully reversible changes in the macromolecular
order can generate large strains (&gt;10%) in the polymer. In turn, this
actuation back-couples into a structural adaptation of the meta-atom resident on
the polymer. The ability to utilize a pump to structurally modulate a
metamaterial then becomes a vehicle to manipulate a probe beam of a different
wavelength (with which the meta-atoms are multiresonant) with near-unity changes
in the scattering amplitude and with phase control. Photo-adaptive metamaterials
capable of device-level optical manipulation become possible. An array of
outreach efforts is planned to magnify the broader impact of the work.
Dissemination via publications will be augmented with a focus on open-source
distribution of the simulation software and online tutorials on fabrication and
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.