* 1921088
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Geography of Stop and Frisk in Nine U.S. Cities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Nicholas Petersen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2020
* USD 10,980.00

Police agencies across the United States employ stop and frisk practices as part
of a proactive crime-fighting strategy. These tactics are criticized because
they disproportionately implicate Black and Latinx individuals, tend to be
concentrated in poor neighborhoods of color, and sometimes involve the
detainment of people who are never arrested. However, existing social science
scholarship does not adequately address why some neighborhoods experience more
stop and frisk activity than others. Moreover, it fails to consider the ways
that geographic variation in proactive policing are related to legal decision-
making. This is an important question because legal scholars argue that
developments in Fourth Amendment jurisprudence have resulted in a threshold for
conducting stops that is lower in poor, minority neighborhoods than in Whiter,
more affluent areas. The present research seeks to address these gaps by: (1)
examining which social processes generate geographic variation in stop and frisk
across census tracts and identifying characteristics of "surveillance hotspots,"
and (2) investigating whether the legal standards for justifying stops are
relaxed in perceived "high-crime" areas. This study will broaden understanding
of inequality in the criminal justice system by exploring the roots of these
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these aims, the researcher
combines three types of data to analyze these relationships, including: (1)
pedestrian stop and frisk incidents, (2) crime incidents, and (3) demographic
data from the Census and American Community Survey. Stage one will utilize data
from nine cities across the United States (Austin, Boston, Chicago, Denver, New
Orleans, New York City, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and Washington, D.C.) to
identify the neighborhood characteristics and social processes associated with
"surveillance hotspots"--those areas that experience exceptionally high
concentrations of stop and frisk activity. Analyses for this stage consist of
estimating fixed-effects ordinary least squares and geographically weighted
regression models. The second stage draws on detailed information about the
bases for pedestrian stops in two cities (Chicago and New York City) to evaluate
whether the legal thresholds for conducting stops systematically varies across
census tracts. Analyses for stage two involve estimating spatial regression
models to evaluate neighborhood-level variation in legal thresholds for making
stops by analyzing the relationships between neighborhood marginality,
reasonable suspicion justifications, and arrest rates. The findings from this
study will shed light on the macro-level social processes that lead to
inequitable policing and could be utilized by law enforcement agencies to
develop practices that enhance police-community
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.