* 1921809
* Collaborative Research: Unsteady Ground Effect: How Solid Boundaries Affect Bio-Inspired Propulsion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Keith Moored, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 226,383.00

Many animals fly or swim near the surface of water or the ocean floor. These
boundaries create unsteady, three-dimensional, and asymmetrical flows that can
increase the animal's flying/swimming speed and efficiency. Despite the wide
implications of these benefits, there are no reliable models for near-boundary
bio-locomotion. Accurate models could reshape the way biologists think about the
flight strategies of birds migrating over open water or the evolutionary
pressures on the shapes of bottom-dwelling fish. A better understanding of near-
boundary lifestyles could help ecologists better predict the fragility of near-
ground ecosystems to over-fishing, loss of habitat, or changing climate. Better
models would also reshape the way engineers design bio-inspired vehicles that
operate near boundaries. The key to improving these models is a better
understanding of the complex flows governing near-boundary swimming and flying.
The proposed work aims to shed light on these complex flows and bring them into
public view using multimedia and an outreach program for middle school girls.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the unsteady
flow mechanisms governing near-boundary swimming. The project will support the
first systematic study of unsteady ground effect through a combination of water
channel experiments and inviscid flow simulations. As a result, classic steady
ground effect theory will be generalized to the modern interdisciplinary flow
phenomena present in swimming and flying animals. These flow phenomena will be
explored by testing the effects of Strouhal number, reduced frequency, aspect
ratio, undulation, and asymmetric kinematics on near-ground swimming. The
research will focus on four specific aims: (i) developing scaling laws for the
forces and energetics of near-ground swimming, (ii) mapping near-ground three-
dimensional flow interactions, (iii) determining the role of undulatory
kinematics in near-ground swimming, and (iv) understanding how asymmetrical
kinematics alter near-ground flows. By including both experiments and inviscid
simulations, the research will identify which effects are Reynolds-number
dependent and which are driven purely by inviscid vortex dynamics. This research
will provide key insights into the near-ground lifestyles of fish and will aid
in the design of novel bio-inspired underwater
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.