* 1922641
* STEM for All Collaboratory: Accelerating Dissemination and Fostering Collaborations for STEM Educational Research and Development
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joni Falk, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,914,226.00

The STEM for All Collaboratory will advance educational research and development
through the creation and facilitation of two related and interactive platforms:
the STEM for All Video Showcase, and the STEM for All Multiplex. The Video
Showcase provides an annual, online, week-long, interactive event where hundreds
of educational researchers and developers create, share, and discuss 3-minute
videos of their federally funded work to improve Science, Mathematics,
Engineering, Technology and Computer Science education. Several years of
successful Video Showcases have contributed to a rich database of videos
showcasing innovative approaches to STEM education. To capitalize on the growing
resource and extend its impact, this project will create a STEM for All
Multiplex, a unique contribution to STEM education. The Multiplex will draw on
past and future Video Showcase videos to create a multimedia environment for
professional and public exchange, as well as to provide a way for anyone to
search the growing database of videos, create thematic playlists, and re-use the
content in new educational and research contexts. The Multiplex will host
interactive, monthly, thematic online events related to emerging research and
practices to improve STEM and Computer Science education in formal and informal
environments. Each thematic event will include selected video presentations,
expert panels, resources, interactive discussions and a synthesis of lessons
learned. All events will be accessible and open to the public. The project will
continue to host and facilitate the annual Video Showcase event which has
attracted over 70,000 people from over 180 countries over the course of a year.
This effort will be guided by a collaboration with NSF resource centers,
learning networks, and STEM professional organizations, and will advance the
STEM research and education missions of the 11 collaborating organizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Video Showcase and the Multiplex will foster increased
dissemination of federally funded work and will effectively share NSF's
investments aimed at improving STEM education. It will enable presenters to
learn with and from each other, offering and receiving feedback, critique, and
queries that will improve work in progress and to facilitate new collaborations
for educational research. It will connect researchers with practitioners,
enabling both groups to benefit from each other's knowledge and perspective.
Further, it will connect seasoned investigators with aspiring investigators from
diverse backgrounds, including those from Minority Serving Institutions. It will
thereby enable new researchers to broaden their knowledge of currently funded
efforts while also providing them with the opportunity to discuss resources,
methodology and impact measures with the investigators. Hence, the project has
the potential to broaden the future pool of investigators in STEM educational
research. This work will further contribute to the STEM education field through
its research on the ways that this multimedia environment can improve currently
funded projects, catalyze new efforts and collaborations, build the capacity of
emerging diverse leadership, and connect research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.