* 1922538
* An Overlooked Mechanism for Wind-driven Circulations in Semi-enclosed Marginal Seas
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 588,471.00

Marginal seas occupy a large fraction of the World Ocean's margins and are key
areas for human activity, yet very little attention has been paid to how the
observed large-scale winds force water circulation in these areas. This is the
focus of this study that uses numerical models (idealized and realistic) to gain
a better understanding of how winds force circulation patterns in marginal seas
and how this affects exchanges of mass, heat, and freshwater between marginal
seas and the open ocean. Understanding how winds force circulations in marginal
seas is important for forecasting fisheries, pollution dispersion, military
activity, and shipping. There are broader impacts also related to education and
student development. Results from this program will be incorporated into
graduate level classes and lectures at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
(WHOI) Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (GFD) Summer School. Undergraduate and
graduate students participating in the WHOI Summer Student Fellow Program and
GFD Summer School will be engaged and trained in numerical methods, applied
mathematics, and data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary intellectual
merit of the proposed work lies in the advancement of knowledge of the
circulation in marginal seas. The original aspects of the proposed research are
the focus on forcing by wind stress (as opposed to wind stress curl) and in the
synthesis of idealized and realistic numerical models over a wide range of
applications. The problem is motivated by the numerous marginal seas found along
the western North Pacific, but the approach followed is designed to yield
insights into the generic problem of the coupling between Ekman transports,
topographic barriers, boundary layers, and interior flows, making it applicable
to all marginal seas for which wind-forcing is important. To date, the exchange
between marginal seas and the open ocean has been viewed as being forced by
geostrophic flows impinging on the marginal sea. However, the Ekman transport
under consideration here is much more effective at penetrating the topographic
barriers that define the marginal sea and is an unexplored mechanism for forcing
within the marginal sea and for exchange between the marginal sea and the open
ocean. In this study, the emphasis is on how Ekman transports, forced by large-
scale wind stress, interact with boundaries and drive both boundary layer and
basin-scale flows. Idealized and realistic numerical models are applied to a
wide range of physical configurations. The idealized configurations allow for
inference of how the circulation depends on the physical geometry of the
marginal seas and forcing, while the realistic configurations allow for this
knowledge to be applied to more complete, real systems. The model results are
interpreted using analyses of mass, heat, and potential vorticity
budgets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.