* 1922713
* Prediction of Solar Eruptions with Machine-Learning Algorithms Combining Physical Models and Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jon Hoeksema, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 494,705.00

Space-weather prediction has been around for many decades but is reaching new
heights due to the advent of more data, sophisticated data processing
techniques, and computing power. Modern satellites and ground-based telescopes
designed to study space weather take more data than ever before. The Solar
Dynamics Observatory (SDO), for example, acquires ~1.5 terabytes of data a day.
As such, the time may be right to give an affirmative answer to the question:
Can we harness the data revolution to effectively predict the onset of a major
solar flare? The main purpose of this three-year project is to answer this
question by bringing together an interdisciplinary team of computer scientists
and solar physicists to analyze data taken by the SDO, Global Oscillation
Network Group (GONG), and Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite
(GOES) observatories, as well as data products derived from numerical models,
using machine-learning algorithms to characterize and understand which
signatures indicate the imminent eruption of a solar flare. Previous research
studies have attempted to predict solar flares using a subset of these
components, but not all of them. Few space-weather studies have harnessed the
data revolution to predict space-weather using machine learning algorithms
despite the vast amount of data available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year
project addresses open questions in solar flare physics. First, the project aims
to determine which features contribute to local and global pre-flare signatures.
While interaction between active regions can trigger flaring behavior, hyper-
local phenomena can also trigger flaring behavior. Second, the project team will
explore how the rate of change of any given feature influences eruptive activity
on the Sun. Finally, the project aims to identify the timescales on which each
individual feature best predicts future flaring activity. To accomplish these
goals, the project team will use the relevant features identified in these three
tasks, along with interpretable machine learning algorithms, such as state-space
models, to predict solar activity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Space
weather prediction is a national priority, listed as a key goal of the most
recent decadal survey and a prime focus of the National Space-Weather Action
Plan. This three-year project aims to build an open-source, well-documented,
unified, reproducible, and operational feature dataset and machine-learning
model. The project team will use this dataset and machine-learning model to
teach students both through summer internships and via their book entitled
Statistics, Data Mining, and Machine Learning in Heliophysics. The research and
EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.