* 1922512
* NRT-WoU: Research Training Opportunities in the Nascent Field of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Vuk Mandic, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,661.00

On August 17, 2017, a collision of two neutron stars was observed both by
gravitational-wave detectors and by traditional telescopes. This first
simultaneous observation of an astrophysical event by the two "messengers"
(gravitational waves and light) has had broad scientific implications, ranging
from tests of fundamental physical laws and expansion of the universe to the
understanding of the origin of the heaviest elements in the periodic table. The
event ushered in a new field, Multi-Messenger Astrophysics, with the potential
to transform how researchers observe and understand the universe. In the coming
years, vast amounts of new data are expected from existing and upcoming
gravitational wave detectors, telescopes, gamma ray detectors, and neutrino
detectors. The size, complexity, and diversity of the new datasets will be
unlike anything seen in Astrophysics. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Minnesota Twin Cities will
facilitate the management, processing, and analysis of these datasets by
training MS and PhD students in modern data science techniques. The NRT will use
the nascent field of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics as a training ground to
prepare students for the challenges of the modern data-driven workforce in both
industry and academia. This project anticipates training fifty (50) MS and PhD
students, including thirty (30) funded trainees, from the fields of
astrophysics, computer science, electrical engineering, physics and statistics.
In addition, approximately eighty (80) graduate students are anticipated to
participate in aspects of the technical, research, and professional training
provided by the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The trainees will pursue unique
research opportunities by working in interdisciplinary trainee teams, mentored
by interdisciplinary faculty mentoring teams. They will use the most modern data
analytics techniques, such as machine learning, deep learning, Bayesian
inference and others, to address some of the pressing questions in Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics. Their training will include a series of workshops,
seminars, symposia, journal club, outreach activities, and fall retreats
designed to provide trainees with a broader exposure to data science techniques,
tools, and applications, and with opportunities for development of professional
communications and leadership skills, and career development, vision, and impact
skills. The trainees will pursue summer research and industry internships with
local and national companies and research organizations. A series of activities
will be pursued to ensure full participation of underrepresented minorities and
women and to develop a strong community around this program that will provide a
supportive structure for the trainees, helping them move through the program
efficiently and presenting them with career opportunities post-graduation. The
best practices developed by this program will be publicly available for adoption
by other STEM graduate programs across the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.