* 1922424
* Standard Research: Consensus, Democracy, and the Public Understanding of Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Cailin O'Connor, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 431,892.00

This award supports a research project that studies how changing social networks
influence public belief about science; it will focus specifically on how false
beliefs can persist and spread even in evidence-rich environments, and how these
beliefs in turn feed back into collective decision-making through democratic
institutions. The results of this project will provide a better understanding of
the drivers that shape public belief about matters of scientific facts and how
those influences interact with democratic institutions. The results will be
relevant to academics across the social sciences and humanities, and they will
have immediate social significance particularly to policy makers, including
those working in the government and those shaping social media sites. The PIs
also have plans to develop an intervention that may serve to improve public
uptake of data through social media, to disseminate their results to general
audiences, and to develop new programs to mentor graduate and undergraduate
students on producing their own public philosophy. In addition, they will
develop an integrative teaching plan that incorporates their research outcomes
into teaching and mentoring at the undergraduate and graduate levels, with an
emphasis on mentoring members of underrepresented minorities in
philosophy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will explore a cluster of
topics related to the social dynamics of false belief and the public
understanding of science in democratic societies. The PIs will explore these
issues from the perspectives of philosophy of science and social epistemology,
drawing on formal tools developed by economists, biologists, and philosophers,
including epistemic network models and agent-based modeling techniques. They
will use these methods to address several questions concerning how journalistic
practices bear on public understanding of science, the role of influencers (such
as propagandists from foreign governments, domestic political groups, and
industry) in shaping the public understanding of science, how social dynamics
interact with individual cognitive biases to shape belief and consensus, and how
consensus over scientific belief emerge among the public and policy makers. The
results of this research will be published in professional journals in
philosophy of science and in social epistemology. The project dovetails with
related projects from other disciplines including economics, political science,
psychology, and sociology; the results of this project should be of substantial
interest to researchers in those disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.