* 1922167
* DMREF: Turning Carbon Dioxide into 3D-Printed Concrete via Integrated Machine Learning, Simulations, and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Puneet Gupta, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,599,975.00

Concrete, which is by far the most manufactured material in a world, faces many
challenges, including a substantial embodied carbon intensity, slow strength-
development rate, and poor strength-to-weight ratio. To overcome these
challenges, alternative cements are being investigated that allow the uptake of
carbon dioxide. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our
Future (DMREF) award supports fundamental research to accelerate the synthesis
and design of these alternative materials through an integrated computational
and experimental approach. New knowledge of the mechanisms that control
processing-structure-property relationships has the potential to enable the
design and discovery of environmentally-friendly concrete materials that can be
3D printed into customizable forms. By allowing take of carbon dioxide in the
processing, the carbon footprint associated with traditional concrete production
can be greatly reduced. This research has the potential to redesign and
reimagine concrete as a resource for the production of value-added products
rather than as a waste. By seamlessly integrating experiments, simulations, and
machine learning, this collaborative project will train students to be well-
versed in both experimental and modeling approaches of relevance to materials
science and engineering, resource management, and construction industries. A
focus on the training of undergraduate students will engage the environmental
conscience of the next generation of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
objective of this research is to decipher the fundamental knowledge required to
accelerate the design of a new 3D-printable portlandite-based cementitious
binder that permits CO2 uptake. Toward this end, this research aims: (i) to
understand, control, and optimize the rheology of concentrated portlandite
suspensions to enable printability, (ii) to refine portlandite carbonation
routes at ambient temperature to maximize CO2 uptake to accelerate the
carbonation kinetics, and (iii) to discover new multi-material 3D-printed
metastructures with high load-bearing capability and optimal strength-to-weight
ratio. This research relies on an iterative closed-loop integration of
simulation (i.e., from electrons to continua), experimental, and machine
learning activities that mutually inform and advance each other. The synergy
between experimental and computational approaches will shed new light on
interfacial reaction processes of mineral sorbents. This project will also
advance the state of the art in our understanding of the rheology of
concentrated suspensions, and elucidate the molecular design principles behind
the discovery of polymers that permit the printability of concentrated slurries.
Finally, by pioneering machine-learning-informed multi-material 3D-printing,
this research will develop new methods to optimize the geometry and spatial
distribution of metastructures that are light, stiff, and strong. Overall, by
marrying the benefits of CO2 mineralization and 3D-printing, this work will
result in pioneering intellectual contributions to accelerate the design of
transformative construction materials with desirable properties and low carbon
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.