* 1922025
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Systematic discovery of materials platforms for spin-light quantum interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rashid Zia, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 625,000.00

Nontechnical description: Certain types of defects in solids - for example, an
isolated impurity atom, or a vacancy where an atom is missing from the crystal -
act like trapped molecules whose quantum-mechanical states can be controlled
through use of light and electronics. Such defects are employed today as the
basis for emerging applications in quantum information science, especially as
single-photon sources, quantum memories, and quantum sensors. However, only a
small number of potential defect systems, within a limited set of host
materials, have been explored for this purpose, and those systems have specific
properties that are not optimal for every application. Alternative defects,
potentially occurring in materials that have been largely ignored, offer
potential advantages, but the identification and development of new quantum
defects has historically been a slow and arduous process. The goal of this DMREF
project is to dramatically accelerate the discovery process for quantum defects
in solids, by combining new computational and experimental techniques in an
efficient paradigm inspired by the Materials Genome Initiative. The
collaborating researchers will predict the basic properties of defects in a
large number of materials, identify those systems best suited for the
application at hand, fabricate and identify the target defects using high-
throughput experimental methods, and establish their potential for applications
in quantum science, especially as "spin-light interfaces" that will serve as the
basis for future quantum networks. The research project will prepare multiple
graduate and undergraduate students for future employment in the quantum
workforce, and its outreach programs will introduce concepts of quantum science
and technology to the general public through virtual and in-person activities.

Technical description: Point defects in wide-bandgap semiconductors have emerged
as leading platforms for quantum information science and technology, because
they host isolated electron and nuclear spin states that can be addressed
optically and electronically for use as qubits and quantum sensors. However,
most research to date has concentrated on only a few defect systems and host
materials, and the identification of new defect systems has been a slow,
arduous, and generally ad hoc process. Given the vast number of potential
materials and defect configurations, it remains a major challenge to
theoretically predict and experimentally identify promising candidates in a
systematic way. This collaborative DMREF project will address this challenge by
combining new computational and experimental techniques to accelerate the
discovery of defects, dopants, and host materials optimized for spin-light
quantum interfaces. Computationally efficient analytic group theory-based models
supported by judicious use of ab initio and low-energy numerical calculations
will facilitate the systematic discovery of electronic systems with desired
properties, while novel high-throughput single-emitter spectroscopy techniques
will enable rapid experimental characterization. The immediate goal of the
project is to identify previously unexplored spin systems that support coherent
spin-photon interfaces at or near room temperature, using state-of-the art
techniques for quantum dynamical control. More broadly, the ability to select
defects that satisfy particular materials and application requirements will
revolutionize solid-state quantum engineering and lead to diverse new
applications of quantum science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.