* 1922266
* Outsourcing Attention Management to Human and Artificial Agents in Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Paul Leonardi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 347,645.00

As the capabilities of artificial intelligence advance, organizations are faced
with new opportunities to outsource tasks and decisions about their practices to
machines. The introduction of artificially intelligent (AI) assistants to
workplaces and their effect on organizational performance has garnered both
excitement and concern. While some executives praise AI and laud its value as a
solution for organizational problems, other workers fear that artificial
intelligence will threaten and displace their work. This study avoids such
generalizations by focusing on how the use of artificially intelligent agents in
scheduling shapes how managers direct their attention, which in turn shapes
organizational performance and the economy at large. Understanding these
processes is important because of the broad consequences that entrusting
attention management to AI will have, from influencing innovation to enabling or
inhibiting organizational learning by affecting the knowledge to which
organizations have access. The findings of the study will shape our
understanding of what work technology is equipped to do, how organizational
members should be trained to work with AI, and how to mitigate unintended
consequences of using AI to guide our decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates how decisions about time and attention are outsourced to
both AI and human agents and utilizes ethnographic methods to gather rich
interview and observational data from several field sites. In doing so, the
study contributes to intellectual conversations in three main areas. First, the
findings of this study will help revise existing theoretical work using an
attention-based view of the firm to show how other people shape leaders'
attention. Second, the findings will develop new theory about the relationship
between time and attention. Though existing empirical evidence suggests that
decisions about time affect attention allocation, the proposed comparative study
will provide greater understanding of the mechanisms through which decisions
about time come to bear on attention. Third, the study contributes to the larger
area of artificial intelligence and the changing nature of work and organizing.
Its findings will illuminate the choices that developers make in designing
artificially intelligent technologies and identify the attributes of these tools
that organizations should consider when deciding to implement them into their
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.