* 1922042
* DMREF: Data Driven Discovery of Conjugated Polyelectrolytes for Neuromorphic Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Guillermo Bazan, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,749,588.00

DMREF: Data Driven Discovery of Conjugated Polyelectrolytes for Neuromorphic
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;As a
potentially disruptive technology, neuromorphic computing breaks away from the
current performance-limiting conventional computer architectures (i.e. von
Neumann paradigm) by developing biologically inspired computational devices with
artificial intelligence capabilities. Organic electronic materials have recently
emerged as attractive alternatives to inorganic counterparts in neuromorphic
computing owing to their low-energy switching, excellent tunability, low
fabrication costs, and biocompatibility. In this project, we will establish a
collaborative, multidisciplinary and data-centric research program to accelerate
the discovery of novel conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPEs) with chemical
structures tailored for the demands of neuromorphic computing. The project will
bear direct impact on applications ranging from neuromorphic computing, to
energy generation (photovoltaic and thermoelectric materials), sensing,
robotics, and pathogen mitigation. The project will also provide cutting-edge
educational and training opportunities to students and postdoctoral fellows who
will gain valuable experience in data science, materials informatics, and data
driven material research. The PIs are fully committed to broadening
participation and enhancing diversity in materials research and education by
strengthening opportunities for underrepresented groups in STEM fields. Exposing
the underrepresented groups to data centric research and education is a key
component of the project. A set of courses will be developed at various levels
in both participating institutions to prepare the students and postdoctoral
fellows for the proposed research. The PIs will reach out to local high schools
and community colleges through targeted recruitment, workshops, and summer camps
for high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will significantly accelerate the discovery of
CPE materials specifically designed for neuromorphic computing. The research
effort integrates high-throughput computation, machine learning, multiscale
modeling, chemical synthesis, and materials and device characterization executed
in a "closed loop" manner. The team will construct the first comprehensive
database dedicated to CPEs, which includes a collection of structural, elastic,
vibrational, electronic, dielectric, and energetic properties for over ten
thousand CPEs. Based on the CPE database, the team will explore the correlations
between the materials properties and formulate a set of molecular design rules.
Materials characterization will be performed to validate the design rules and
once validated, they will provide guidance for predictions of promising CPEs.
Based on the predictions, the team will synthesize the most promising CPEs and
examine their performance in the neuromorphic devices. The project has three
deliverables: (1) The first comprehensive CPE database. (2) A fundamental
understanding on how the backbone structure and adjacent electrostatic forces
control CPE properties and a set of design rules for accelerated materials
discovery. (3) A set of highly optimized and promising CPE structures for
neuromorphic and optoelectronic applications. Successful completion of the
project not only impacts neuromorphic computing, but also research areas, such
as photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, thermoelectrics, sensors and robotics.
The potential to affect transformative breakthroughs in the rational design of
neuromorphic and organic electronic materials makes a compelling case for the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.