* 1922275
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: GOALI: Localized Phase Transformation (LPT) Strengthening for Next-Generation Superalloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Emmanuelle Marquis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2023
* USD 343,150.00

Extraordinary Properties &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) Grant Opportunity for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports an integrated experimental and
computational effort to accelerate the discovery of new typs of Ni-base
superalloys that will have superior high-temperature creep performance, but most
likely will have been missed by the traditional trial-and-error method. Ni-base
superalloys are critical enabling high-temperature structural materials that
determine the efficiency and carbon footprint of a wide range of aerospace and
land-based power generation systems such as gas turbines. This effort is an
integral part of the national efforts under the Materials Genome Initiative
(MGI) and the Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME) initiative.
For the first time, superalloy development will be led by computational
modeling, mechanistically informed and validated by critical experiments
involving novel combinatorial methods for materials processing and state-of-the-
art characterization techniques. Because future materials R&amp;D activities,
requiring substantially reduced time and cost cycles, must integrate
computational materials research with critical experiments, this research
project will directly prepare graduate students to immediately contribute to the
success of MGI/ICME in industry. Additionally, the training programs for
researchers involved in materials development will accelerate the implementation
of the new methodology in industry, resulting in increased effectiveness of the
US materials technologists. Regarding educational outreach, the present DMREF
program will engage undergraduate researchers as mentors who develop K-12
engineering outreach activities encouraging high school students with diverse
ethnic backgrounds to enter science and engineering disciplines
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMREF GOALI project will exploit a new design
strategy that utilizes a localized phase transformation (LPT) phenomenon to
disruptively improve the high-temperature creep performance of Ni-based
superalloys. LPTs occur only at extended defects and are confined locally at
these defects. By integrating sophisticated computational models, at multiple
scales, highly advanced materials characterization techniques, and combinatorial
and accelerated methods of materials processing and property evaluation, this
project will (a) search the high-dimensional alloy composition space for the
occurrence of LPT by high-throughput DFT Monte Carlo calculations, and validate
the DFT predictions by novel combinatorial methods to rapidly produce alloys,
coupled with advanced electron microscopy and atom probe tomography; (b)
establish the connection between defect type (stacking fault, anti-phase
boundaries, twins, dislocations and their networks) and the nature of LPT using
phase field simulations with the DFT calculations as inputs; (c) quantitatively
determine the effect of LPT on the operative deformation mechanisms and develop
physics-based deformation models that capture these effects using a combination
of the phase field method and a mechanism-sensitive crystal plasticity model,
which will enable direct validation against polycrystalline creep experiments;
and (d) employ novel processing routes to stabilize high dislocation/twin
density microstructures by LPT, thereby providing a new strengthening mechanism
for deployment to superalloys. The GOALI partner of this project, GE Research,
will respond to alloy recommendations by providing high quality alloys in single
crystal and polycrystal forms. Such an integrated research effort will raise
significantly the state-of-the-art in the discovery and development of new
superalloys and is expected to result in new science in alloy design. The focus
on superalloys will have a marked impact on a broad range of advanced
technological areas including aerospace, transportation and
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.