* 1922895
* Key host factors co-opted to form viral replication organelles
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Peter Nagy, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 563,750.00

Viruses with RNA genomes cause major losses in agriculture and pose significant
risks to human health. To multiply in their hosts, these viruses subvert host
proteins and cellular membranes to build large viral replication organelles that
serve to propagate viruses in the infected cells. These intricate organelles are
essential for replication, in part by protecting the viral genomes from attack
by the host's immune system. Despite the costly agricultural and medical impact
of these viruses, the biogenesis of viral replication organelles is incompletely
understood. This project employs plant-infecting tombusviruses to address this
key component of the viral life cycle. Insights gained from this project include
novel strategies to inhibit the formation of the replication organelles, thereby
providing methods to block virus replication and facilitate the development of
novel, potent and broad-range antiviral approaches. The research will promote
interdisciplinary training for graduate students and a postdoctoral researcher
across fields that include plant pathology, biochemistry and cell biology. The
lab will also provide hands-on research opportunities for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tomato bushy stunt virus, which is among the
most advanced viral systems, will be used to unravel the roles of host factors
in replication organelle formation. The emerging picture with many viruses is
that the formation of replication organelles, which concentrate viral and host
components and provide protection against antiviral responses by the host,
absolutely critical for virus replication. A major breakthrough in this area by
the PI is the identification of critical co-opted host proteins, namely Sac1
lipid phosphatase, Fis1 mitochondrial fission protein and Atg11 autophagy
scaffold protein as key host factors in the biogenesis of tombusvirus
replication organelles. These co-opted cellular proteins interact with each
other, with the hijacked cellular membranes and with the viral replication
proteins and likely serve as key assembly platforms for the biogenesis of
replication organelles. The PI will identify their pro-viral functions based on
the awesome power of yeast genetics in combination with elegant cell-free
replication assays developed for tombusviruses by the PI. Similar work will be
extended to TBSV-plant infections, which will likely lead to major new insights
into RNA virus replication and viral pathogenesis. Developing an efficient
antiviral strategy based on blocking the function of co-opted Sac1, Fis1 or
Atg11 could rapidly be done in the elegant tombusvirus-yeast/plant systems.
Inhibition of formation of critical viral replication organelles could be a
powerful approach to block virus replication, thus the proposed research will
facilitate the development of novel, potent and broad-range antiviral
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.