* 1922598
* NRT-HDR: Transdisciplinary Graduate Training Program in Data-Driven Adaptive Systems of Brain-Body Interactions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Padmanabhan Seshaiyer, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,928.00

Nearly one in five Americans currently live with a disability that affects
performance of their daily activities. Individuals living with complex
disabilities as a result of substance use disorders, autism spectrum disorders,
post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury often have multiple
negative health outcomes involving physical and psychosocial factors. These
disabilities have pervasive societal, public health and economic consequences
that impact individuals, families, support networks, and sometimes whole
communities. Addressing this challenge requires an in-depth understanding of the
physical and physiological underpinnings of the disabling condition, the
environmental factors and social-ecological context that limits an individual's
participation in daily activities, and the development of technological
solutions to help overcome these barriers. The next generation STEM workforce
charged with addressing this challenge must work together across traditional
academic disciplinary boundaries to integrate engineering, data science and
social science knowledge, while meaningfully engage with stakeholder communities
in a mutually beneficial manner. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to George Mason University will address the need to
train a versatile, interdisciplinary community-engaged STEM workforce with the
skills to harness the data revolution to create fundamental research and
translational innovations aimed at improving the quality of life for individuals
with disabilities. The project anticipates training one hundred (100) PhD
students, including nineteen (19) funded trainees, from electrical and
bioengineering, data science, computer science, neuroscience, and the social
sciences. The NRT project will include students with disabilities in the trainee
cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will develop and use both data-collection
devices and data-analysis techniques to promote data-driven solutions associated
with complex disabilities that have major social, public health and economic
consequences. For example, students may utilize their training in data
analytics, wearable sensors and imaging to design new technology-assisted
methods for personalized service delivery, to develop new machine learning
algorithms to support the next generation of brain computer interfaces and
improved prosthetic control systems, or to advance research on virtual reality
based multisensory training. This NRT program will cross-train engineers, data
scientists and social scientists to use state-of-the-art data analytic methods
and wearable computing technologies based on a novel transdisciplinary CAP
(competencies, applications and practice) curriculum and a community-engaged
design project. The CAP curriculum will provide immersive, individualized
training in data analytics, wearable sensors and imaging, contextualized in
terms of applications (cognitive and behavioral neuroscience, human movement and
function and neuroengineering) and scaffolded by hands-on practice in research
and professional skills development. The design project will provide experience
in convergent research, communication across disciplinary boundaries, and
communication to a broad audience. Within George Mason University, the project
will involve 14 core faculty from the Center for Adaptive Systems of Brain-Body
Interactions, and an additional 15 faculty from 14 departments and 5
schools/colleges. By aligning with strategic institutional priorities and
engaging diverse faculty mentors, this NRT project is well-positioned to sustain
the traineeship model beyond the funded period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.