* 1922291
* ASPIRE: An SFS Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education (Renewal)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Phyllis Gail Frankl, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 06/30/2025
* USD 4,577,458.00

There is a growing national recognition of the importance of diversifying the
workforce, both to fill the huge demand for qualified employees in computer
science related professions, including cybersecurity, and to promote diversity
of thought and experience, to support improved problem-solving. This project
aims to build on and extend the success of the current CyberCorps(R) Scholarship
for Service (SFS) program at New York University, including implementing several
creative modifications and enhancements to the SFS program to increase gender
diversity in NYU's cybersecurity program. Additional aspects of the program will
include mentorship programs and campus visits by alums to advice and help place
students in the executive branch of the federal government; placing a stronger
emphasis on research projects by the SFS students, and deeply technical as well
as interdisciplinary learning experiences depending on the student's preparation
and aspiration. These efforts will sharpen the student's ability for creative
thinking, making them better cybersecurity professionals. Using knowledge and
skills obtained in the program, the graduates will be well prepared to meet
challenges of protecting the information and infrastructure resources of our
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This renewal project will leverage and improve the
resources and infrastructure generated by the current SFS program. The program
will be run by NYU's Cyber Security Center (CCS) which brings together
complementary expertise, faculty innovation, and student enthusiasm from
different schools at NYU to enhance the state of knowledge and practical
application of security and privacy. This center includes faculty from Tandon
(Engineering), Law, Steinhardt (Ethics, Philosophy, Education), Wagner (Public
Policy), Stern (Business and Economics) and NYU Abu Dhabi (Engineering). The
best qualified SFS students will be admitted from across all the schools. The
project will support an educational program that relies on a number of high-
quality courses in cybersecurity, participation in research projects supervised
by faculty, hands-on experience both at NYU and during summer internships at the
government, semester for-credit internships in New York City, participation in
curricular activities including competitions and badges with industry partners
of the broader cybersecurity center, and outreach activities through CSAW, the
largest student run security event in the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.