* 1922689
* Computational design of magnon spintronic devices with multiscale approach by combining time-dependent quantum transport with classical micromagnetics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Branislav Nikolic, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Conventional spintronics employs spin currents of electrons to carry, transport
and process information. However, they decay over short distances while also
generating Joule heat losses. Electronic spin current impinging onto a magnetic
insulator is converted into spin current carried by collective motion of
localized magnetic moments. Such spin wave or magnon spin currents can propagate
over long distances without Joule heat losses since electrons do not move
through an insulator. Even slower spatial decay of spin currents becomes
possible when they are transported by spiraling textures of precessing magnetic
moments within room temperature magnetic insulators with easy-plane anisotropy,
sharing many features of coherent and superfluid transport without dissipation
at cryogenic temperatures. In addition, the spin waves can interfere and exhibit
nonlinear wave interaction which can be exploited for novel wave-based logic
gates, as well as for mixing of logic and memory on the same chip to evade the
so-called memory wall as a bottleneck in data exchange between distant slow
memory and fast logic gates in conventional electronics. The superfluid spin
transport can be exploited to create magnetic analogues of superconducting
Josephson junctions. The proposed research will employ newly developed
computational tools to simulate interconversion between electronic spin currents
and spin wave or superfluid spin currents, thereby offering a precise guidance
for device fabrication with optimal control of long-distance and low-dissipation
spin-encoded information flow across magnetic insulators and its probing in the
bulk or near interfaces with normal metals contacts. Broader impact of the
proposed research will include: design of building blocks for novel computing
technologies with ultralow power consumption; training for graduate students in
advanced quantum device modeling and supercomputing simulations; and creation of
new publicly available device modeling software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scalability of magnon spintronic devices requires efficient schemes to excite
exchange spin waves of short wavelength, which will be investigated by
simulating spin waves of nanoscale wavelength generated by annihilation of two
magnetic domain walls or by a single current-driven domain wall. These setups
will also underlie simulations of logic-in-memory devices where domain walls
store binary information while spin waves perform logic operations by traversing
them. Magnon valves and transistors which modulate spin wave spin current across
ferro- and antiferromagnetic insulators with easy-axis anisotropy will be
simulated. Schemes to modulate superfluid spin currents across magnetic
insulators with easy-plane anisotropy will be investigated, including magnetic
analogues of Josephson junctions. In all of these devices, readout of
information processed by magnetic insulator requires to eventually convert spin
currents carried by the dynamics of localized magnetic moments into conventional
electronic spin and charge currents. The whole process will be modeled
microscopically by utilizing and further advancing theoretical and computational
capabilities of recently developed multiscale framework which self-consistently
combines time-dependent nonequilibrium Green function algorithms for electrons
with the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation for classical dynamics of localized
magnetic moments. This framework makes it possible for the first time to
directly, and in time-resolved fashion, investigate how injection of electronic
spin current (steady or pulsed) excites spin waves or superfluid spin transport
by spin torque and, how they excite electronic spin currents via the spin
pumping effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.