* 1922560
* NRT: One Health and the Environment (OH&amp;E): Convergence of Social and Biological Sciences
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Andrei Alyokhin, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,379.00

Global environmental and land-use changes, aging human populations, and the
increasing prevalence of infectious diseases of animals, plants and people
(e.g., Lyme disease, Zika virus, bird flu, citrus greening disease) highlight
the need for training professionals in an interdisciplinary "One Health"
approach that studies disease dynamics at the intersection of human, animal,
plant, and environmental health. As much as 60% of the emerging infectious
diseases in humans have originated in animals; for example, almost 300,000
people died of swine flu in 2009. One Health diseases are costly; over a 12-year
period, the economic burden of six infectious disease outbreaks in the U.S.
totaled over $80 billion. Disease susceptibility and transmission is strongly
affected by social factors (e.g., outdoor employment, limited healthcare
access). Addressing the complex connections among human, animal, plant, and
environmental health under changing land use and climate patterns will advance
the basic science while also generating innovative solutions to One Health
problems. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
the University of Maine will address these environmental One Health issues, with
transdisciplinary teams of scientists working together to train graduate
students. The project anticipates training seventy-one (71) MS and PhD students,
including twenty-one (21) funded trainees, from a variety of STEM fields
including Economics, Biology and Forest Resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NRT
project will encourage interdisciplinary environmental One Health research by
trainees in a diverse range of systems, from marine to terrestrial, rural to
urban, and economic to cultural. Specific research topics include migratory bird
pathogen transmission and evolution, drivers of disease spillover between game
birds and domestic poultry, the ecology and evolution of vector-borne diseases,
and climate and/or land-use practice impacts on the spread of disease vectors
and drinking water quality. Through close interactions with internship partners
outside of academia, the trainees will expand their boundaries to consider not
just the underlying science, but also the management and policy challenges in
developing solutions to One Health problems. Training in cross-disciplinary
communication will enable trainees to engage with diverse scientific
communities, stakeholders, citizen scientists, and the public. The traineeship
is designed to increase the participation of women, first-generation students,
veterans, students with disabilities and other traditionally underrepresented
groups. The project will develop new graduate degree programs and concentration
areas in One Health as well as curricular innovations to be shared with other
institutions to help them develop similar interdisciplinary programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.