* 1922758
* NRT-HDR: Data and Informatics Graduate Intern-traineeship: Materials at the Atomic Scale (DIGI-MAT)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Klara Nahrstedt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,037,226.00

The application of engineering materials impacts every facet of society, through
manufacturing, energy, transportation, medicine, and more. One the most
important trends in materials science is the emergence of atomic scale
characterization of materials. Characterizing and modeling materials at the
atomic scale generates massive data sets. New advances in data science are now
revolutionizing the way that materials data are captured, curated, managed, and
manipulated. Industry and national labs are increasingly in need of a science
and engineering workforce trained in both materials and data science. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University
of Illinois will support the creation of a Data and Informatics Graduate Intern-
Traineeship in Materials at the Atomic Scale (DIGI-MAT). The vision of DIGI-MAT
is that materials problems will ultimately be data problems, and understanding
of materials will be a challenge in capturing, curating, managing, and
manipulating massive data streams. The program will combine cutting-edge
research with a new curriculum, professional development opportunities, on-
demand skills training, and, at the core of the program, research internships
with external partners. This project anticipates training 72 PhD students,
including 31 funded trainees, from degree programs in engineering, physics,
statistics, and information science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DIGI-MAT project
balances research with coursework, skill-building, professional development and
robust internships. Working across disciplinary boundaries, participants will
tackle specific, high-impact research problems, including the following: (i)
machine-learning to identify features in billion-atom microscope images; (ii)
statistics and data-fusion methods for large materials data sets that vary over
space and in time; (iii) new routes to automate the synthesis of nanomaterials
using data; (iv) cyberinfrastructure for atomistic data; and (v) new highly
accurate and efficient methods to computationally model materials. The program
will integrate this research activity with new interdisciplinary graduate course
offerings. Additional flexible training modules will be offered in data
acquisition and management, materials data curation, uncertainty quantification,
instrumentation for materials characterization, and application of machine
learning to materials data. Trainees will be placed in semester-to-year-long
research internships with partners in industry, national labs, academia, and
abroad. Research internships will be closely aligned with trainees' graduate
research, helping to prepare them for careers at the intersection of materials
and data science. Finally, trainees will have the opportunity to develop
additional career-aligned skillsets such as communication, leadership, and
entrepreneurship through workshops and other venues (e.g. industry networking
events).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.