* 1922459
* 2019 Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES)-National Science Foundation (NSF) Special Sessions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Dawn Elliott, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2020
* USD 15,175.00

The BMES Annual Meeting is highly interdisciplinary and is the premiere
conference for the Biomedical Engineering community, offering programming at the
forefront of discovery and education to leading researchers, professionals,
leaders and students in the BME field. The BMES Annual Meeting is an ideal venue
to hold the BMES-NSF Special Sessions to engage the broadest possible
participation, and to stimulate conversations, questions &amp; answers, and new
mentoring relationships across faculty, students and professionals. These
Special Sessions will allow audience participants to gain a greater awareness of
NSF-sponsored research opportunities, attain a better understanding of how to
prepare successful BME grant proposals, and offer participants a place to learn
from each other as mentors and colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;Two sessions are
planning:&lt;br/&gt;1) BMES-NSF Special Session on CAREER and UNSOLICITED
Awards: This BMES-NSF sponsored Special Session is expected to be held at the
2019 BMES Annual Meeting on Friday, October 18, 2019. The goal of the session is
to bring together NSF Bioengineering and Engineering Healthcare grantees, young
investigators, junior and senior faculty, and postdoctoral trainees for idea
exchange and networking related to conducting and funding cutting-edge research
in BME.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) BMES-NSF Special Session on Graduate Research
Fellowships Program (GRFP): This BMES-NSF sponsored Special Session is expected
to be held at the 2019 BMES Annual Meeting on Saturday, October 19, 2019. The
goal of the session is to bring together program officers, grantees, reviewers
and graduate students to highlight the NSF GRFP and inform undergraduate and
graduate students on GFRP guidelines and strategies to develop winning GRFP
grant proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.