* 1922521
* Microbial landscapes: Are microorganisms hidden drivers of species distributions?
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Christopher Searcy, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 911,038.00

All plants live in places filled with many microbes, like bacteria and fungi,
that are invisible to the naked eye. These microbes can help or hurt the plants
they live with. For example, some microbes help plants grow in places without
many nutrients, while other microbes cause disease. Given humanity's dependence
on plants for food, shelter, clear air and fuel, understanding how microbes
affect plant health is important, especially as the environment changes. This
research will test how soil microbes help or hurt individual plants and how they
may determine where groups of plants are found together. The goal is to see if
microbes act as "hidden players" that explain patterns long thought to be
explained by other things. Understanding microbial effects on plants can also
improve how rare plants are managed and conserved, which is relevant because
this project will take place in an area with many rare species. The project will
provide training in field research for the next generation of scientists,
including students from underrepresented groups at the University of Miami.
Researchers will work with public school teachers to create nature documentaries
and teaching modules to help middle school students learn about the hidden but
important role of microbes in the world around them. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project has three main components. The first is to examine the interaction
between well-known selection pressures (fire and allelopathy) and soil microbes
on individual plant fitness. Next-generation sequencing will be used to
determine how the soil microbiome responds to fire and allelopathy. Then,
greenhouse experiments will be used to disentangle the role of differences in
the soil microbes from differences in soil properties (and the interaction
between the two) in governing plant fitness. The second component of the project
will combine bioassays determining the effect of soil microbes on plant
demographic parameters with existing long-term datasets to examine the
demographic pathways and ecological contexts that allow microbes to influence
plant population and metapopulation dynamics. This approach will use integral
projection modeling to integrate microbial effects and patch-specific
environmental parameters to understand the mechanistic basis for the
distribution of 11 plant species across a patchy landscape. The final component
will incorporate next-generation sequencing of soil microbiomes from ~700 sites
into plant species distribution models to examine the relative importance of
microbial and abiotic factors in determining the distributions of all ~80
members of the local plant community. Taken together, these new applications of
modeling species distributions, demography, and metapopulations, parameterized
with data from long-term studies and experiments, will shed light on the
important linkages between plant distributions and their microbial
associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.