* 1922030
* Standard Grant: Forest Fuels: Equity, Environment, and Woody Biomass Energy Technologies in Michigan
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 364,453.00

This award supports a collaborative research project that examines the socio-
ecological implications of differently-scaled woody biomass energy technologies
in Michigan, including residential woodstoves, community-scale boilers, and
biomass power plants. The project will provide deeper understandings of the
social acceptability of using wood for energy in Michigan. Having a more nuanced
understanding of the cultural carrying capacity for woody biomass energy systems
will help policy-makers determine which technologies may be appropriate for
particular landscapes and communities. The results of this research are to be
disseminated broadly though professional activities with Michigan's Statewide
Wood Energy Team and the national Alliance for Green Heat, media outreach
activities such as regional radio, and newspaper interviews. The project will
also provide opportunities for training undergraduate students in historical and
social science research methods, including the design and implementation of
interviews, documentary analysis, focus groups, and
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research project will use new
approaches for thinking about the relationship between renewable energy
development and environmental justice. It combines spatial analysis with
approaches from science and technology studies (STS) and environmental history
to understand how these different technologies have distributed benefits and
burdens since the late twentieth century. It will use multiple methods including
archival analysis, semi-structured interviews, a survey, and spatial analyses,
to investigate the sociopolitical factors that have led to adoption of biofuel
technologies. By combining historical research, quantitative social science
methods, and spatial analysis, this project will help to reveal how political
and social dynamics from the past constrain technological development in the
future. Researchers will communicate the results of the research through
scholarly publications, public outreach efforts, and instructional activities in
their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.