* 1922506
* Workshop on Quantitative Representation of Microstructures and Materials for Extreme Environments; Alexandria, Virginia; May 20-24 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,10/31/2019
* Alp Sehirlioglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 10/31/2019
* USD 53,536.00

The Workshop on Quantitative Representation of Microstructures and Materials for
Extreme Environments will be held May 20-24, 2019 in Alexandria, Virginia. This
workshop brings together leading experts in quantitative representation of
microstructures and Materials for Extreme Environments. The workshop aims to
develop tools and strategies to expand the field of materials modeling and data
science, and expand their application to extreme environment conditions with
integration of non-equilibrium physics. This award provides support for the
meeting logistics. The expected outcome of the workshop is an accelerated
roadmap to develop and manufacture materials to operate at non-equilibrium
conditions. When applied at this scale, transformative research that relates
processing to microstructure to properties quantitatively will lead to
disruptive technological developments. The collaborative and open approach
developed will provide a competitive advantage to the United States, in
particular in aerospace and defense applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of the workshop is to bring together researchers that (i) develop mathematical
tools, (ii) expand existing models to more realistic conditions, and (iii)
verify the outcome of the models and define the realistic environment of
applications. Prospective attendees represent a diverse group of researchers
with a variety of expertise and perspectives. Participation in this workshop is
co-sponsored by this award and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR) program on Materials in Extreme Environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.