* 1922839
* Multiphase Flow Dynamics of Blood Cells in Compliant Vessels: Towards A Computational Study of Autoregulation of Blood Flow in Microcirculation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Prosenjit Bagchi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 354,909.00

Blood pumped from the heart to various parts of the body is conveyed by a
hierarchy of blood vessels. This vascular system supplies oxygen nutrients to
cells in the body and removes carbon dioxide and metabolic waste. The terminal
blood vessels are capillaries, and this is where gas and nutrient exchange with
surrounding tissue takes place. Demand for oxygen and nutrients varies with time
in specific tissues. For example, cerebral neurons demand more oxygen during
increased cognitive activities. Each organ and tissue is able to regulate its
blood supply on demand. Blood flow regulation at the capillary level is known as
autoregulation, and it involves dilation and contraction of vessels triggered by
smooth muscle cells (SMCs) in the pre-capillary vessel wall. Autoregulation
allows the capillaries to maintain constant blood flow rates despite sudden
changes in pressure. Loss of autoregulation is associated with many pathological
conditions, including dementia and coronary disease. Compliance of blood vessels
is the key to the process. Red blood cells (RBCs) are extremely flexible; their
motion through capillaries influences overall blood flow and pressure
distributions, which in turn affect activation of pressure-sensitive SMCs. This
project will develop a computational model of autoregulation of blood flow by
combining RBC deformation, SMC activation, and vessel compliance. The model will
provide a detailed understanding of the critical pathways that cause loss of
autoregulation and its effects in various diseases such as dementia, stroke,
heart disease, kidney failure. The project will involve mentoring graduate and
undergraduate students in research, and will engage high-school students through
a summer research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a
high-fidelity, three-dimensional, multiscale, multiphysics, fluid-structure
interaction (FSI)-based computational model of autoregulation of blood flow in
physiologically realistic vascular networks. It will integrate a coarse-grain
bio-electro-chemical model for calcium ion-mediated active contractile stress
generation in SMCs, finite-strain viscoelastic model for the dynamic response of
the blood vessel walls, large deformation of flowing RBCs in suspension, and
Immersed Boundary methods to couple the fluid flow with deforming interfaces.
The influence of vessel compliance on RBC deformation and distribution, and the
role of RBC rheology on vessel deformation will be analyzed quantitatively. The
apparent viscosity of blood in compliant vessels, and the effects of vessel
compliance on RBC partitioning at vascular bifurcations will also be addressed.
Finally, the role of active contraction on the distribution of RBCs in a
vascular network, and the role of RBC distribution on active contraction will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.