* 1922937
* I-Corps: Silicon(Si)-based Rechargeable Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Leon Shaw, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
silicon(Si)-based rechargeable batteries that can simultaneously provide
ultrafast charging capability, high specific energy and long-lasting cycle life.
Such rechargeable batteries will allow cell phones to be charged to their full
capacity within 20 min (rather than 2 hours offered by the current battery
technology available in the market) while extending the usage time to 3 days
(rather than 2 days of current technology) before recharge is needed. These
ultrafast charging and high energy batteries can also find a market for other
consumer products, such as cameras, laptops, drones, power tools, electric
forklifts in warehouses, and military devices, to improve work productivity and
life quality for consumers. Furthermore, Si-based high energy batteries can be
utilized to reduce the cost and weight of electric vehicle battery packs by 60%.
These advancements will pave the way for broad market penetration of electric
vehicles and support a more environmentally sustainable mode of transportation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project employs a novel, simple and low-cost
manufacturing method that can synthesize a new type of Si-based anode powder
which exhibits unusual properties with ultrafast charging capability, high
specific capacity and long-lasting cycle life. This new Si-based anode is termed
as Si@void@C because it contains three distinct features simultaneously: (i)
nanostructured Si building blocks, (ii) a conductive carbon shell outside the
nanostructured Si core, and (iii) engineered void space inside the Si core.
Together these three features offer the much-needed properties for Li-ion
batteries: ultrafast charging capability, high specific energy and long-lasting
cycle life. Based on these unique properties, the Si-based rechargeable
batteries are designed in two general categories, one being "ultrafast charging
batteries" that can shorten the charging time to 20 min while still allowing
cell phones to be used for 3 days before re-charge and the other being "high
energy batteries" which require 2 hours charging time, but allow users to
recharge batteries every 6 days. Furthermore, "high energy batteries" can enable
a reduction in the cost of the battery packs by 60% for electric vehicles,
removing a critical barrier to consumer acceptance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.