* 1922694
* NRT: IN FElloWS &amp; an Academy of Innovators at the Nexus of Food, Energy &amp; Water Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Tyler Mark, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,998,456.00

Challenges at the nexus of food, energy and water systems (FEWS) are important
both nationally and globally. For example, new approaches are needed to ensure
adequate food supplies for increasing populations, to foster the development of
sustainable and carbon-neutral sources of energy, and to improve the management
of water resources. A trained and diverse workforce equipped to meet these
challenges is critical and will be directly addressed in the current study. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University
of Kentucky will integrate an evidence-based educational model with
interdisciplinary research focused on Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy
and Water Systems (INFEWS). The project will combine graduate student training
with cutting edge research in mine land remediation, water treatment, crop
production and power generation and will help address the need for innovators in
FEWS. The need for innovative leadership is particularly urgent in Appalachian
states where the dependence of the economy on agricultural and energy sectors
results in water management issues and where the decline of coal mining is
forcing the economy to diversify. This project anticipates training forty-six
(46) MS and PhD students, including twenty-one (21) funded trainees, from
chemistry, biosystems and agricultural engineering, chemical engineering,
forestry, plant and soil sciences, horticulture, and agricultural
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees and their mentors will work on
fundamental interdisciplinary research topics relevant to the Appalachian
states. Integrated research will focus on synergizing mine land remediation,
water treatment, crop production and power generation to attain sustainability
in water use and in the concurrent production of energy and food. Particular
topics include mine land restoration to improve hydrology and water quality; the
use of greenhouses on restored mine land for year-round food production
(requiring localized water treatment powered by renewable energy); the use of
algae to sequester carbon dioxide emissions and provide organic fertilizer for
soil improvement in reclaimed areas; and the conversion of biomass grown on
reclaimed mine land to fuels and chemicals. Given the economic problems inherent
to many Appalachian counties, the research will also evaluate the feasibility
and sustainability of utilizing reclaimed mine lands to contribute to economic
development in this region. To integrate this research with graduate student
education, a series of initiatives will be undertaken, including an INFEWS
certificate program, an annual INFEWS symposium, collaborative research grants,
an INFEWS consortium, and an academy of FEWS innovators to be established at the
University of Kentucky. This academy will leverage effective tools for training
STEM professionals, such as developmental network-based mentoring and career
preparation encompassing both technical and professional skillsets. Individual
development plans for trainees will guide their professional development and
expose them to a range of career pathways. A comprehensive evaluation plan will
be utilized to assess the project components and overall training model. To
ensure inclusive student cohorts, this project will partner with minority
serving institutions and leverage two National Science Foundation program
networks from the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) and
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (INCLUDES). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.