* 1922982
* HDR DSC: Collaborative Research: The Data Science WAV: Experiential Learning with Local Community Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Brian Candido, Springfield Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 17,945.00

This project simultaneously addresses two problems: 1) the inability of
community-based and non-profit organizations to tackle data science problems;
and 2) the lack of real world experience gained by students studying data
science. The increased availability of data, combined with increased computing
power at lower costs, has brought to the desktop tremendous analytical and
problem solving capabilities. Yet many organizations are not able to take
advantage of these developments because they often lack appropriate staffing to
wrestle with complex data science problems. Meanwhile, as students increasingly
gravitate toward data science programs, much of their course-based problem
solving experience focuses on clean problems with simple data sets. This leaves
them unprepared for the reality of the data science applications they will face
in professional settings. This project addresses both issues by deploying teams
of data science students to assist local organizations, thereby increasing the
long-term capacity of the data science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
multifaceted project that will provide immediate impact to local organizations
and long-term benefit for students through valuable hands-on data science
experience. There are two major components of the proposed project. First, Data
Science WAV teams of four specially-trained undergraduate students will be
deployed to community-based organizations to Wrangle, Analyze, and Visualize
their data. Second, this project will offer summer faculty development workshops
designed to help new instructors, especially those at community colleges, teach
data science at their institutions. Curricular innovations that bring
experiential data science learning into the curriculum will lead to sustained
impact at the partnering academic institutions and in the larger Pioneer Valley
region. This proposal is diverse across both institutions and student
populations. It comprises one major research university (The University of
Massachusetts, Amherst), four liberal arts colleges (Amherst, Hampshire, Mount
Holyoke, and Smith), and three local community colleges (Greenfield, Holyoke,
and Springfield Technical). The inclusion of two women's colleges (Smith and
Mount Holyoke) and two Hispanic-serving institutions (Holyoke and Springfield
Technical) will help ensure that a diverse student population is engaged in the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Data Science
Corps program focuses on building capacity for harnessing the data revolution at
the local, state, national, and international levels to help unleash the power
of data in the service of science and society. Projects in this program are
being jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea; the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems; the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education; the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, Division of Mathematical Sciences; and the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities and Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.