* 1922173
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: GOALI: Multiscale Design of Zeolite Sites for Precise Catalytic Transformations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rajamani Gounder, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Zeolites are a class of crystalline, solid materials that contain pores of the
size of molecules, lending to their wide use in applications such as gasoline
refining, and cleaning exhaust coming from diesel vehicles. Zeolites are
naturally occurring, but technological materials are produced synthetically and
at large scale. The properties of a particular zeolite are determined in part by
its pore size and shape, and in part by the chemical elements in the material;
however, specifics of these relationships are poorly understood. As a result,
nominally the same zeolites may show vastly different performance in a given
application. The overarching aim of this project is to develop computer models
and experimental protocols that increase our ability to precisely locate the
positions of elements within the zeolite pores during the zeolite synthesis
process. This understanding is expected to lead to materials that have superior
performance in current applications, are longer-lasting and more durable, and
can perform functions that are not possible today. To achieve these ends, it
brings together a team of researchers with expertise in zeolite synthesis and
characterization, in experiment and in molecular-scale computer models, and from
industrial and academic laboratories. It delivers new modeling protocols and new
materials, while simultaneously training students in a diverse, collaborative
environment who are well prepared for careers in chemical
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses in particular on
crystalline aluminosilicate zeolites. In these materials, aluminum heteroatoms
within the zeolite framework are anionic charge centers. Increasing evidence
indicates that the relative proximity of these aluminum centers has a
significant impact on the ultimate properties of the zeolite, in particular in
their function in Bronsted acid catalysis (methanol dehydration) and in redox
catalysis (the selective catalytic reduction of NOx). The main hypotheses are
cationically charged structure-directing agents (SDAs) present during the
synthesis process have a determining effect on the location of those Al atoms
within a given zeolite lattice, their effect can be inferred from the
interactions between SDAs and the pre-formed, aluminum-substituted zeolite, and
the same modeling approach can be used to predict speciation during post-
synthetic ion exchange. To test these hypotheses, the project develops classical
and first-principles models to predict zeolite compositional phase diagrams for
organic SDAs and inorganic cations vs silicon-to-aluminum ratio in a series of
zeolite frameworks. These models are validated against experimental observation
on laboratory-synthesized zeolites, using both ex situ spectroscopic and
chemical characterization as well kinetic evaluations under catalytic
conditions, and informed by first-principles and microkinetic modeling
predictions of the relationship between Al atom location and properties. The
project advances the computational design of zeolite materials in the context of
practically significant catalytic reactions in a computation/experiment and
academic/industrial collaborative setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.