* 1922174
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Achieving Multicomponent Active Materials through Synergistic Combinatorial, Informatics-enabled Materials Discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Chad Risko, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2023
* USD 295,990.00

Non-technical: Affordable, low-cost flexible electronics will revolutionize how
society thinks about and uses devices in applications ranging from energy
storage and conversion, displays, or sensors for environmental and health
monitoring. Conjugated polymers can provide the key functional component for
electrical performance; however, control of the thin-film, active-layer
morphology presents a key challenge. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize
and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project merges knowledge from polymer design,
synthesis and processing, high-throughput combinatorial materials discovery,
multiscale materials simulation, and materials informatics to stimulate the
discovery of new generations of flexible, stretchable and high-temperature
semiconductors enabled by blends of conjugated polymers and electrically inert
polymers that exhibit unprecedented and robust performance. The discoveries will
enable the widespread commercialization and utilization of flexible electronics.
In addition, the project will develop generalizable materials genome methods for
integration of high-throughput experiment and informatics in organic electronic
systems. Students participants will realize multidisciplinary benefits. They
will be cross-trained and have opportunities to expand their knowledge and
experience through relevant additional collaborations; and they will be
encouraged to participate in broadening experiences, such as industrial
internships, teaching practicums and energy policy courses, based on individual
interests and career goals. The PIs will build upon existing mentoring programs
for female graduate students, using ongoing monthly lunch groups as a hub to
provide professional development and leadership opportunities for students,
expanding its reach through additional programs, including seminar speakers and
panel discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Affordable, low-cost flexible
electronics will revolutionize how society thinks about and uses devices in
applications ranging from energy storage and conversion, displays, or sensors
for environmental and health monitoring. However, satisfying the functional and
economic requirements of target applications and the constraints of large-scale
solution-based additive fabrication processes requires increasingly complex
solution formulations. Dilution of the active semiconducting polymer in an
insulating matrix is an exciting and emerging opportunity to achieve the desired
functional attributes in an economically viable approach. In that regard a key
challenge is control of the thin-film, active-layer morphology to achieve
exceptional levels of charge transport performance that will be imperative for
envisioned applications. Here, new polymer chemistry is combined with materials
modeling to explore electronic properties and molecular scale interactions and
dynamics in solution and blends to inform high-throughput experiments. These
data will then serve as the key inputs of materials informatics approaches that
will establish critical connections among composition, structure and processing.
The objective is to build the materials genome that will provide knowledge to
inform materials development at all stages along the structure-processing-
function paradigm. The project will create a holistic foundation connecting
molecular structure to polymer chain dynamics from the solution level to
solidified thin-film morphology to electronic performance; and motivate the
realization of ubiquitous, cost-effective and sustainable organic
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.