* 1922206
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Fundamentals of Short-Range Order-Assisted Alloy Design: Thermodynamics, Kinetics, Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ju Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,417,420.00

It is well known that the ordering of atoms at the nanoscale dictates the
properties and performance of materials, but knowledge of the quantitative
relationships among properties, performance and structure - in particular the
short-range ordering of atoms - is lacking for many structural alloys. Knowledge
of these relationships has the potential to enable new high-strength, corrosion-
resistant materials for use in transportation, energy, and infrastructure
applications. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) award supports research to develop an improved fundamental understanding
of short-range ordering, in order to identify guidelines for the design of new
metallic materials with superior properties. Alloys with short-range order have
characteristics of hard, but brittle intermetallics in the short-range, but also
of soft pure metal or solid solutions, in the medium- to long-range. Despite
classical understanding that suggests otherwise, there is increasing evidence
that shows that short-range ordering can lead to unexpected improvements in
mechanical properties. A short-range order-assisted alloy design concept will be
explored as a new route to overcome the fundamental strength-toughness
limitations in physical metallurgy. The overall goal of this research is to
establish the fundamental understanding and the generic design rules that enable
effective utilization of short-range order to realize damage-resistance in
extreme environments. Concepts from this research are incorporated into
educational modules in place at local science museums, and further educational
benefits will stem from this work through the active participation of student
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to unravel what controls short-
range order stabilities and characteristics, understand fundamentals of short-
range order-assisted deformation micro/nano-mechanics, and design novel complex
concentrated alloys that overcome current strength and toughness limits. It is
necessary to understand how specific aspects of short-range order chemistry,
size, and strength can be controlled, and how such variations would influence
the interaction with dislocations. To this end, one of the most important
challenges is regarding characterization. The typical size of the short-range
ordered zones reaches the resolution limits of the conventional microscopy and
diffraction tools such as the transmission electron microscopy, the atom probe
tomography, and the x-ray diffraction. The research team will employ a novel,
multi-pronged approach, combining theoretical modeling (ab-initio density
functional theory calculation, Monte-Carlo simulation, and molecular dynamics),
metallurgical processing (fabrication &amp; testing), and atomically-resolved
advanced structural characterization techniques (resonant x-ray scattering, in-
situ scanning electron microscopy, and revolving scanning transmission electron
microscopy) in order to overcome this challenge, and to link atomic-scale short-
range order-characteristics to engineering properties at the macro-
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.