* 1922270
* Renewal of the Cyber Service Training and Education SFS Scholarship Program at Norfolk State University Scholarship for Service (SFS) Program
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Jonathan Graham, Norfolk State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,961,471.00

Norfolk State University (NSU) is a Center of Academic Excellence in
Cybersecurity - the second Historical Black College and University to be so
designated - and is proposing to continue its contribution to the Cybersecurity
workforce through participation in the CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program. Continued participation in this program will permit NSU to contribute
to expanding the cybersecurity workforce, and bring cybersecurity awareness and
education, not only to the NSU community, but to the general public at large.
Current and past SFS scholars have worked with middle and high school
cybersecurity summer camps, students in a high school cybersecurity club started
by NSU and in other community cybersecurity awareness programs directed at the
general public. The funding will permit NSU to continue these valuable
cybersecurity awareness activities. Current SFS graduates are already
contributing to the cybersecurity workforce in areas of cybercrime, digital
forensics, cyber defense and in some very highly classified areas. The
university is proposing to continue and expand this contribution. As a minority
institution with a relatively high proportion of females pursuing Computer
Science degrees, NSU will contribute substantially to addressing under-
representation of minorities and females in the cybersecurity workforce. Apart
from the required internship programs, SFS students are required to be a part of
a cybersecurity seminar series where they are exposed to speakers from industry,
current hands-on cybersecurity topics and techniques, cybersecurity
certifications and preparation for cybersecurity competitions. This
cybersecurity seminar enhances academic class preparation and makes these SFS
graduates more competitive as they seek employment upon graduation. Through
collaborations and interaction with cybersecurity employers in government
agencies, NSU will continually update the academic curricula and seminar needs
to ensure that graduates remain competitive not only now, but also in the
future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Norfolk State University's SFS program has
contributed sixteen cybersecurity scholars to the cybersecurity workforce and
this proposal aims to continue this work. The specific objectives are 1) recruit
highly qualified and motivated individuals for workforce preparation; 2) Develop
students for the cybersecurity workforce through exposure to a rigorous academic
curriculum and a cybersecurity seminar series which provides additional hands-
on-learning opportunities; 3) Enrich the SFS scholars and the external community
by involving the SFS scholars in educating K-12 students and adults about the
importance of cybersecurity and the career opportunities in the cybersecurity
field. Over the course of development of the Cybersecurity program at Norfolk
State University, it has developed strong relationships with the Department of
Energy National Nuclear Security Administration, The ARMY Research Laboratory,
Mitre Corporation, Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Space and Naval
Warfare Systems Command (SPAWAR). These institutions have helped to guide NSU in
the preparation of students who are ready to contribute immediately upon
graduation and as a result are highly sought after.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.