* 1922531
* Planning IUCRC at Iowa State University:  Center for Soil Dynamics Technologies
* ENG,EEC
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Carmen Gomes, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 15,000.00

Soils are literally the foundation of the global terrestrial ecosystems. Soils
are needed to sustain life, to grow food, to provide shelter, and to enable
mobility of human populations. Therefore, the societal importance of
understanding and predicting the near-surface dynamics of soils cannot be over-
stated; such societal importance also points to potentially enormous commercial
impact. Yet, there is currently no nationally concerted effort or entity to
coordinate research and development into soil sensing systems and predictive
models to comprehensively understand the current state and future changes of
soils as regards their chemical, physical, and biological properties. This
planning grant will explore building the Center for Soil Dynamics Technologies
with the mission to support critical industries such as precision agriculture,
climate change adaptation, natural resource extraction, emergency response
systems, border security and defense logistics, habitat construction, waste and
water management, and other geotechnical engineering systems with cutting-edge
measurements and modeling of global soil dynamics on multiple spatial and
temporal scales. This is envisioned as a national center supporting the R&amp;D
teams of these critical industries, allowing them to share information,
techniques, and applications of both our technologies and data. The proposed
Center is directed towards promoting and harnessing robust technological
advances in sensors and devices, computing, communication, control,
instrumentation, and data platforms that can provide persistent long-lived
observations and exploration capabilities for the soil environment. Innovations
at the component, subsystem, and system levels on these fronts will lead to a
surge of new applications. Through the engagement of a diverse group of
students, post-docs, and faculty, the Center will create numerous opportunities
for inclusion and broader participation of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global observations of surface-to-root-zone profiles of
soil properties such as moisture, composition, and temperature are key in a
number of science and application domains. These observations are needed to
quantify links in the water, energy, and carbon cycles, and also to determine
two virtually unobserved fluxes, evapotranspiration and recharge. In the Arctic,
soil profile properties from surface to the permafrost table are key in
understanding the impacts of climate change on the New Arctic. In agriculture,
such observations are linked to new developments in precision agriculture to
plan irrigation patterns and crop rotation. In ground-based operations, tactical
decisions are executed based on trafficability and ground stability. Much
progress has been made in the past few decades in remote and insitu observations
of surface soil properties, but near-surface soil profiles remain virtually
unobserved. The Center for Soil Dynamics Technologies addresses this major
knowledge gap through research to enable a multi-scale and multi-modality
observational scenario, with novel in-situ and low-altitude UAV-based sensors,
high-altitude airborne and spaceborne remote sensors, energy-aware terrestrial
wireless network technologies, and machine learning analyses to scale up from
in-situ to regional coverage. This research will immediately benefit multiple
industries, such as offering the agriculture industry an order of magnitude
reduction in water usage costs, preventing the economic repercussions of surface
subsidence from aquifer depletion, and enabling new observational technologies
for defense industries. In the longer term, enabling more accurate climate
projections via understanding the feedbacks between the water and carbon cycles
by characterizing root zone soil moisture will enable economically viable
adaptation measures. This improved understanding will also help meet societal
goals such as less soil contamination and greater food security. Additionally,
the Center will become a focal point of broader cross-disciplinary knowledge
synthesis for many activities already existing on participating center
university site campuses in research, teaching, and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.