* 1922846
* Structural basis for repressor-activator transitions in response to the plant defense hormone, jasmonic acid
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Karsten Melcher, Van Andel Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2020
* USD 87,920.00

When plants are wounded by insect feeding or infected by microbial pathogens,
they respond by producing hormones that function as signals to allow the plant
to mount a defense. Often the defense involves turning on, or activating,
beneficial genes that help the plant survive the damage and then turning off, or
repressing, those genes once the danger wanes. This research seeks to understand
the molecular details of how these genes transition from "off" to "on".
Knowledge of the detailed mechanism could be broadly important for agriculture
by providing a foundation for genetic manipulation and development of crop
plants optimized for defense and growth. This project will offer research
training opportunities to guest international graduate students and
undergraduates from from a local community college, thereby contributing to the
preparation of the future scientific workforce. In addition, through
participation in hands-on research experiences, high school teachers will
improve their ability to communicate the scientific process and engage their
students in meaningful science learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
focused on the plant defense hormone jasmonate. In healthy plants, jasmonate-
responsive genes are bound by a multi-protein complex composed of a repressor
called JAZ, a transcriptional activator called MYC, and a group of other
proteins. In the absence of jasmonate, the JAZ repressor inhibits the MYC
activator, and the genes are transcriptionally silent, or off. In response to
damage from herbivorous insects and many microbial pathogens, jasmonate is
produced and turns on these genes by inducing the proteasomal degradation of the
JAZ repressor, thereby relieving inhibition of MYC, which turns on the genes by
activating transcription. The molecular details and the roles played by the many
proteins that participate in this transition from repressed to active state are
largely unknown. This project seeks to discover how the large multi-protein
complexes involved in jasmonate signaling are assembled and regulated.
Approaches will include a combination of X-ray crystallography, electron
microscopy, biochemical, biophysical, and in planta analyses, and in cell
signaling reconstitution. Because many signaling cascades result in transitions
from repressed to active gene expression, the results could serve as a paradigm
for discovering, and eventually manipulating, the responsible regulatory protein
complexes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms and the Molecular Biophysics Programs in the Division of Molecular
Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.