* 1922311
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: The Synthesis Genome: Data Mining for Synthesis of New Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yuriy Roman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2023
* USD 789,324.00

Successes in accelerated materials design, made possible in part through the
Materials Genome Initiative, have shifted the bottleneck in materials
development towards the synthesis of novel compounds. Existing databases do not
contain information about the synthesis recipes necessary to make compounds that
are found to have promising properties, designed through computational methods.
As a result, much of the momentum and efficiency gained in the design process
becomes gated by trial-and-error synthesis techniques. This delay in going from
promising materials concept to validation, optimization, and scale-up is a
significant burden to the commercialization of novel materials. This Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) research will build
predictive tools for synthesis so that the development time for chemical
compounds with interesting properties can be synthesized in a matter of days,
rather than months or years. The research activities include automatically
extracting information from the published literature and patents on how solid
inorganic materials have been made in the past by using natural language
processing techniques. After this text extraction the project will generate a
"cookbook" of materials synthesis recipes. This cookbook can be mined through
machine learning approaches for suggestions on how to make new materials by
looking for patterns and similarities among previously made materials. The
project outcome will be a data set of materials synthesis methods, to be made
available to the community. Another key project outcome is to use machine
learning to predict novel or optimized recipes for materials. These predictions
will be accompanied by experimental confirmation for a class of materials used
in catalysis called zeolites. The major objective of the outreach component of
this research is to enable the use of the database by non-experts. This will be
accomplished through both online tutorials and in person workshops. The online
tutorials will teach the basic knowledge required to utilize the online tools
and functionalities while the workshops will be addressed to students and
researchers who want to make use of the database itself.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach to automatic extraction of information in the
literature will be semi-supervised from a machine learning perspective.
Unsupervised methods, including word embeddings that capture the context of
words within scientific corpus, will be used. Then downstream supervised methods
will be used to classify words by their type and their relationship to other
words. This forms the basis of the recipe database. The extracted information
will then be mined using machine learning tools from the materials informatics
community. Because the recipe classification (described subsequently) leverages
expertise from the NLP perspective and the target material classification
leverages expertise from the materials perspective, there is significant
leverage to be had from this interdisciplinary approach, a partnership not
previously pursued to further materials design. This approach builds on
established synthesis knowledge, and combines it with modern data extraction,
materials informatics, text mining and machine learning techniques, and high-
throughput ab-initio thermochemical data availability. The integration of these
different fields will provide a direct route towards more rational design of
synthesis methods and thereby significantly accelerate the deployment and
testing of new materials concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.