* 1922665
* Rethink Ride-Hail: From Understanding Limits to Reaching Full Potential
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Yu Nie, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 291,101.00

Transportation Network Companies (TNC) such as Uber and Lyft has reshaped
traditional taxi services. Unlike traditional taxis where riders hail vehicles
from street curbs, TNCs allow riders hail vehicles digitally through smart
phones, or e-hail. It is however unclear how the performance of these two types
of services (street hail vs. e-hail) compare with each other in terms of how
well they are able to match riders with drivers and how long riders must wait
for vehicles to arrive. This project will develop a general framework describing
the matching between riders and drivers for both types of services, based on
which, their respective performance will be compared. Policies and strategies
will also be developed in order to improve the performance of these services.
The project will develop educational materials and involve undergraduate and
graduate students. Findings from this project will be widely disseminated
through academic journals and international meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project researches a novel and general model of the matching process between
riders and drivers and validates it with empirical data. This model describes
spatial equilibrium between supply and demand in a mixed market that offers both
e-hail and street-hail services and seeks to explain fundamental differences
between the two types of services. Parameters in the model will be calibrated
from empirical data, allowing realism between the general model framework and
the various matching strategies implemented in the real world. The project will
also analyze practical decision-making problems for service operators and
regulators. Operators may be able to design a hybrid service by combining
e-hail's greater productivity with street-hail's higher returns to scale. The
project results will also provide insights to regulators who are currently
contemplating various policies such as entry cap and minimum wage. These
decision problems, typically formulated as either Mathematical Programs
constrained by Equilibrium Conditions or Markov Decision Processes, are large in
both dimension and scale, highly nonlinear, and nonconvex. Accordingly, the
project also contributes to the analysis and solution of these challenging
optimization problems. Finally, the project develops a comprehensive evaluation
framework that consists of model-based, simulation-based and application-based
case studies. These case studies can be used by other researchers and educators
working in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.