* 1922351
* Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation: Marine Science Laboratory Alliance Center of Excellence
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Todd Fritch, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Martha James
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,499,683.00

Mote Marine Laboratory will lead the Marine Science Laboratory Center of
Excellence of Excellence (MarSci-LACE, a Louis Stokes Regional Center for
Broadening Participation in STEM, in partnership with the Perry Institute for
Marine Science, Smithsonian Institution, Florida Keys Community College, and the
State College of Florida-Manatee-Sarasota. The project is collaboratively funded
by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) program and NSF INCLUDES. NSF INCLUDES focuses on
catalyzing the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
a pilot research and dissemination project, MarSci-LACE has four primary
objectives. These are to:(1) establish an innovative project to study, identify,
demonstrate, and articulate the need for broadening the participation of
historically underrepresented and underserved students in marine science STEM
fields; (2) identify, modify/develop, and distribute tools for understanding the
impact of marine research learning experiences at Independent Marine Research
Institutes (IMRIs) on underrepresented minority (URM) undergraduate students?
learning, STEM identity, and career aspirations, including the impacts of the
approaches and perspectives of IMRIs mentors, IMRIs support of URM learning and
mentor development; (3) collect existing and develop new practical-, theory-,
and evidence-based resources to address identified gaps, expand upon existing
successful examples at IMRIs, and replicate proven practices in non-marine, STEM
research experiences targeted at URM students, mentors, and IMRIs and LSAMP
institutions; and (4) facilitate the transfer of scalable MarSci-LACE
practical-, theory-,and evidence-based best practices and innovative strategies
to other IMRIs and LSAMP institutions. The latter will be accomplished through
online and in-person resources, training opportunities in marine STEM teaching
and learning for URM students, and progression of URM students to graduate
programs and completion of graduate degrees. Other contributions include
publishing on effective models for increasing minority participation in marine
STEM. Other contributions include publishing on effective models for increasing
minority participation in marine STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In year three of the
project, MarSci-Lace will host a conference designed to share findings and best
practices, cultivate additional partnerships, provide opportunities for
collaboration and other informal exchanges of ideas. The external evaluation is
designed to establish the foundation for nationwide documentation of improved,
evidence-based STEM education in marine sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.