* 1922157
* Standard Grant: Wild Trout: Conservation, Restoration, and the Molecular Turn
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* David Havlick, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 208,988.00

Trout fishing contributes billions of dollars annually to local and regional
economies. In many cases, native trout are privileged even as wildlife managers
release non-native fish into freshwater ecosystems. Questions about the value of
native vs. non-native trout and where these belong are increasingly addressed at
the molecular scale using environmental DNA. This project examines the
intersection of science, values, and actions in native trout management in
Colorado and Montana. It addresses three key questions: 1) How are conceptions
of nativity constructed as related to trout management and policy? 2) How are
scientific advances in genetics reshaping key assumptions about trout
distribution, ecology, and ideas of nativity? 3) How are new forms of scientific
knowledge impacting fisheries management practices, policies, funding
priorities, and spatial claims to nature? The project advances understanding
about how we value species and genetic purity, how these can change over time,
and how scientific information is adopted as 'common sense' by institutions. It
also addresses the broader impacts of these changes, considering how scientific
and technological developments contribute to changing concentrations of power
and expertise, geographies of "healthy" and "impaired" ecosystems, and shifting
patterns of natural resource management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project combines multiple social science methods to examine how new genetic
methods for identifying native vs. invasive trout species matter for trout
management and policy. These methods include semi-structured interviews with key
stakeholders, angler creel surveys, content analyses of documents (including
environmental assessments, management plans, technical reports, media accounts,
and archives), and site visits to hatcheries and centers of fisheries science.
In combination, these convergent indicators enable systematic examination of
shifting understanding of what constitutes a native vs. non-native species, and
of the financial, ecological, and natural resource management implications of
this shift in perspective. Such understanding has significant practical
implications for understanding and managing trout as wildlife officials, fishing
guides, and anglers make decisions about what kinds of fisheries they promote or
pursue. The project also has broader impacts on teaching and learning by
supporting and the training of undergraduate and graduate students at an
institution that serves significant populations of minority, first-generation,
and Pell Grant-eligible students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.