* 1922428
* Rapid testosterone signaling receptor TRPM8 regulates sexual reward and satiety
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Eleonora Zakharian, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Testosterone is an essential steroid hormone that regulates the development of
the male reproductive system and dimorphic reproductive behaviors in all
vertebrates. Testosterone stimulates protein synthesis by regulating the
expression of genes; a time-dependent process that is completed within hours.
Testosterone also exerts rapid actions that take place within minutes. Rapid
signaling induced by testosterone affects numerous behavioral traits in animals,
including reproductive behavior, aggression, and fear. However, the molecular
mechanisms underlying rapid testosterone actions are poorly understood. A recent
discovery identified a novel testosterone receptor that resides on the cell
surface and is responsible for rapid testosterone actions. This project is
designed to investigate the intricate details of this rapid testosterone
signaling mechanism and reveal its role in reproductive and social behaviors in
rodents. Specifically, this project will assess how rapid signaling through the
novel testosterone receptor regulates steroid synthesis, sexually dimorphic
behaviors, and rewarding aspects of these behaviors. This project also offers a
broader impact on society and aims to enhance educational basis in understanding
organismal differences during development. It includes scientific training of
students at the post-graduate, graduate, and undergraduate levels, and
development of educational program among four participating universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is well known that genomic steroid receptors
regulate behaviors indirectly via their downstream molecular targets. A recent
study revealed that the Transient Receptor Potential ion channel of the
Melastatin group, TRPM8, serves as a direct ionotropic testosterone receptor.
Application of picomolar testosterone concentrations elicited TRPM8 channel
openings and evoked calcium influx in the cells. This finding ignited an
interest in whether TRPM8 directly regulates dimorphic behaviors. The mechanism
of this conceptually novel physiological role of TRPM8 in mediating
testosterone-dependent behaviors and sex dimorphism is the main objective of
this project. This application will use a combination of techniques, including
biochemical and biophysical analysis, imaging, electrophysiology, molecular
biology, fluorescent spectroscopy, and animal behavioral studies. Three specific
aims will: (a) determine the mechanism of TRPM8-exerted control of
steroidogenesis, (b) assess the mechanism of testosterone-TRPM8 pathway in
reward; and (c) reflect on the role of TRPM8 in brain development. The study
will open new avenues for understanding the role of TRPM8 in testosterone-driven
behaviors and sex differences. The research and educational programs will be
developed through post-graduate, graduate, and undergraduate training among four
collaborative universities. The results will be published in peer-reviewed
journals and presented at scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.