* 1922999
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Reference Grammar of a Typologically Diverse Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Marie-Caroline Pons, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2022
* USD 22,125.00

Language is the most unique characteristic of the human species. In order to
develop an understanding of human language, the discipline of linguistics
requires detailed information about languages that are significantly different
from the more familiar languages that were studied in the past. This project
will produce a grammatical description of Chepang, an endangered language spoken
in Central Nepal by around 48,000 people. Chepang belongs to the Sino-Tibetan
family, which also includes Chinese, Tibetan, and Burmese. Chepang shows
grammatical patterns which are very unusual in the world's languages. To take
one important example, Chepang sentences do not have the same kind of subjects
and objects as English or most other languages. In Chepang, verb agreement
follows a very complex "hierarchical" pattern in which any first or second
person argument of the clause, whether subject, object, or even the possessor of
a subject or object, governs agreement (so that in the Chepang translation of
the sentence "She scolded your child" the verb would agree with "you", not with
the subject of the sentence). Languages like this are very rare; they include a
few Native languages of North America, a few in South America, and a few Sino-
Tibetan languages of the Himalayas. It is important to document this kind of
unusual grammar in order to understand the full range of possible human
language. The project will bring U.S. resources into Nepal and do some capacity
building, acting like a type of "soft power" in a region where other foreign
countries are making extensive connections of their own. The analysis of the
language produced in the doctoral dissertation will serve as a foundation to
create pedagogical materials for future mother-tongue based multilingual
education programs. Broader impacts also include training and research
experience for the doctoral student who will carry out the fieldwork and write
the grammar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce a
reference grammar of Chepang [ISO 639-3:cdm], generating a detailed description
of the phonological and grammatical structures of the language, and a
transcribed set of spoken narratives. Doctoral student Marie-Caroline Pons will
work in close collaboration with members of different Chepang communities who
live in the plains and hills of Makawanpur district, to audio/video record,
transcribe, and translate a wide varieties of genres that will document the
language, history, and life of the Chepang people, including narratives,
ethnographical expository and procedural texts, as well as natural
conversational interactions. Chepang has a number of grammatical features which
are of great historical and theoretical interest, including the verbal agreement
system mentioned above. At present very few full descriptions of languages of
this kind exist, and there is debate in the field about how such languages work,
and how this pattern relates to what occurs in more familiar languages. Because
language documentation of this kind can only be carried out in a community of
speakers, recording conversations and narratives from elders who are fluent
speakers, the project requires extended research in Nepal. In addition to its
contributions to the science of linguistics, and to our knowledge of Asian
prehistory and Tibeto-Burman language change, the grammar which will be produced
will be of considerable value to the Chepang community in the preservation of
their language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.