* 1922898
* Data Science for All: Designing the Successful Inclusion of Data Science in High School Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Stephen Uzzo, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2020
* USD 99,998.00

The New York Hall of Science, in collaboration with the Columbia University Data
Science Institute/Northeast Big Data Innovation Hub and the San Diego
Supercomputer Center/West Big Data Innovation Hub, will run a workshop exploring
the potential for including authentic data science curricula and hands-on
projects in high school Computer Science (CS) courses. While there has been
great progress in bringing computer science to all learners through the national
CSforAll movement, attempts to introduce data science as part of that effort
have not yet been successful. These attempts have been limited by a lack of
robust curricula, resources, and teacher training and - perhaps more importantly
- by a lack of accessible tools and data sources. This workshop brings together
stakeholders to consider the extent to which these limitations either no longer
exist or can be overcome in order to answer the question: Is data science ready
for K-12?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2-day in-person workshop will address the
state of data science in high schools, focusing on the needs of students and
teachers. Participants will include high school students and their teachers,
CSforAll project developers, database and data science tool developers,
practicing data scientists and specialists in learning sciences, assessment and
evaluation, along with stakeholders from academia, industry, and state/local
government. The workshop will: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; -- discuss impediments to
the inclusion of data science and its applications in CS education at the high
school level; &lt;br/&gt; -- provide presentations and demonstrations prepared
by tool, database and software developers, practicing data scientists, and
&lt;br/&gt; learning researchers to describe validated practices; and&lt;br/&gt;
-- host a collaborative brainstorming session to identify appropriate data
science learning resources, tools and data sets, and a &lt;br/&gt; draft roadmap
for their application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The result will be reported in a
white paper that articulates a path forward. The paper will be made available on
the Northeast Big Data Innovation Hub data literacy website, and will form the
basis for deployment recommendations and a trajectory for infusing data science
into computer science at the high school level, and ultimately throughout formal
education in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.