* 1922687
* NRT: Addressing resiliency to climate-related hazards and disasters through data-informed decision making
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Puneet Srivastava, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,022,710.00

Climate-related natural hazards and disaster losses are escalating in the United
States and are often billion-dollar events (e.g. hurricanes, severe storms,
inland flooding, crop freezes, droughts and wildfires). This project is aimed at
training the next generation of scientists and leaders who can help build
resilient communities that are prepared for, can effectively respond to, and can
quickly recover from damaging hazard events. To better understand the
complexities of resilience planning and improve predictability, methodological
advancements that integrate multiple layers of information are critically
needed. Specifically, progress requires a better understanding of the factors
that impact resilience in natural, social, and built environmental systems; how
these systems interact; and the effectiveness of specific resilience-based
measures and communication strategies. In the absence of such advancements,
disparities in the resilience of communities will persist, and decision-making
efforts to reduce climate-related hazard impacts may be misguided. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Auburn University will
prepare a future workforce that will build climate-related disaster resilience
in the southeastern United States by training individuals at the MS and PhD
levels. Students will conduct research within an integrated and
multidisciplinary framework with the aim to better understand, predict, and
communicate the resilience of natural, social and built environmental systems.
The project anticipates training thirty-six (36) MS and PhD students, including
eighteen (18) funded trainees, across earth systems science, engineering,
geosciences, forestry and wildlife sciences, climate science, data science,
agriculture, and social science disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this NRT project is to address interdisciplinary research questions concerning
resilience to climate-related natural hazards and disasters, while training the
next generation of scientists and engineers to recognize the data-driven
decision-making needs of stakeholders and to effectively communicate scientific
information to stakeholder and public audiences. The project will employ a
transformative workshop-studio-internship training approach. Two-way exchanges
and direct interactions between stakeholders and trainees will occur, exposing
trainees to real-world problems and possible career pathways. In addition to
working on directed thesis research, trainees will take: (1) a course on
resilience and social vulnerability, (2) a course on science communication, (3)
a studio course that brings trainees and stakeholders together to address real-
world problems, (4) a summer internship working directly with stakeholders, and
(5) a series of workshops focused on structured decision-making approaches.
Trainees will acquire quantitative, qualitative, analytical, and collaborative
skillsets; will learn to infer the types and magnitudes of climate effects on
natural, human and built environmental systems across spatio-temporal scales;
and will understand the actionable science needs of relevant stakeholders.
Faculty will work with trainees to incorporate cutting-edge research into their
theses. Research will examine how to optimize community preparation, response,
and recovery from climate-hazard events that are common in the southeastern
United States with results potentially informing approaches in other geographic
regions with similar risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.