* 1922020
* DMREF - Material Intelligence for Accelerated Design of Biologically-Interfaced Single-Layered Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Mehmet Sarikaya, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 12/31/2019
* USD 78,527.00

Rapidly expanding machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI)
algorithms offer tools for Materials Science and Engineering (MSE),
unprecedented just a few of years ago. Even the most advanced traditional tools
today (microfluidics, advanced modeling, and supercomputers) cannot keep up with
the opportunities offered by data intensive ML/AI tools. The main barrier to
achieve the goals laid out in the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) strategic
plan is the difficulty to access clean, curated, comprehensive, meaningful, and
most of all, standardized data that can be used in predictive design and
modeling of engineered systems, especially true in highly complex and dynamic
interfaces between biology and materials science. The ability to deploy these
powerful algorithms in domain sciences has remained limited due to the sheer
number of dimensions of the parameter space and enormous variability in the
data. With the goal of overcoming the current barriers, this project aims to
develop a modular software framework, dubbed Materials Intelligence (Mat-I)
towards accelerating discovery and innovation in MSE. By exploiting Mat-I
technology, the scientific community has the high likelihood of accelerating
research, and the collaborating industry (Microsoft, Amazon, Google, NVIDIA,
Real Networks, Proctor and Gamble, Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
and Intel) will have the crucial tools to develop materials and methods with
tailored bio-nano interfaces at the critical intersection of biology, solid-
state systems, and informatics in designing devices such as bionanosensors for
cancer diagnostics, biomolecular fuel cells for energy harvesting, and
neuromorphic networks towards brain-like computers. The project will educate the
next generation of innovative scientists, undergraduates, PhDs, and post-
doctoral researchers, bolstering the traditional competitive edge of the US at
the world stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aim of the convergence
science team, with expertise in genomics, computer science, physics, and
materials science and engineering, is to construct a modular Mat-I software
framework towards accelerating discovery and innovation. The research will
generate and make accessible comprehensive maps among the input space of
structures (peptides and single atomic layer solids, the smallest viable
entities in biology and physical sciences, respectively) to the output target
space of physical properties under a wide range of experimental conditions. The
goal is to learn correlations among the three parameters such that, given the
sequence/structure representations and experimental conditions, one can then
predict the output physical properties, which may be adapted to complex
engineered solutions. The proposed approach will employ, enhance, and develop
specific mathematical, statistical, and information approaches for discovery in
materials engineering that will combine physical, information, and biosciences.
Given a set of measurements, the team will apply ML/AI to make inferences and
learn a model of the true underlying process and, using these inferences and
quantifications of uncertainty, the team will devise test-beds to maximize the
information gained with respect to the model. By collecting data and making
correlations in an iterative loop, the pace of discovery will be accelerated in
closing the knowledge gaps faster than standard methods. The research will use
model selection, robust statistics, and adaptive learning, and prototype
validation in both static and dynamic representations of bio-nano interfaces.
The project will establish foundational rules of a wide range of key wetware
devices for technology and medicine through neural network formation by
incorporating biology with solid-state devices of the future, the ultimate goal
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.