* 1922143
* A Case Study of the Cross-disciplinary Use of Mathematical Constructs in Computational Biology as Tool Migration
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Chia-Hua Lin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 131,452.00

This award supports a postdoctoral researcher in a project that studies the
mechanism of tool migration in science; that is, the novel use by one discipline
of established mathematical constructs that were first developed and used by a
different discipline. Specifically, the project will focus on computational
biology, a subfield of biology that applies mathematical models from
neuroscience to study information processing in non-neural systems. The
overarching goal of the project is to gain a better understanding of a mechanism
that promotes smooth and productive interdisciplinary exchange, an important
goal of science policy. The researcher plans to disseminate the results of her
project to philosophers of science and to biological and cognitive scientists.
She also plans to disseminate her results to undergraduates and the interested
pubic by developing and delivering a public lecture on the concept of tool
migration. The overarching goal of her project is to inspire students and to
encourage working scientists to think both creatively and more critically about
the tools that have been (or could be) used in their respective
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a research project to study how
interdisciplinary science came about in the context of computational biology.
The project will address three specific research questions: What is the role of
analogical reasoning in scientific practice? Does the same theory applied in
multiple disciplines (such as the theory of computation in neuroscience and in
biology) produce the same type of explanation in those disciplines? Finally, how
do scientists transfer or integrate disciplinary knowledge by adopting research
tools across disciplines? To address these questions, the postdoc will be
embedded in a computational lab in order to gain insights that will facilitate
her analysis of the research tools described in computational biology
publications (using the framework of tool migration that she developed in her
doctoral dissertation work on migrations of tools developed in game theory).
Results of this research project will be disseminated in multiple ways: by
organizing an interdisciplinary conference symposium on the topic of unification
of explanation, presenting at two philosophy conferences on the topics of
analogical reasoning and the cross-disciplinary knowledge transfer, publishing
one scientific paper and two philosophical papers in peer-reviewed journals, and
delivering public lectures to undergraduate students, practicing scientists, and
interested individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.