* 1922528
* Porosity Structure and Earthquake Rupture Dynamics at the GOFAR Fracture Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Robert Evans, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,529,089.00

Across the seafloor, faults occur at the edges of tectonic plates where the
plates slide laterally past each other. These features are called oceanic
transform faults and they have a similarity to hazardous faults on land, such as
the San Andreas fault in California. But because the seafloor has a far simpler
geology than land the ocean settings are ideal natural laboratories to study
some of the important processes occurring throughout the earthquake cycle.
Furthermore, scientists have observed that, at transforms, large earthquake
activity occurs in fairly regular cycles with repeat times of 5-6 years,
allowing experiments to be planned that capture the faults as they experience an
earthquake sequence. The understanding that comes from such studies can further
the advancement of earthquake prediction. The repeating cycles of earthquakes at
one such oceanic transform fault, the Gofar in the east Pacific, was first
observed through deployments of seismometers - instruments which measure the
motion of the seafloor - around the fault. One factor thought to be important
for earthquake generation is the amount of seawater that is present in the top
several kilometers of seafloor. Yet, there is little data on fluid distributions
within active faults. This experiment will provide such data in the well-studied
Gofar region by measuring the ability of the seafloor to conduct electrical
current, a property that is directly linked to the amount of seawater in the
seafloor. Instruments will be deployed on the seafloor that measure electric and
magnetic fields. Signals from a transmitter of electromagnetic energy towed
behind the research vessel will be recorded by the seafloor instruments. By
surveying different parts of the fault system that behave differently when
earthquakes occur, it will be possible to understand better the different
properties of the fault and how these relate to seismicity. Early career
participants will be invited on the expedition. The project supports the
training of graduate students and a postdoctoral
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanic transform faults (RTFS)
offer a natural laboratory for understanding key processes occurring throughout
the earthquake cycle, and an outstanding opportunity to further the advancement
of earthquake prediction. The role of fluids in fault processes has been
hypothesized, but there is surprisingly little data available on fluid
distributions within active fault networks. This experiment would provide such
data in a well constrained framework of seismicity studies. A primary reason for
studying RTF settings is the relatively predictable cycle of seismicity
observed, with quasi-periodicities on the order of 5-6 years. To that end,
deployments of ocean bottom seismograph (OBS) instrumentation captured foreshock
activity building up to a large M6.0 event across the Gofar RTF in the east
Pacific. Another deployment of OBS instruments is planned for the Gofar,
starting in late 2019 through 2021, with the aim of capturing the end of two
current seismic cycles and the goal of understanding why these faults are so
predictable. This experiment will focus on areas with different levels and types
of seismicity. Within the Gofar transform is a region that repeatedly inhibits
rupture propagation and that primarily fails aseismically. Seismic velocities
are significantly different in the seismic rupture region and in the rupture
barrier. Pull-apart conditions might allow deep seawater penetration into the
fault resulting in persistently high porosity and fluid pore pressures at depth.
The net result of these fluids is to promote dilatancy-strengthening of the
fault which has been observed to inhibit dynamic deformation. A series of CSEM
profiles at different parts of the Gofar system will directly measure seafloor
electrical resistivity, a property most closely related to porosity of the
crust. The experiment will therefore map porosity variations throughout the
system, particularly in the damage zone of primary seismicity and within the
area that has been seen to repeatedly inhibit rupture propagation, allowing us
to directly test the role of fluids in the seismic
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.