* 1922930
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR: Why is the High-Latitude Ionosphere More Variable in January than in July?
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Alex Chartier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 12/31/2022
* USD 192,100.00

With humanity continuing to explore last frontiers of the new Arctic and
Antarctic, polar nations invest heavily in improving navigation satellite
coverage of this region. In this context, the ionized portion of the upper
atmosphere (ionosphere) at polar latitudes represents an important piece of the
puzzle, since it is the medium through which the satellite radio signal travels
and since it is known to contain strong disturbances. This award provides
support for a comprehensive investigation into unexpected plasma density
enhancements at polar latitudes called sporadic-F. The focus of the
investigation is on the Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) observations
of sporadic-F. Navigation satellites often experience degradation of radio
signal quality and sporadic F has been demonstrated to be one of the leading
causes. Opening of Arctic to shipping traffic as the ice cap melts and an ever-
increasing number of transpolar flights make this investigation particularly
timely due to its potential to characterize occurrence and identify mechanisms
for GNSS signal loss. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This investigation will validate a
recent set of satellite observations that fly in the face of conventional wisdom
and past expectations based on decades of northern hemisphere data analysis. The
validation will utilize ground-based observations in both hemispheres and first-
principles modeling. It is well-known that sporadic-F is controlled by
magnetospheric forcings (convection and precipitation), and it has been
hypothesized that thermospheric variations may also be important. Therefore, new
insights into the characteristics of those systems (magnetosphere and
thermosphere) are expected. To aid in mapping and understanding dynamic high-
latitude plasma flows, the state-of-the-art Lagrangian coherent structure
analysis code will be used and developed. This work has the potential to
transform the understanding of a phenomenon that has been the subject of
extensive study since its discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.