* 1922642
* NRT:  Plants-3D (Discover, Design and Deploy):  Training Diverse Graduate Student Cohorts in Plant Synthetic Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* James Burnette, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

Global food security is among the greatest challenges of the 21st century.
Meeting the nutritional needs of 9 billion people by 2050 will require
significant increases in crop productivity, a reduction in pest and pathogen
susceptibility, and enhanced resistance to drought, salinity, flooding,
temperature extremes and nutrient deficiency. Plants provide food, fiber and
biomolecules used in medicine and a myriad of industries. The critical need to
improve the environmental resilience of plants and the rapid growth of the
plant-based chemical industry has placed high demands on workforce availability
and training. Remarkably, only 3% of the biotechnology workforce is Hispanic or
African-American. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award to the University of California Riverside will increase the diversity and
capacity of the nation's workforce in agricultural biotechnology by building
upon the institution's effective model for minority and first-generation
undergraduate education in STEM. The Plants3D (Discover, Design, Deploy) project
will provide interdisciplinary training in plant science and engineering. The
project anticipates training over fifty (50) MS and PhD students, including
twenty-eight (28) funded trainees who will be cross-trained in plant science and
environmental and chemical engineering. These trainees will be prepared for
agricultural biotechnology careers in industry, academia and government
agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PLANTS3D NRT project will undertake
interdisciplinary research and training to address plant science challenges
related to food security and human health and to foster entrepreneurial skills.
It will leverage genomic resources and the biological and engineering tools of
synthetic biology to understand plant stress sensing and protective responses,
plant-microbe interactions, and to increase production of high-value
phytochemicals. The PLANTS3D NRT project will train graduate students to: (i)
discover pathways that plants use to sense and respond to abiotic and biotic
signals or produce valuable natural products; (ii) design novel signaling
components that regulate stress tolerance or synthetic biology tools to
efficiently transform and express optimized plant metabolic pathways; and (iii)
deploy engineered stress tolerance pathways in crops or biosynthetic pathways
that produce valuable metabolites in microbial hosts. PLANTS3D unites faculty
experts in plant biology, synthetic biology and engineering to achieve these
goals. Students will be trained in the transdisciplinary integration of
knowledge and tools to create solutions and entrepreneurialism as teams to
accelerate the translation of their discoveries to practical applications.
Trainees will also have opportunities to intern with a variety of agricultural,
biotechnology or pharmaceutical firms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.