* 1922563
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Linguistic Analysis of Grammatical Constructions in Discourse about Civic and Economic Issues
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Emiliana Cruz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 01/31/2021
* USD 19,308.00

The project will address the complex ways in which social, civic, economic, and
linguistic factors interact to provoke or prevent the accelerated process of
language shift of indigenous languages. Simultaneously, it will document a
specialized genre. Growing evidence shows that more specialized genres and
knowledge in languages are vulnerable to attrition. Through an analysis of
particular linguistic elements, the project will provide greater detail about an
endangered language that displays a highly complex morphological system. Because
the topic is limited to a particular kind of specialized speech (the matters of
state), the analysis will also expand knowledge about the role of
sociolinguistic and other factors in the linguistic shift, including linguistic
ideologies about who should speak a language, how and where it should be spoken.
The focus will be on Nahuatl (ISO 639-3 NHE), a Uto-Aztecan language possessing
a complex morphology of prefixes and suffixes that interacts with the discursive
content of speech. This complex morphology (quite different than English
morphology, for example) creates a testing bed for how specialized genres
interact with specific aspects of a language, here extensive suffixing and
prefixing processes, as well as how different speakers use the same grammatical
elements in different ways. Project activities include the development of
pedagogical materials, a workshop for elementary school teachers in the village,
and the training of two native speakers in linguistic documentation
methodologies. Broader impacts include the training of a doctoral student, a
public repository of audio and video recordings and transcriptions archived at
the University of Texas, Austin's AILLA repository, and the strengthening of
collaborations between Mexican and American scholars.

The project will expand knowledge about the linguistic and extra-linguistic
factors that influence the maintenance or the shift of one language to another.
The project will collect video and audio recordings of the oratory taking place
in assemblies made up by women-only, men-only, and mixed groups from Nahua
Mexican society to identify rhetorical strategies such as persuasion. This
language is spoken in various parts of Mexico; this project will specifically
document the variety located on the east-central side of the country. Usage will
be analyzed for speaker variation as pertains to particular grammatical
elements, as well as more "poetic" kinds of constructions such as metaphor,
alliteration, parallelism, anaphora, and metonymy. Through the analyses of
grammatical constructions in these civic- and economic-oriented genres, the CoPI
will investigate how grammatical constructions and linguistic strategies used in
governmental contexts are used by language users to accomplish social goals
during the course of speeches on policy and civic topics. An analysis of the
markers for linguistic categories like direction or future, frequently found in
this specialized genre, will lead to a better understanding of their grammatical
properties as well as how speakers of Nahuatl use these structures for different
purposes. The researcher will use linguistic ethnography as the central
methodology, supplemented by in-depth interviews. Ethnography is a methodology
that includes linguistic investigation, participant observation, and recording
of spontaneous speaking interactions. The results will provide insights not only
for linguistics but also for sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology, and
anthropology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.