* 1922398
* UTD SFS Renewal: Enriching Technical Program Offerings for SFS Scholarship Program at UTD
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Shuang Hao, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 06/30/2025
* USD 3,451,035.00

The University of Texas at Dallas (UTD), a National Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense Education, Cyber Security Research and Cyber
Operations, will continue its participation in the CyberCorps: Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program to prepare highly qualified cybersecurity professionals
for entry into the government workforce. The academic program is designed to
equip students with highly technical skills in cyber security with options to
get exposure to other related fields including data science, emerging network
technologies, and cyber security policy and management. Beyond their academic
degree in a graduate level program, UTD SFS scholars are involved in government
sponsored research projects and complete numerous extra-curricular education
activities to gain necessary hands on skills and expertise in their focus areas
in cyber security to better prepare themselves for their future government jobs.
The project also includes a significant outreach component to introduce
fundamental cyber security knowledge at various levels to the general student
population on UTD campus, students from other colleges and universities in the
state of Texas, local K-12 institutions focusing mainly on high school students
and high school CS teachers. The project team members are actively involved in
national scale outreach efforts via their involvement in Women in Cyber Security
(WiCyS) and Women in Data Science (WiDS) groups and their related annual
conference events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of this project include
(1) training 24 highly qualified students in a graduate level degree programs to
become domain experts in cyber security; (2) providing necessary mentoring and
support to successfully place them into qualified government cyber security
positions; (3) introducing the following three new thrusts in cyber security
education program based on the PIs research expertise: (i) Trustworthy Machine
Learning, (ii) Advanced Network Security, and (iii) Cyber Security Policy and
Risk; and (4) continuing with the recent success in diversity by recruiting
female and minority students into the SFS program. UTD SFS scholars are involved
in government sponsored research projects and complete numerous extra-curricular
education activities to gain necessary hands on skills and expertise in their
focus areas in cyber security to better prepare themselves for their future
government jobs. SFS scholars are also required to involve in cyber security
outreach activities including developing and delivering workshops on fundamental
cyber security topics and organizing a cyber security competition in UTD's Texas
Cyber Security Awareness (TexSAW) event that is annually offered to students at
colleges and universities in Texas. The overall program is expected to equip the
students with necessary knowledge and experiences to become successful in their
future employment in cyber security domain in the Government and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.