* 1922516
* HDR DSC: Engaging Undergraduates in Data and Decisions Research at the Engineering/Biology Interface
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eddie Red, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,186,084.00

Recent studies have documented the overall failure of undergraduate programs to
prepare students for the complex, professional lives that lie ahead for them.
This project addresses a number of these shortfalls, training students to
navigate the more complex and uncertain professional terrain associated with
interdisciplinary scholarship. The project will launch a unique data sciences
program at Virginia Tech (coordinating organization), Morehouse College (HBCU
for men, Georgia, implementing organization), Bennett College (HBCU for women,
North Carolina, implementing organization), and Hampden-Sydney College (all-male
college, Virginia, implementing organization). Our ultimate goal is to provide
interdisciplinary education and research opportunities in data and decision
science for undergraduate students who are experts in a core discipline of
engineering or biology, but who are also proficient in the alternate discipline.
Undergraduates from biology and engineering will take classes and conduct
research in data science at the engineering/biology interface. A new
collaborative, multi-university capstone course "Data and Decisions at the
Engineering/Biology Interface" will be launched simultaneously at all four
universities. This new course will be driven by the needs of stakeholders from
agriculture, conservation, search and rescue, water quality, transportation in
inclement weather, and global health and emergency
relief.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will provide unique research
opportunities in data and decision science for at least 75 students over 3
years, with about half coming from the two HBCUs. Multi-university student teams
(comprised of biologists and engineers) will work together to identify broad
social, global, economic, cultural and technical needs/constraints, and
determine ways in which their complementary technical skills contribute to
addressing complex data science grand challenges at the engineering/biology
interface. The teams will submit their data science challenge ideas using
sensor-based assets and computational-based assets, competing for slots to
participate in a coordinated field campaign in which they will collect data, and
learn to make decisions from these data. Team projects will be developed in
response to stakeholder needs, using sensor assets available from the
participating universities and stakeholders. Students will become well-grounded
in the language and tools of computational modeling and data analytics,
including machine learning, data-driven discovery of equations and causality,
clustering, and neural networks. Students will learn to communicate effectively
with fellow students, policymakers, and the public. Following their data
sciences experiences, the students are expected to: (1) be conversant with data
science research in a second discipline, open to its methods, culture, and
perspectives; (2) be able to integrate the second discipline into sustainable
new data science research; and (3) conduct interdisciplinary data science
research with team members from other fields. The program will provide insights
into the attitudes of students towards interdisciplinary data science research,
and explore how conceptions of collaboration and career path are affected by
their participation in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's Harnessing the
Data Revolution Data Science Corps program focuses on building capacity for
harnessing the data revolution at the local, state, national, and international
levels to help unleash the power of data in the service of science and society.
Projects in this program are being jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the
Data Revolution Big Idea; the Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering, Division of Information and Intelligent Systems; the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education; the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Division of
Mathematical Sciences; and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences, Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.