* 1922658
* NRT-HDR: FUTURE Foundations, Translation, and Responsibility for Data Science Impact
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Julia Stoyanovich, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

Rapid advances in computational speed, data availability, and the development of
novel data analysis methods have birthed a new field: data science. This new
field requires rigorously trained, cross-disciplinary, and ethically responsible
data scientists. Producing researchers who are "data science natives" requires
the development of an inclusive, interdisciplinary ecosystem supported by
coursework and professional development activities to foster education and
training. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
the Center for Data Science at New York University will build such an
environment entitled FUTURE. This project anticipates training fifty (50) PhD
students, including twenty (20) funded trainees, from data science and other
disciplines such as mathematics, computer science, physics, neuroscience, health
sciences, and psychology. An additional 145 MS or PhD students will engage in
select courses and professional development opportunities offered through the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traineeship will fill a significant gap by
rigorously training data scientists who (1) develop methodology and harness
statistical tools to find answers to questions that transcend the boundaries of
traditional academic disciplines; (2) effectively communicate to extract crisp
questions from big, heterogeneous, uncertain data; (3) translate fundamental
research insights into data science practice in the sciences, medicine,
industry, and government; and (4) are aware of the ethical implications of their
work. These objectives will be achieved by a combination of an innovative core
curriculum, a novel data assistantship mechanism that provides training of
skills transfer through rotations and internships, and communication and
entrepreneurship modules. In addition, trainees will address fundamental
research questions in mathematical and statistical aspects of data science,
machine learning, domain applications, and ethical data use. The program will
create a sustainable model of societal impact and will produce teaching
materials and methodologies for incorporating translation and responsibility
into data science curricula. FUTURE will build on the Center for Data Science
track record of attracting and retaining a diverse cohort of graduate students
and will create an interdisciplinary graduate traineeship that includes
diversity of thought by design, by supporting a multitude of methodologies,
application domains, and avenues for impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.