* 1922916
* UNOLS Office 2019-2023
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Doug Russell, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kandace Binkley
* 04/30/2024
* USD 6,631,784.00

The University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) is a consortium
of sixty-six academic institutions with research and educational programs in the
ocean sciences and dedication to the major shared-use facilities that support
these programs. UNOLS Infrastructure is composed of a myriad of assets including
ships and deep submergence vehichles, aircraft, and major instrumentation.
Institutions or federal agencies own these facilities and it is through the
UNOLS system that the community has access to them. Support for the UNOLS Office
is traditionally provided by six Federal Agencies: National Science
Foundation/Division of Ocean Sciences and Division of Polar Programs, Department
of the Navy/Office of Naval Research (ONR), National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA), Department of the Interior/U.S. Geological Survey (USGS),
Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM) and the U.S. Coast Guard
(USCG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is for the University Washington to
host the UNOLS Office for an initial term of five years from 2019 to 2023. Under
the guidance and leadership of the UNOLS Office, much of the work is done
through the volunteers from the scientific community who serve on standing
committees. The UNOLS organization, founded in 1971, has played an important
role in coordinating and improving the operations of the nation?s Academic
Research Fleet. One of the important focus areas for UNOLS is to coordinate and
schedule these national assets, to plan for the future, and to be able to
identify and meet the scientific infrastructure requirements of the U.S.
oceanographic research scientists, students and technicians. This enables the
United States to make advances in science, education, and the public awareness
of our natural environment. One of the critical functions that the UNOLS Office
performs, through broad community involvement, is to assist in prioritizing the
resources within the available budgets to ensure the advancement of the field of
oceanography. It is through the UNOLS efforts that the office is able to assist
the National Science Foundation and other federal agencies with providing
community feedback and input on the future direction of oceanographic research
in the United States. Through the various UNOLS meetings, workshops, reports,
studies, and daily communication, UNOLS provides a conduit for open dialog
between the agencies supporting this research and the scientific community being
served. The NSF's mission to "promote the progress of science; to advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure the national defense" are
all aided by the UNOLS Office's ability to bring together the scientific minds
to identify what are the science questions that need to be answered, and then to
provide the safe platforms to conduct this important
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.