* 1922091
* Combinatorial and Algebraic Aspects of Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Christopher Leininger, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides partial support to U.S. based participants at a conference
titled "Combinatorial and Algebraic Aspects of Geometric Structures" which will
be held July 22 through July 26, 2019 at Chiang Mai University, in Chiang Mai,
Thailand. This conference aims to build on existing collaborations between
researchers at the University of Illinois, Chiang Mai University, National
University of Singapore, and the University of Luxembourg, and more broadly from
Europe, Asia, and North America. The conference will include general research
talks and mini-course lectures aimed at graduate students and postdocs, as well
as five-minute lightning talks by graduate students and postdocs, providing them
an opportunity to share their research and spark conversations with other
participants. The venue will provide the opportunity for US researchers to make
new connections with their counterparts from European and Asian countries, in
particular those from the latter countries for whom it may not be feasible to
travel internationally.

The theme of the conference, as the title suggests, is quite broad and involves
topics such as geometric structures on manifolds, including hyperbolic and flat
structures on surfaces, exotic geometric structures arising from representations
into other Lie groups, and coarse geometric structures arising from geometric
group theory. The speakers are chosen to represent a coherent mix of topics from
this list, to maximize the potential for new collaborations and cross-
fertilization of areas. For example, Maloni's research is in both hyperbolic and
mixed-signature geometric structures meshes very well with Bridgeman and
Canary's work on higher Teichmueller theory as well as hyperbolic geometry.
Existing collaborations between the PI and researchers from Chiang Mai,
Thailand, Singapore, and Luxembourg, as well as collaborations between
researchers from those locations, will also provide a starting point for new
collaborations. Additional details about the conference can be found on the
conference website: http://www.math.science.cmu.ac.th/lst/index.php

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.