* 1922169
* Renewal: Preparing Crosscutting Cybersecurity Scholars
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Rajendra Raj, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 4,208,502.00

Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) will build on its previous successful
participation in the CyberCorps(R) Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to
prepare additional highly qualified cybersecurity professionals to fill the
talent gap in the government workforce. Among them will be 21 exceptional
students who will graduate with a double degree: a BS degree in computer
science, computing security, or software engineering, along with an accelerated
MS degree in computing security. Reflecting RIT's new status as a National
Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Research and a doctoral-granting
institution under the Carnegie Classification, an additional three doctoral
scholars will graduate from the RIT's nationally ranked Ph.D. program in
computing and contribute to the future demands of the nation's cybersecurity
workforce. All of these 24 graduate students will be prepared to take on
leadership roles with the OPM-approved employers upon graduation, and serve to
secure, protect, and improve the nation's cyberinfrastructure. With their
crosscutting breadth of knowledge and experiences, these advanced SFS graduates
will be ready to adapt dynamically to ongoing cybersecurity challenges at
various federal executive agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFS program will
be housed in RIT's B. Thomas Golisano College of Computing and Information
Sciences, one of the largest computing colleges in the nation. The faculty
mentors and the SFS scholars come from three computing departments within the
college: computer science, software engineering, and computing security. As each
department focuses on different aspects of cybersecurity, the scholars will
benefit from the cohort experiences providing breadth and depth of cybersecurity
knowledge and experiences. The SFS program at RIT thus will continue to produce
cutting-edge scholars with leadership experiences in cybersecurity, and the
abilities to advance the cybersecurity field. Scholarly contributions made by
the SFS scholars and their mentors will be disseminated at cybersecurity
conferences. As part of their outreach efforts in cybersecurity, the SFS
scholars will also work with local schools with a large population of
underrepresented groups in computing and cybersecurity. The scholars will also
help to broaden female participation in cybersecurity by partnering with the
college's active Women in Computing group, as well as partnering with the annual
Women in Cybersecurity and the Grace Hopper Celebration
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.