* 1922165
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: The Search for Novel Superconductors in Moire Flat Bands
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Ke Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 875,000.00

Non-technical Description: This project will investigate novel unconventional
superconductors based on atomically thin materials stacked with a twisted angle
between them. When two atomic layers with similar atomic structure meet each
other, a larger scale quasi periodic structure called a moire pattern forms.
Electronic structure of these interfacial structure can be engineered by
adjusting the twisting angle. When the electron energy distribution is narrow,
strong correlation between them appear, which can in turn drive the system to be
a dissipationless superconducting state. Experimental and theoretical research,
in conjunction with the predictive powers of advanced computational methods,
will be developed to achieve a better understanding of the physical mechanisms
at work and will contribute to the ability to design superconducting materials
with higher transition temperatures. The project will provide fundamental
understanding of the materials properties and phenomena that underpin
superconducting electronic device applications in low energy electronics,
quantum sensing, and more importantly quantum computing applications. A new
generation of scientists will be trained who are deeply involved in both
experimental and theoretical/modeling research with complimentary
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The moire heterostructure
engineering of 2-dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) materials leads to quantum
heterostructures. Utilizing recently demonstrated twisted vdW heteroepitaxy, the
investigators will construct vdW homo/hetero structures to realize correlated
electronic states that appear in the moire flat bands. With inputs from theory
and mathematical modeling of multiscale electronic structure, the project will
experimentally investigate multilayer 2D superconducting systems with unusual
properties, such as gate tunable transition temperature and non-conventional
pairing symmetries. Various material platforms will be explored including
twisted double bilayer graphene, twisted trilayer graphene and twisted homo- and
hetetro-structures based on transition metal dichalcogenides. Theoretical
guidance will be an indispensable part of this study since there are a variety
of choices for material platforms and twist angle which cannot be covered by
experiment alone without targeted modeling guide. Unconventional
superconductivity can also lead into the development and discovery of
topological superconductors, which can be utilized for quantum computing. The
qubits realized in topological superconducting systems hold promise for fault-
tolerant quantum computation, thanks to the topological nature of the underlying
quantum states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.