* 1922312
* DMREF: Collaborative research: Data driven discovery of synthesis pathways and distinguishing electronic phenomena of 1D van der Waals bonded solids
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Evan Reed, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 560,000.00

Non-technical Description: This project explores a recently discovered class of
more than 400 materials that form one-dimensional wires of bonded atoms
surrounded by a tubular, two-dimensional van der Waals gap avoiding any strong
atomic bonds between wires. A combination of predictive computational
techniques, chemical preparation, and physical characterization will be employed
to identify a spectrum of scientifically and technologically important
properties of these materials with a focus on electrical transport properties,
mechanical response and stability, and phase transformations. This project aims
to leverage a spectrum of data mining, machine learning, and materials property
calculation techniques to accelerate the identification of the most promising
subset of these 400 materials for synthesis and testing. The PIs will train the
next generation of scientists and engineers by providing interdisciplinary
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students with attention
given to attracting those from underrepresented groups. Emphasis will be placed
on training with respect to computationally-led and data-drive approaches to
materials research. Specifically, undergraduate students will develop Java-based
software for materials science and graduate students will host a podcast aimed
at disseminating developments in data-driven computational
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Bulk crystals of graphite
and other materials composed of 2-dimensional van der Waals (vdW) layers exhibit
numerous important properties in the bulk that are preserved as the material is
thinned to atomic thickness, e.g. the high electrical conductivity of graphene.
This distinguishes them from native bulk materials that do not exhibit such vdW
layered structure, such as copper, whose properties change dramatically as it is
thinned below a few atomic layers. Unlike 2D layered materials, the
1-dimensional vdW materials of this project have received relatively little
research attention, but are likely to exhibit many of the useful properties of
their 2D counterparts. One hypothesis is that the presence of vdW gaps and the
absence of dangling bonds and large single crystal domains inhibits carrier
scattering at the surface of such materials and, thus, allows for electronic
transport at a resistivity almost independent of wire cross section. Recent
synthesis work by the project participants has revealed excellent transport
properties of such materials when thinned to nanoscale cross sections, rivaling
the favorable characteristics of the native bulk form of copper, with potential
applications in the miniaturization of electronic devices. Another hypothesis is
that these materials may be more likely to exhibit electronic or structural
phase changes that can be engineered for low power electronic memories and other
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.