* 1922648
* Undergraduate Biology Education Research Gordon Research Conference Proposal: Achieving Widespread Improvement in Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Debra Pires, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,700.00

The Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Undergraduate Biology Education Research
(UBER) will allow a critical mass of scholars who study how improvements in
undergraduate biology education can be scaled to assemble. The five-day
conference will provide opportunities for thought leaders in the UBER community
to gather in an environment that encourages collaborative, face-to-face
conversations about the future of the field and how the community can address
emerging opportunities, challenges, and important
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC will foster the next generation of ideas
for accelerating biology education research, informing national priorities, and
promoting the scaling of evidence-based practices. To meet these goals, this
important national gathering aims to: 1) expose a diverse assemblage of
attendees to state-of-the-art approaches for teaching biology; 2) engender deep
discussions about contemporary issues that will improve undergraduate biology
research; and, 3) continue the development of a common language and conceptual
understanding of issues related to scaling implementation of evidence-based
practices in undergraduate biology education. The conference will facilitate the
synthesis of research findings and the formation of new collaborations and
research strands that will lead to improved biology learning for hundreds of
thousands of students enrolled in diverse biology programs. The PI and advisory
committee will invite participants who have recently taken on leadership
positions within the higher educational system and future biology education
researchers. The latter will participate in the affiliated Graduate Research
Seminar, a two-day pre-meeting focused on mentoring and supporting graduate
students and post-docs who represent the next generation of biology education
research professionals. The collective efforts of conference attendees will help
sustain and improve undergraduate biology education well into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.