* 1922543
* Understanding the evolution of dimorphic flowers in maize through combined changes in transcriptional dynamics, hormone levels and genetic networks
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Steven Klein
* 07/31/2022
* USD 370,048.00

The biological rules that govern floral development are paramount, given that
reproduction is critical to evolutionary success. Although most flowering plants
produce only perfect flowers (those with both male and female structures),
roughly 30% of species produce imperfect flowers, which have with either male
(staminate) or female (carpellate) flowers. Imperfect flowers are associated
with wind-pollination and increased outcrossing. Although other agriculturally
domesticated plants in the grasses (ex. rice, wheat, millet, sorghum) produce
perfect flowers, maize forms separate, staminate and carpellate inflorescences
on the same plant. Separate male and female inflorescences have allowed plant
breeding programs to generate elite, adapted maize varieties with highly
productive female inflorescences and F1 hybrids. This research grant will employ
multiple levels of organization to investigate floral characteristics in maize
by 1) comparing the conservation of transcriptional dynamics during the
development of staminate and carpellate inflorescences in maize with the perfect
inflorescences of the closely related species, sorghum, 2) characterizing new
floral mutants through analysis of hormone levels and molecular biology, 3)
identifying candidate genes involved in the development of perfect and imperfect
flowers by integrating developmental transcriptomics with hormone-responsive
genetic pathways. Knowledge gained from the work will provide important insight
into how reproductive structures are generated in cereal species through the
coordinated activity of genes, hormones, and developmental evolutionary
processes and will allow one to predict which genes can be used for manipulating
floral dimorphism in other crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
analysis of maize mutants with altered male and female floral characteristics,
it appears that at least three hormones, JA, GA, and BR, are necessary for
specification of staminate and carpellate flowers in maize, often regulating
pistil abortion in male flowers. In Aim 1, a transcriptional ontogeny of
developing maize ears will be compared to the ontogeny of developing tassels and
sorghum panicles. Unique male and female programs will be identified. In Aim 2,
two new mutants, fun and Te2, will be analyzed. They are different than
previously described inflorescence mutants and may provide new clues to the
evolution of separate male and female inflorescences. The tassels of both have a
more female architecture than the JA, BR or microRNA tasselseed mutants. They do
not encode enzymes in hormone pathways or directly involve microRNAs. FUN is a
nuclear localized protein of unknown function. TE2 is an ARF transcription
factor. By identifying the interacting partners of FUN and the downstream
targets of TE2, the network of inflorescence determination factors will be
expanded. The goal of Aim 3 is to combine the approaches of Aims 1 and 2
alongside other public datasets to formulate rules of life that coordinate the
evolution of imperfect flowers. Although research expects multiple evolutionary
origins of imperfect flowers, known developmental mechanisms regulating organ
abortion are limited and thus common specification genetic networks may be
possible. With that in mind, the rules of rule that coordinate floral dimorphism
in maize may apply to other grasses and angiosperms in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.