* 1922857
* Instructive scaffolds capable of simultaneously regenerating multiple periodontal structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/17/2018,07/31/2021
* Jianjun Guan, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 307,141.00

Non-Technical Summary:

Scaffolds have been widely used for tissue regeneration. Yet it remains
challenging to design scaffolds that simultaneously induce endogenous
regeneration of multiple tissues with inherently low regenerative potential,
such as periodontal tissues and musculoskeletal tissues. Current scaffolds lack
the capability to concurrently recruit different cell types to the diseased
sites and promoting them to develop into tissues. This project will design
scaffolds that address this current challenge. The scaffolds will be tested
using periodontal cells as model cells. The proposed studies will provide a
fundamental understanding of the effects of scaffold physical and biological
properties on the recruitment of several cell types at the same time, and
directing them to regenerate into corresponding tissues. The outcomes of this
project will guide the development of scaffolds for simultaneous regeneration of
multiple tissue structures. The proposed research is integrated with a
multifaceted education and outreach plan. It includes (1) mentoring
undergraduate student summer research for underrepresented groups; (2) engaging
high school female students in science and engineering; and (3) providing
underrepresented/minority graduate students with unique research opportunities.

Technical Summary:

A major challenge in tissue regeneration is to design scaffolds that
simultaneously induce endogenous regeneration of multiple tissues with
inherently low regenerative potential. To address the challenge, this project
will create scaffolds capable of not only recruiting different types of
endogenous cells, but also guiding the recruited cells to concurrently
regenerate into different tissues. The project will use fibrous scaffolds that
mimic the morphology of tissue extracellular matrix, and periodontal cells as
model cells to gain a fundamental understanding of the following relationships:
(1) the effect of chemotactic growth factor release on the activation of
chemotactic migration of multiple cell types; (2) how biological signals such as
immobilized proteins direct the differentiation and matrix deposition of these
cell types; and (3) how scaffold morphology can be tailored to act as a physical
barrier to the cells that may delay the regeneration while inducing the desired
cells to populate the scaffolds. Understanding these relationships will guide
scaffold design for simultaneous regeneration of tissues. The proposed studies
will foster education and outreach activities including mentoring the research
of underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students, and engaging high
school female students in science and engineering.