* 1922103
* Workshop: Digital Forensics as Open Source Pedagogy; March 2020, West Lafayette, Indiana
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Jason Parry, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 28,290.00

The aim of this workshop is to train students and educators in techniques of
data collection and digital verification using open source web tools. This
workshop is inspired by the increasing use within journalism and social media
cultures of digital forensics; that is. the tools and techniques for compiling,
confirming, and combining distinct elements of digital evidence. By inviting
experts in digital verification techniques to deliver hands-on training
sessions, this workshop is designed to explore the pedagogical possibilities
opened by the rise of digital evidence, while raising larger questions about the
role of data collection in civic life and participation. Participants will
receive training from key thinkers and practitioners in digital forensics, who
will explain the technologies and scientific theories that have shaped digital
forensics as a method for carrying out investigations, as well as how to use
open source digital forensics tools.

This workshop has the potential to advance digital forensics as open source
pedagogy and promote active learning strategies within STEM and Media and
Communications teaching communities. It will encourage teachers and students to
critically engage with open source digital forensics tools in the classroom, and
it will help them to develop a more robust understanding of how digital tools
produce ways of knowing that increasingly impact how journalists and other
investigators approach core societal ideas of accountability, justice, and human
rights in the digital age. The workshop will also serve to advance knowledge of
how digital forensics is increasingly impacting a range of fields including
Science and Technology Studies, Political Science, Journalism, Data Science,
Computer Science, and Media Studies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.