* 1922739
* Hybridizing Data and Model Driven Approaches for Proactive Production Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Feng Ju, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 03/31/2024
* USD 416,747.00

This award will contribute to the national prosperity by investigating a
framework for factory-level production control using real-time equipment-level
sensing data. Rapid advances in sensor technology, computer-controlled
processes, high-performance computing, and internet-of-things (IoT) have the
potential to improve the productivity of U.S. manufacturing significantly.
However, current production systems remain predominately retrospective and
responsive to adverse events because real-time analysis has not been
sufficiently integrated in proactive decision support. This award investigates
an approach based on hybridizing data-driven statistical methods and with
product flow models to address the key challenges in real-time sensing,
performance prediction, and proactive control of production systems. The
knowledge developed from this research will enhance the understanding of the
fundamental principles governing manufacturing systems operations from both
theoretical and practical perspectives. The research is integrated with an
education plan to enhance education and outreach activities in the minority and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
research to advance the state-of-the-art in prognostics, data fusion, and real-
time production controls at both process and system levels in production
environments. The research will investigate a new data-driven approach that
combines Bayesian generative models, tensor data analytics, and data-fusion for
prognostics to determine a process-level health condition index based on
heterogeneous sensing data at different sampling rates. Process-specific health
condition information will be integrated with system-level stochastic models for
production performance prediction by synthesizing the input from sensor
measurements and the output of process-level prediction. Finally, a data-driven
sequential decision-making problem will be formulated to derive adaptive control
actions that optimize the performance at both system and process levels in real-
time. The developed methodology will be tested and validated using data from a
small-scale university lab and collaborating industry partners, as well as open
data sets published by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.