* 1922884
* WORKSHOP: Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium at ACM CHI 2019
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Laura Dabbish, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2020
* USD 28,850.00

This is funding to partially support a Doctoral Research Consortium (workshop)
of about 20 promising graduate students along with a panel of 6 distinguished
researchers from academia and industry; in accordance with CISE policy, the
award will support just the 9 students from U.S.-based educational institutions
in addition to the panelists. This 2-day event will take place on May 4-5 in
conjunction with the ACM 2019 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI 2019) sponsored by the Association for Computing Machinery's Special
Interest Group on Human-Computer Interaction (SIGCHI), which will be held May
4-9 in Glasgow, UK. This will be the first time that CHI has taken place in the
UK and it will be hosted at the Scottish Event Campus in Glasgow. The annual CHI
conferences are the leading international forum for the presentation and
discussion of human-computer interaction (HCI) research and practice, and they
are attended by more than 3,000 HCI professionals from around the world.
Research reports published in the CHI Conference Proceedings and the CHI
Extended Abstracts are heavily-refereed and widely cited; they are among the
most scientifically respected and impactful research publications in the field
of HCI. More information about this year's conference, whose theme is "Weaving
the Threads of CHI," is available online at https://chi2019.acm.org/. The annual
CHI doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next
generation of HCI researchers, allowing them to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development. Applications are encouraged from all doctoral students
whose research is HCI-related, regardless of the fields in which they are
earning their degrees. To increase the broad impact of the event, the organizers
are committed to diversity. Due to timing issues, the student participants for
2019 have already been selected; there are a total of 20 students (approximately
10 females and 10 males) who represent a wide range of topic areas and
backgrounds; in addition, no more than two students will be from any given
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CHI Doctoral Consortium is a research-
focused meeting that has taken place annually at the CHI conference since 1986,
and has helped to launch the careers of many outstanding HCI researchers. Goals
of the workshop include building a cohort group of new researchers who will have
a network of colleagues spread out across the world, guiding the work of new
researchers by having experts in the field give them advice, and making it
possible for promising new entrants to the field to attend their research
conference. This year's DC will once again adopt the successful schedule
implemented in 2017 and 2018, where the group breaks into clusters of 3-4
students paired with one faculty panelist. Each student participant will have a
time slot of approximately 20 minutes in which to make a formal presentation
about his or her doctoral research and to receive feedback both from the faculty
panelist and the other student participants. The feedback will be constructive
and geared to help the students understand and articulate how their work is
positioned relative to other HCI research, whether their topics are adequately
focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen
and applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented.
Follow up activities, including two poster sessions, are planned during the
technical program of the conference, and the students' work will be published in
the CHI 2019 Extended Abstracts. SIGCHI's conference management committee will
evaluate the doctoral research consortium, and the results will be made
available to the organizers of future consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.