* 1922259
* DMREF: Paired ionic-electronic conductivity in self-assembling conjugated rod-ionic coil segmented copolymers and mesogens with ionic liquid units
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Christopher Ober, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,625,006.00

Computer methods that can predict materials organization and behavior, combined
with property measurements, have the potential to accelerate the search for new
materials for emerging applications. This project will identify new materials
built from both large polymer molecules and small-dimension liquid crystals that
combine two kinds of conductivity within the same molecule. These materials can
form regions that act like "wires" to transport charged atoms (ions) through one
type of liquid-like wire, and electrons through another type of solid wire.
These types of molecules allow the design of conducting channels of different
sizes and shapes. Such materials combine a variety of features needed for future
robotics as well as those for energy storage and production. This materials
discovery research will be carried out by an interdisciplinary team skilled in
computational science and engineering, polymer chemistry, polymer engineering
and physical property studies. Workforce training in this DMREF program will
provide a stimulating and constructive environment in which participants are
exposed to a comprehensive materials design cycle. The focus of the project also
provides a compelling and unique context to convey the importance of science and
engineering to students, facilitated by partnerships with established programs
for the general public and students in high school and university. DMREF
students will collectively participate in research and teaching to
underrepresented groups. The data, materials design and machine learning
software developed under this project will contribute to the Materials Genome
Initiative national infrastructure and be accessible by the broader scientific
and industrial community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixed ionic/electronic
conductors have been shown using traditional cumbersome research approaches to
have promise for energy storage materials and to possess unexpected synergy
between conducting phases. This DMREF program will accelerate the discovery of
new promising mixed ionic/electronic conductors by using a dual iterative cycle
to study the general phase behavior and transport dynamics of self-assembling
polymeric and oligomeric liquid crystal mixed conductors. A machine learning
approach will combine a genetic algorithm to propose successive generations of
candidate materials, and a neural network scheme to construct a regression model
to correlate input (a library of chemical groups and structures) with output
variables (conductivity properties). An important aspect of the intellectual
merit of this project lies in the development of processes to integrate
computation, experiment and data analysis for the design of these functional
materials. The proposed research is envisioned to not only shed light on the
role of structure on phase behavior and charge transport, and their effect on
interface sharpness and conductivity between the solid-like electronically
conducting phase and the liquid-like ionically conducting regions but also lead
to new applications as energy storage, sensing and robotic materials.
Collaborations will provide additional expertise to this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by funds from the DMREF
initiative and the Polymers Program in the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.