* 1922551
* NRT-HDR: Team training to develop new hardware and software applications for digital plant science across multiple scales
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Scanlon, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,998,051.00

There has been an unprecedented explosion of Big Data in the life sciences over
the last several years. Likewise, advances in bioengineering promise to see the
previously un-seeable and measure the previously immeasurable. This combination
of "Big Data" and novel technological advances enables the investigation of
fundamental principles in plant science at multiple scales. Interdisciplinary
research in Digital Plant Science (DPS) leverages these advances by combining
computational science, plant science and systems engineering approaches to
respond to agricultural and ecological challenges. Accordingly, this next
generation of graduate students must receive cross-disciplinary training in
plant science, bioengineering, and computational biology to acquire the
foundational skills to sense, capture, and measure information about plant
processes in real time and at multiple scales, from microscopic single cells to
entire ecosystems. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award to Cornell University will create a transformative experience that
integrates interdisciplinary team learning and professional development to equip
future plant scientists with the tools needed to investigate, comprehend, and
engineer plant processes to improve plant productivity and sustainability in the
21st century. The project anticipates training 120 graduate students, including
18 funded trainees, from the graduate fields of Plant Biology, Plant Breeding,
Plant Pathology, Soil and Crop Sciences, Biological and Environmental
Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Computer Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create an interactive and innovative
core curriculum that integrates plant science, computational science, and
bioengineering, while disseminating this curriculum throughout and beyond the
Cornell community. Graduate trainee learning through co-instruction will
reinforce this core training. In addition, novel, team research rotation
experiences will be utilized. Teams of three graduate students, mentored by
cross-disciplinary faculty comprising computational scientists, bioengineers,
and plant scientists, will collaborate to generate and analyze original "Big
Data" in a group environment that simulates the team-based research approaches
that typify industrial research and development settings. Graduate student
training will be broadened to include the systematic development of
communication and team-working skills that are essential for successful careers
in multiple endeavors both within and outside of academia. Partnerships between
Cornell and the private sector will be exploited and extended to facilitate
trainee internships and continuing-education experiences in an industry setting.
Ultimately, this graduate training program will develop new tools and strategies
to investigate plant genotypes, phenotypes, and processes in real time and at
multiple scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.