* 1922639
* NRT-HDR: Quantitative Analysis of Dynamic Structures
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Surita Bhatia, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,017,331.00

Advanced materials are important for many applications with societal benefits,
including flexible electronics, solar panels, recyclable plastics, antibacterial
coatings, water purification systems, and next-generation batteries. Properties
of these materials depend heavily upon their structure or how various atoms and
larger units are arranged. New instruments and mathematical models of materials
allow scientists to measure and predict some of these properties. However, these
techniques yield large quantities of data requiring complex analyses. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Stony Brook
University will train a diverse population of researchers with the skills to
analyze the large data sets associated with complex material structures and
properties. These students will participate in scientific communication,
workplace diversity, career paths, and team-building workshops to meet the
growing needs for a workforce trained in data science. Additionally, Stony Brook
faculty will work together with the American Chemical Society Bridge Program and
institutions that serve minority and disabled students to promote success of
underrepresented students in science and engineering PhD programs. The project
anticipates training seventy-five (75) PhD students, including thirty-eight (38)
funded trainees, from the fields of chemistry, materials science, chemical
engineering, mechanical engineering, and geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NRT
trainees will develop new software tools and experimental methods for the
materials community, contributing to improved design of advanced materials.
Advances in instrumentation have enabled an unprecedented ability to probe
structural dynamics that span many time and length scales, with incredibly high
rates of data acquisition. Transformative aspects of the research include the
development of new algorithms for rapid in situ X-ray spectroscopy of reactions;
automated screening of parameter space of composites to advance the pace of
materials discovery; and the first time-resolved measurements of nanoparticle
motion during evaporative assembly. The main training elements are (1)
interdisciplinary research on development of software and/or algorithms for data
analysis; (2) a summer school that brings cohorts of diverse trainees together;
(3) new elective courses and shorter modules on emerging computational and
experimental tools; (4) hybrid group meetings centered around a common theme;
(5) scalable responsible conduct of research, professional development, and
career paths modules; (6) science communication training provided by the Alan
Alda Center for Communicating Science; and (7) a student-driven career ladder
program and guided mentorship through Individual Development Plans (IDPs) and
activities tailored to students' career goals. To extend benefits beyond
trainees, the project will implement a new graduate certificate on Quantitative
Analysis of Dynamic Structures, transition the summer school to a self-
sustaining program open to students nationwide, and distribute curriculum
materials as open-access video lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.