* 1922915
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  LTREB RENEWAL:  The role of ecological heterogeneity in a long-term grassland restoration experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Scott Collins, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2024
* USD 392,655.00

Reconstructing ecosystems through ecological restoration presents an opportunity
to test current understanding of how environmental conditions affect
biodiversity. One criterion for restoration success is whether reconstructed
communities can endure naturally-occurring periodic stress, however, identifying
the environmental factors most important for promoting biodiversity and
resilience in reconstructed ecosystems requires decades of study. This research
will extend a record of reconstructed prairie plant diversity and productivity
in response to soil nutrients and depth that were altered to create variable
conditions for more species to coexist, compared to soil conditions left
unchanged and homogenized, following long-term tillage. The 25-year field
experiment will test whether variation in the soil environment affects plant
diversity and resilience of reconstructed ecosystems to climate variability and
drought. This information will be used to develop recommendations for large-
scale efforts to reconstruct diverse and resilient grasslands that provision
food and habitat for wildlife. This project will also provide training of
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as foster education about prairie
restoration for natural resource managers, high school teachers, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;The experimental design contains replicated plots assigned to
four heterogeneity treatments that contain either no manipulations, three soil
nutrient levels, two soil depth levels, or six combinations of soil nutrients
and depth. The study site is located at the Konza Prairie Long Term Ecological
Research Site, which has high interannual variation in precipitation. Prior
research revealed a precipitous decline in plant diversity across all treatments
over the first 15 years of restoration, offset only when new species were added
and, to a greater extent, more heterogeneous soil. This motivated continuous
addition of new species for an additional five years. Plant composition,
productivity, and resources, such as light and soil nutrients, will be measured
in the same permanent sampling areas using the same methods for an additional
five years, capturing ecosystem development for one quarter of a century and
droughts occurring in 2012 and 2018. These data will be used to test whether
spatial heterogeneity in soil resources sustains more diverse and variable plant
communities over the long term and whether this ecological heterogeneity makes
grassland resilience to drought less predictable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.