* 1922868
* WORKSHOP: Consortium for the Science of Sociotechnical Systems Research Summer Institute 2019
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Rebecca Reynolds, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2020
* USD 19,995.00

This award supports junior researchers' participation in the Consortium for the
Science of Sociotechnical Systems Research (CSST) Summer Institute. The
consortium fosters trans-disciplinary research into the interplay of humans and
technology in complex computational systems, bringing together scholars from
intellectual communities such as computer and information science, computer
supported cooperative work and human computer interaction, social computing and
social informatics, psychology and sociology, organizational studies and
information technology, and education and learning sciences. The institute is a
way to bring these scholars together, providing expertise and mentoring in
conducting sociotechnical research, opportunities for creating new connections
and collaborations across disciplines, learning and assessing new research
methods and approaches, and in general foster convergence-style research in line
with NSF's strategic goals. The funds will support junior scholars who are in
most need of these kinds of connections and mentoring opportunities, increasing
both the size and the diversity of the sociotechnical research community and
strengthening the research capabilities of individual members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The institute will take place at Rutgers University in
June 2019. Participants will be recruited through a number of channels,
including the existing CSST network, discipline-specific channels for announcing
events, and organizations dedicated to broadening participation in STEM fields.
Up to 50 participants will be invited, with selection criteria aimed at
maximizing diversity of fields, research topics, methods, institutions, and
backgrounds, emphasizing opportunities to applicants from universities with
smaller research portfolios and thus fewer opportunities for research mentoring.
The institute itself will conduct a number of activities as part of this
mentoring, including chances for participants to discuss their work with close
peers and mentors, opportunities to develop new collaborative activities, and
plenary discussions of professional development in the space of sociotechnical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.