* 1922202
* CyberCorps Mentoring and Scholarship Program (CMSP)
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Brian Smith, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,015,922.00

Drexel University's College of Computing and Informatics will establish the
CyberCorps Mentoring and Scholarship Program (CMSP) to recruit, train, and
mentor 17 CMSP Scholars to transition into cybersecurity positions within
federal, state, local, or tribal government organizations. The project will
develop a CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (SFS) initiative that can
contribute to improving cybersecurity by increasing the number and diversity of
undergraduate students who complete cybersecurity degrees and then take
positions within government agencies. The goal is for the CMSP to strengthen
national cybersecurity by enhancing both the recruitment and retention of a
diverse cybersecurity workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core focus of Drexel's
CMSP is the successful recruitment, retention, and support of students who are
women, underrepresented minorities, and veterans. The project addresses these
groups through multiple forms of mentoring, guided by an approach to student
development called Validation Theory. Validation Theory aims to provide a
systematic understanding of the role of validation in the transition,
persistence, and success of underrepresented college students. Components of the
CMSP include faculty-student mentoring, monthly cohort meetings, extracurricular
workshops, and other activities designed to validate students. These activities
are particularly useful for recruiting and retaining women, underrepresented
minorities, and veterans. Scholars will also be required to engage in
cooperative education experiences (co-ops) that interleave classroom learning
and real-world professional experience. The project will also provide further
empirical support for Validation Theory's strengths and weaknesses as a
theoretical framework. Existing instruments to understand the effects of
Validation Theory will be extended for the CMSP program. A new quantitative
instrument will also be developed to assess student perspectives of validation
in and outside of classrooms. These products will be shared with the
cybersecurity education community to support knowledge building in the areas of
student recruiting, mentoring, and job placement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.