* 1922499
* NSF-AFOSR Joint Workshop on Mechanics-Based Design of Intelligent Material Systems by Multimaterial Additive Manufacturing; Melbourne, Australia; August 15, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Hang (Jerry) Qi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2020
* USD 47,447.00

This grant provides financial support for the workshop entitled NSF-AFOSR Joint
Workshop on Mechanics-Based Design of Intelligent Material Systems by
Multimaterial Additive Manufacturing, to be held on August 15, 2019, in
Melbourne, Australia, during the 22nd International Conference on Composite
Materials 2019. Recent advances in additive manufacturing technologies have
drastically changed the perception of how multifunctional composites and
structures are designed and fabricated. The emergence of multimaterial 3D
printing--precise placement of dissimilar materials in space--has opened
unprecedented opportunities up for creating new types of composites. While
tremendous research possibilities exist, center to these opportunities is
mechanics, which is not only critical in understanding fundamental engineering
issues, such as interface properties and reliability, but also drives innovative
design through mechanical behavior, such as mismatch of strains and nonlinear
thermomechanics. The objective of this workshop is to review the recent progress
in the mechanics-based design of intelligent material systems by multimaterial
additive manufacturing and to identify new directions and opportunities. Funding
from this grant will support travel costs for 13 invited speakers to attend the
workshop and present their work, and two graduate students for organizing the
workshop as well as the production of a report.

In this one-day workshop, 13 invited leading experts in mechanics of
multifunctional materials as well as additive manufacturing from across
academia, government, and industry will discuss present and future challenges
and opportunities related to the mechanics-based design of intelligent material
systems by multimaterial additive manufacturing. The workshop will be comprised
of three sessions in a single technical track with each session covering a
different topic and having two 25-min presentations, three 5-min presentations,
and one 30-minute discussion period. With each session covering a different
topic and allowing plenty of discussion time, this unique format is intended to
foster discussions around the most important technical challenges in each topic
and opportunities for future research. This workshop will also feature a final
one-hour panel discussion that will integrate the topics and discussions from
the three sessions. The outcome of these presentations and discussions will be
documented in a final report and will be widely disseminated across academia,
government, and industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.