* 1922004
* NRT: Future Rivers: Training a scientifically innovative, communication savvy STEM workforce for sustaining food-energy-water services in large and transboundary river ecosystems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Faisal Hossain, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

Large freshwater ecosystems are lifelines for a majority of the world's
population, providing ecosystem goods and services critical to economies and
livelihoods. Despite the important societal and economic benefits of these
freshwater systems, the ability to predict impacts from ecosystem change and to
evaluate tradeoffs is limited. A better understanding of conceptual and
quantitative frameworks for evaluating the physical, biological, and social
dynamics that sustain freshwater ecosystem services would allow for better
management of these critical resources. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Washington will develop an
innovative, culturally-aware STEM workforce fluent in state-of-the-art
approaches for sustaining food-energy-water services in large river ecosystems
and who are prepared to effectively safeguard ecosystem services for a growing
world population. The project is driven by an urgent need for interdisciplinary
scientists who can address current and future environmental problems by
employing the quantitative tools required to integrate, model, and visualize
complex datasets and often conflicting outcomes. The Future Rivers NRT training
will include coursework and group activities that emphasize quantitative and
interdisciplinary literacy. Students will engage in research that integrates
transboundary rivers across the world, spanning a range of human disturbance and
regional economic development regimes. The project anticipates training sixty
(60) MS and PhD students, including eighteen (18) funded trainees, from
disciplines across natural resource science, engineering, social science, health
science, and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of the Future Rivers
NRT project are to develop a trained workforce in 21st century quantitative and
data science approaches to sustain and safeguard food-energy-water services in
large river ecosystems, while researching new ways to better predict impacts and
safeguard these resources. The project will use numerical modeling and data
science to catalyze new approaches for addressing the grand challenge of
achieving sustainability in large Food, Energy, and Water Systems (FEWS). To
integrate the research and learning, the Future Rivers project follows an active
learning model that starts with the presentation of new information, followed by
directed practice and exercises, and ends with the application of knowledge
gained in a new context. Project training activities are centered around five
primary educational objectives: 1) develop new technical and data science
skills; 2) foster innovative interdisciplinary and international science
integration; 3) improve trainee communication skills; 4) increase cultural
awareness and inclusivity among faculty, trainees, and participants; and 5)
create networks and opportunities for student career development. Specific
project components focus on data science training and careers (courses,
hackathon events, research summits, career fairs); communication and outreach
skillsets (workshops, science communication film contests); equity and
inclusivity training; and interdisciplinary river FEWS issues (courses, seminar
series, and summer institutes that include some international
locations).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.