* 1922906
* Mapping the Many Pathways (In and Out) of the Postsecondary STEM Pipeline
* SBE,SMA
* 12/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Freda Lynn, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 275,294.00

There is a pressing need to build a skilled and diverse STEM workforce in the
United States. Determining how to navigate aspirations and aptitudes during
college is a major hurdle for many students. Examining the transcript "stories"
of undergraduate cohorts can help postsecondary institutions and future students
(1) contextualize the range of course-taking possibilities and performance
levels associated with destination majors, and (2) identify key crossroads that
students on certain paths will likely encounter. The study helps uncover
barriers to STEM degree completion by examining the relationship between course-
taking pathway and student characteristics. This project builds on prior
knowledge regarding common "leaks" in the STEM pipeline and offers a new
framework for assessing the overall health of academic majors relative to each
other, taking into account patterns of migration both in and out of STEM.
Drawing on social sequence analysis and network science and incorporating
student demographic information, this study provides essential information to
inform policies and practices for STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;College
course sequences from eight consecutive semesters of transcript data for two
cohorts of undergraduates at a public university are used to document in- and
out-migration patterns through STEM and non-STEM majors. As with all campus-
specific transcript studies, these data reflect the sorting of a student
population that (1) is subject to the same institutional policies, (2)
experiences the same exact classroom environment when co-enrolled in a given
class, and (3) constitutes true peers in terms of classroom performance
hierarchies. Each cohort is first described using an origin-destination
typology, which classifies students who start and finish in STEM, students who
migrate out of STEM, students who migrate into STEM, and students who start and
finish in non-STEM majors. Second, network methodology is employed to quantify
the typicality of a student's course-taking sequence relative to other students,
an approach that offers insight into the distribution of pathways through
academic majors. Finally, course-taking pathways are linked with student
characteristics, including gender, race/ethnicity, first-generation student
status and ACT scores. These results will be of immediate utility for many
stakeholder groups, including students, educators, and
policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.