* 1922334
* Collaborative Research: Standard Grant: The Ethics of Studying Indigenous North American Ancient DNA: Moving from Theories to Practices
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* George Nicholas, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 09/30/2023
* USD 201,994.00

Over the last decade, the study of DNA from Indigenous North Americans who lived
long ago has provided exciting insights into the evolution of diseases,
migration to the Americas, population dynamics, the impacts of colonization, and
much more. Yet, the study of ancient DNA extracted from Indigenous ancestors has
grown so rapidly that discussions about ethical responsibilities have not kept
pace with the science. The rights of living Native Americans are too often
ignored in the study of ancient DNA, even though this expanding area of research
has profound social, political, psychological, and legal implications for
Indigenous communities. This has led to numerous controversies and problematic
studies, resulting in distrust of researchers, increasing skepticism of clinical
health studies in Native American communities, and a looming ethical crisis for
ancient DNA studies. At the same time, other ancient DNA initiatives based on
collaboration with Indigenous peoples have answered important scientific and
historical questions while building mutually beneficial relationships. This
study surveys and analyzes the current ethical landscape of ancient DNA research
and develops resources for stakeholders to enable more equitable and informed
decision making and knowledge sharing. The project will also integrate diverse
voices, experiences, and expertise into scientific practice and the creation of
new or expanded bioethical frameworks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
assembles and develops resources regarding the ethics of ancient DNA research to
support more equitable and informed decision making and responsible knowledge
sharing amongst stakeholders. To do so, the project (1) investigates the current
attitudes, values, and practices of Indigenous peoples and scientific
communities around the ethics of ancient DNA research, and (2) collaboratively
develops a set of principles to guide good research practices. This project
contributes to our understanding of collaborative methods in the study of DNA,
the ethics of managing ancestral human remains and other biological materials in
museums, intellectual property issues surrounding the knowledge produced through
genomics, and the human rights of Indigenous peoples in relation to their
genomic heritage. The outcomes of this project include a series of workshops
bringing together scientific and Indigenous leaders, public lectures, academic
and popular publications, postdoctoral researcher mentorship, and the website
aDNAethics.org, which will present "good practices" and online resource kits
that can be used across university classrooms, museums, ethics review
committees, Indigenous cultural preservation offices, journals, labs, and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.