* 1922316
* DMREF: Discovery of high-temperature, oxidation-resistant, complex, concentrated alloys via data science driven multi-resolution experiments and simulations
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Alejandro Strachan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,738,752.00

Refractory complex concentrated alloys (RCCAs) are a new class of materials with
an enormous potential for high-temperature structural applications. These alloys
exhibit high-temperature strength surpassing Ni superalloys, the current state-
of-the-art, but, unfortunately, their corrosion resistance is far from ideal.
This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
project seeks to optimize the composition of RCCAs to achieve an unsurpassed
combination of strength and oxidation resistance at high-temperatures. These
properties would enable the realization of rotation detonation engines for
hypersonic vehicles of interest in national defense and a significant reduction
in fuel consumption and pollution over the lifetime of a land-based gas turbines
that power the electric grid. In addition to providing hands-on training to
graduate students, this program will support undergraduate students who will be
exposed to cutting edge research tools in materials science, computer
simulations and machine learning. The research team will partner with existing
programs at Purdue with a track record of attracting a diverse and talented
cadre of students, including underrepresented populations. To encourage
widespread use of the technology and data developed, the products of this
project will be made available via the nanoHUB open platform, where students,
educators, and researchers can explore data and perform simulations online,
using a web-browser.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and optimization of RCCAs
with the combination of properties sought after for high temperature structural
applications is a daunting technical task due to the extremely large number of
potential alloys, and because the oxidation behavior of these complex alloys is
not fully understood. Adding oxidation testing variables (temperature, partial
pressure of O2) to the compositional ones, the space to be explored is 17
dimensional, which is clearly out of reach to brute force approaches given the
time and cost involved in high-temperature oxidation experiments. Physics-based
modeling could, in principle, help reduce the number of experimental trials,
however, the ability to predict oxidation in complex alloys is limited. Thus,
the team will develop an iterative approach that combines multi-fidelity and
multi-cost experiments and physics-based modeling within a machine learning for
accelerated materials discovery (ML-AMD) framework. ML-AMD will use sequential
learning with deep neural networks (DNNs) to develop models based on disparate
sources of information (accounting for uncertainties) and identify simulations
and experiments to carry out in order to maximize information gain towards the
design goal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.