* 1922539
* Workshop on Post-Disaster Materials and Environmental Management
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2019
* Nazli Yesiller, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,946.00

This workshop will bring together experts from academia and public and private
institutions from across the United States to identify critical research
questions and needs with respect to the management and environmental impacts of
the large quantities and wide varieties of debris and waste generated by
disasters such as hurricanes and floods. The occurrence, magnitude, and
particularly damage and destruction from disasters have been increasing due to
increase in number and frequency of extreme weather events, controlled and
uncontrolled urbanization, deforestation, soil erosion, inadequate and aging
infrastructure, and significant alterations to the natural
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will for the first time bring
together a critical mass of experts to identify major research needs related to
the complex issues of management and environmental impacts of post-disaster
materials in a systematic manner. The topics that will be included in the
workshop are: (1) potential pre- and post- disaster actions to mitigate the
environmental impacts of post-disaster materials, (2) moving and transfer of
debris and waste, (3) recovery, recycling, and reuse of post-disaster materials,
(4) waste-to-energy conversion and extracting energy from debris and waste, (5)
mining of debris and waste, (6) optimal systems and infrastructure for disposal,
(7) new and innovative uses for debris and waste, and (8) broader environmental
and health impacts of these materials including large-scale contamination,
adverse climate impacts, and public health effects. Disaster debris and waste
potentially generate public health and environmental problems; however, these
wide-variety and large-quantity of wastes also include materials with high
potential for recycling/upcycling, beneficial reuse, and conversion to energy
replacing raw and natural material resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.