* 1922761
* NRT-FW-HTF: Robotic Interfaces and Assistants for the Future of Work
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jing Xiao, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,998.00

It is inevitable that robotic interfaces and assistants will play an
increasingly important role in the workplace in the coming decades. The future
of work depends on how well a division of labor can be established between
robots and humans, so that robots will perform tasks that are tedious,
strenuous, and/or dangerous, and humans will focus on higher-level, more
meaningful value-added activities that are easier, safer, and less strenuous.
Anticipating this future environment, research and training are needed today to
equip those developing future robot-intermediated human workplaces with an
integrative and holistic approach to technological development, considering its
social impact and economic consequences. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Worcester Polytechnic Institute will focus
on novel research related to the adoption of robotic interfaces and assistants
in the future workplace. In an interdisciplinary research program named Future
of Robots in the Workplace - Research &amp; Development (FORW-RD), graduate
student trainees will attain diverse skills needed to navigate opportunities and
challenges to shape, guide, and lead the transition to a robot-assisted
workplace. The project anticipates training one hundred twenty (120) MS and PhD
students, including thirty (30) funded trainees, from Mechanical Engineering,
Robotics Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science, and User Experience
Design in the Business School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FORW-RD's training
activities will cohesively cultivate a breadth of interdisciplinary technical
and professional skills, in addition to depth in one area of specialization. A
set of first-year FORW-RD Thinking seminars will address ethical, social,
economic, legal, and technical issues related to the use of robots in the
workplace. Small teams of trainees will develop research plans early in their
graduate studies, guided by multidisciplinary faculty mentors. Technical
coursework includes four existing and four new courses tailored for the FORW-RD
program. Professional development will address both practical skills and
conceptual/interpersonal skills, by focusing on key professional skillsets--
leadership and management, communication, and visioning. Professional practice
will be established by assisting faculty mentors as they advise undergraduate
team Interdisciplinary Qualifying Projects (IQPs) within WPI's project-based
curriculum. Internships with partnering companies and organizations will be
required of all NRT trainees for professional and career development. FORW-RD
traineeship activities will be integrated with a cross-disciplinary research
plan for developing deep expertise in areas such as safe wearable robotic
interfaces, assistive robot platforms, flexible multifunctional material
processing, user experience in technology, decision-making, stigma/bias,
technology in training for high-skill tasks, and ethics at the intersection of
society and technology. Efforts to include ethical, social, and business
implications into the work will develop more well-rounded scientists and
engineers and will help increase participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in robotics and related STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.