* 1922549
* Graduate Students Travel Support for 2019 International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) to be Held in  Taipei, Taiwan September 22-25, 2019.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Chung-Chieh Jay Kuo, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to request funds to provide support for travel
expenses for between 20-25 graduate students of US universities to attend the
26th International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) with its URL at
http://2019.ieeeicip.org/. The conference will be held in Taipei International
Convention Center, Taipei, Taiwan, on September 22-25, 2019. The proposed budget
is for participants' travel costs only. This travel grant will serve as a means
to facilitate graduate students of U.S. universities to attend the conference,
present their most recent research accomplishments, and to have the
opportunities to network and to obtain research and career advices from leading
international experts in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Conferences are a fertile ground to foster research
collaborations. They provide fruitful opportunities for the participants to
interact, exchange ideas, and to share experiences and best practices. Thus,
conferences are inherently conducive for advancing knowledge and understanding
in their respective technical fields, as well as for cross-fertilization in
different fields. It also represents opportunities for cross-fertilization in
all areas. The review criteria for submitted papers specifically includes
creativity, innovation, potential impacts on advancing the knowledge in the
technical fields, as well as transformative potentials. The proposed travel
support is an effective way to encourage graduate students from U.S.
universities to participate in this international conference. Participating in
the conference will offer the students valuable experience in networking,
exchanging research ideas, and broadening their views. It will improve our
graduate students' competitiveness in the global
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;The successful careers
of graduate students are fundamental to advancing theory and applications in all
fields of science and engineering. For the last 25 years, ICIP has been a force
for good research in the broad areas of image/video processing. It has helped
enhance research activities, foster international collaborations, and provided
an educational and informative forum for researchers at all stages of their
career. Participating students will gain valuable experiences through direct
interactions with their international peers, and with senior researchers at
diverse research institutions from many other
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.