* 1922072
* Illinois Cyber Security Scholars Program Renewal 2019
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Roy Campbell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,602,365.00

Securing cyberspace is one of the most significant challenges confronting our
society today. This award to the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
(UIUC) will build on the Illinois Cyber Security Scholars Program (ICSSP). The
initial program recruited, prepared, and placed top-notch undergraduate level
engineers into the government?s cybersecurity workforce. With this renewal,
ICSSP will expand the program further by increasing the diversity of the student
scholars, taking advantage of recently expanded curricular offerings, and
extending the SFS opportunity to graduate students in the School of Information
Sciences. This expanded capability will offer an additional pathway for
individuals to enter the federal cybersecurity workforce. Information assurance
and cyber defense are high priorities for UIUC, as evidenced by its support of
the Information Trust Institute (ITI). The Center for Cyber Defense Education
and Research within ITI coordinates educational activities in information
assurance across UIUC.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This renewal project will produce
46 more professionals with multidisciplinary exposure to computer security for
the government service workforce. They will have the skills and knowledge to
address the technical, human, and societal challenges facing the nation's
critical infrastructure. The project will improve outreach to underrepresented
minorities, 2-year college transfer students, veterans, and first-generation
college students, and will thereby increase the candidate pool of SFS scholars,
especially those coming from financially disadvantaged backgrounds. In addition,
the inclusion of the School of Information Sciences will expand the ICSSP
program to a pool of students who are relatively mature and diverse, including
many people with prior industry and/or professional experience in a range of
disciplines. The ICSSP student's senior research projects, contact with ITI
faculty, and internships in government facilities will expose the scholars to an
integration of research and education that offers far more than what an
undergraduate normally experiences in an ordinary classroom setting.
Furthermore, scholars will bring their internship experience back, enriching the
classroom experience for other UIUC students, and will participate in outreach
efforts to promote cybersecurity-aware behavior and to promote interest in
cybersecurity careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.