* 1922866
* CNH2-L:  Developing adaptive capacity in wildfire-prone regions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* John Bolte, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,590,861.00

The social and environmental costs of wildfires have grown dramatically in
recent decades, and more information is needed to understand how communities can
reorganize themselves in the face of this growing hazard. This project explores
the potential for adaptive social networks of actors in fire-prone regions to
improve their ability to cope with increasingly large and intense wildfires.
This is achieved first by exploring and summarizing key adaptation lessons from
four western US study areas and vetting them via a stakeholder council. Next,
the most promising social network structures from these study areas are tested
in a well-documented focal area, where many alternative futures are simulated
under widely varying future climate scenarios. A stakeholder council is then
convened with leading national and state wildfire learning networks to distill,
consider, and disseminate findings with the participation of young, next-
generation science leaders. Finally, the entire approach is captured in a first-
of-its-kind computer model, extending and sharing the tools so that others may
use them to expand adaptation efforts elsewhere. Lessons and outcomes will be
disseminated to create more resilient landscapes and communities in the face of
increasing wildfires through collaborative engagement with students, educators,
stakeholders, policymakers, and resource managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores how social network topology shapes the ability of communities
in regions affected by wildfires to adaptively reorganize in response to fires
that are more severe than people have previously experienced. The main goal is
to identify replicable network building blocks that can enhance adaptive
capacity in a variety of fire-prone landscapes. Once these network structures
have been identified, they are used to validate an innovative computational
platform linking adaptive social network, biophysical, and agent-based
simulation models. The modeling system is then applied in dynamic, mapped
representations of the focal area landscape and its wildfire actors (e.g.,
landowners, organizations, and policy makers) to test the limits of different
social network topologies to respond to intensifying wildfire regimes. Together,
these efforts enable (1) the creation of a generalizable theory of when, where,
why, and how adaptive changes arise through social network reorganization in
wildfire-prone social-environmental systems experiencing intensifying fire
regimes; 2) the synthesis of empirical and modeling insights to distill
representations of people's and organization's relationships that increase
adaptive capacity with respect to wildfires; and 3) exploration and testing of
how the identified relationships may evolve over time under projected future
disturbance regimes to alter adaptive capacity and constrain risk in relation to
wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.