* 1922697
* NRT-FW-HTF: Neurodiversity Inspired Science and Engineering (NISE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mark Wallace, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,240,568.00

Neurodiversity is an emerging concept through which certain neurological
differences - Autism, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, Dyslexia, and
others - are considered a natural part of human neurocognitive variation,
associated not only with impairments but also with unique strengths. Indeed,
many neurodiverse people have capabilities that are in high demand across many
sectors, yet their potential remains vastly underutilized. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Vanderbilt University will
address this potential by training graduate students in a new interdisciplinary
field of Neurodiversity Inspired Science and Engineering (NISE), which links
human-technology frontiers (HTF) research and education across STEM disciplines
through a cohesive focus on autism. The project anticipates providing a unique
and comprehensive training opportunity for one hundred fifty (150) MS and PhD
students, including forty-five (45) funded trainees, from computer science,
mechanical engineering, data science, psychology, organizational science, and
neuroscience. Students will engage in research that has as its goals: (i)
understanding the unique capabilities associated with autism and learning to
match these capabilities to 21st-century workforce needs, (ii) prototyping
assistive technologies to enable employment and workplace success, and (iii)
exploring organizational practices that help leverage the talents of autistic
individuals and enhance organizational innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NISE
NRT project seeks to train a new type of engineer and scientist, one who can
devise innovations that support workforce engagement of individuals with autism
and/or that are inspired by autistic capabilities. Building on the strengths of
Vanderbilt's new Frist Center for Autism &amp; Innovation, this NRT project will
engage trainees in the development, deployment, and commercialization of HTF
approaches and devices, providing broadly applicable skills in artificial
intelligence, data science, robotics, virtual reality, and inclusive design.
Collaboration with practitioners in clinical psychology, special education, and
business, will ensure relevance of trainees' projects to the clinical,
educational, and/or commercial domains. Trainees will participate in the
Vanderbilt NSF I-Corps program as well as invention disclosure and patents.
Research projects will also impact K-12 students and teachers in the communities
where NRT trainees conduct their work. A central part of the program's plan to
recruit, mentor, and advance women, underrepresented minorities, and persons
with disabilities is the Fisk-Vanderbilt Masters-to-PhD Bridge Program, a
national exemplar in STEM graduate diversity. Trainees will undertake, in
addition to their regular graduate program requirements, a common core of three
new NISE courses, summer school, workshops, and internships, culminating in a
graduate certificate in NISE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.