* 1922719
* REU Site: Tomorrow's Nanomanufacturing: Engineering with Science (TNEWS)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/03/2019,01/31/2023
* Donald Roper, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 01/31/2023
* USD 269,236.00

The Microelectronics-Photonics REU site for Tomorrow's Nanomanufacturing:
Engineering with Science (TNEWS)at the University of Arkansas (UA) merges
discovery-focused research with professional skills training to prepare a rising
generation of leaders to speed translation of nano-scale materials, devices and
processes to commercial manufacturing. To provide trans-disciplinary training as
well as cultivate innovation, teamwork, and ethics, faculty from science and
engineering disciplines collaborate with industry leaders in nanomanufacturing
to mentor REU participants in laboratory discoveries within a framework of
experiences in design, metrology, communication, and leadership. Participants
will be recruited from minority-serving institution partners of UA and societies
for female STEM students to broaden participation in STEM, with special
consideration given to first-generation and economically disadvantaged students.
Participants will be mentored by successful entrepreneurs to transform discovery
to intellectual property from which peer-reviewed publications, patent
applications and nanomanufacturing spinouts can emerge. Long-term engagement
among TNEWS REU alumni will be facilitated as they advance to leadership in
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site at UA aims to provide (i)
rewarding research experiences that bridge science and engineering; (ii)
training to use broadly applicable emerging technologies relevant to
nanomanufacturing; and (iii) development of professional skills to REU
participants recruited from science and engineering undergraduates who are
underrepresented in engineering, particularly first-generation and economically
disadvantaged students. REU participants will conduct student-focused research
projects on topics ranging from quantum to nanoscale materials discovery to
devices and systems that integrate nanoarchitectures. Projects target
biological, sensor, energy and electromagnetic technologies that offer
commercializable innovations from which peer-reviewed publications, patent
applications and nanomanufacturing spinouts can emerge. REU participants will
interact regularly with faculty and industry mentors outside their immediate
research laboratory to enhance student research and progress. This especially
benefits women and minorities. TNEWS will train participants in innovation,
design, metrology, teamwork, communication, ethics and leadership using a tested
experiential learning framework that has contributed to five recent UA nanotech
spin-offs. Integrating these experiences with cohort-building activities and
mentored student sharing will nurture a cadre of emerging leaders in tomorrow?s
nanomanufacturing workforce who grasp complex interactions between personal and
community values to effectively and responsibly transform research discovery to
commercializable innovations that create significant benefit. Outcomes relative
to nine discrete learning objectives will be analyzed by a program evaluator
using both novel and proven assessment methodologies to ensure participant
progress and to refine and develop administration of the TNEWS REU site.