* 1922952
* ATD: Models of Spreading Dynamics in Multilayer Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Mason Porter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 515,999.00

The PI will undertake a three-year project to study opinion and content
spreading in multichannel communication networks. Many people rely on online
sources for their news and information; and people spread diverse content on
these interconnected media. However, the content on media varies in quality and
trustworthiness, from high-quality and thoroughly-researched content to puff
pieces and misinformation. Both the quality and the viewpoint of online content,
which the PI will incorporate into novel mathematical models of opinion and
content spreading, have an enormous influence on online discussions on issues
such as economic and social policy and on interactions with others of differing
views. This project will study the structure of multichannel communication
networks; analyze new mathematical models on these networks to gain a thorough
understanding of the mechanisms of content spread interacting with opinion
shifts of users on these networks; and use this analysis to develop strategies
to flag content in a way that is analogous to spam filters, thereby helping
guide users to better navigate content on various forms of media. The results of
this project will also inform and feed back directly into theory and
applications of networks in many disciplines, such as by improving methodology
for studying how the structure of networks influences processes (content
spreading, transportation, flow of nutrients, and others) that occur on
networks. This project will support 2 graduate students each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will undertake a three-year project to study
opinion and content spreading in multichannel communication networks. This
project has three components. First, using the new mathematical formalism of
multilayer networks, the PI will analyze the structure of multichannel
communication networks and develop network models of it in the form of
multilayer random graphs. Second, the PI will generalize bounded-confidence
models of opinion dynamics from monolayer networks to multilayer networks (this
type of dynamical process has not been studied previously on multilayer
networks, which one can use to encode networks with multiple types of edges or
which consist of multiple subsystems), and the PI will systematically analyze
the behavior of the these models through Monte Carlo simulations and regression
analysis. Third, the PI will develop a model of interacting spreading of
opinions (which are continuous-valued and can be in one or more dimensions) and
content (which spreads through a discrete choice) by augmenting multilayer
bounded-confidence models with media nodes that spread information of
heterogeneous content qualities. Using this model, the PI will develop
methodology to examine structural differences between the spreading properties
of low-quality and high-quality content, thereby advancing the ability to filter
disparate forms of content in networks. The results of this project will also
inform and feed back directly into theory and applications of networks in many
disciplines, such as by providing a principled method for determining the
weights of interlayer edge in multilayer networks (a key open issue in
applications of multilayer network analysis). The novel model of multilayer
opinion dynamics will also influence the study of dynamical processes on
networks more generally, advancing studies on novel phase transitions and
bifurcations that arise from multilayer network
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.