* 1922567
* Collaborative Research: New Bayesian Nonparametric Paradigms of Personalized Medicine for Lung Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Veerabhadran Baladandayuthapani, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2021
* USD 343,056.00

Rapid technological advances have allowed for molecular profiling across
multiple domains from a single tumor sample, supporting clinical decision making
in many diseases, especially cancer. Key challenges are to effectively
assimilate information across these domains to identify genomic signatures and
biological entities that may be targeted by drugs, develop accurate risk
prediction profiles for future patients, and identify novel patient subgroups
for tailored therapy and monitoring. The primary objective of this project is
the development of an innovative, flexible and scalable statistical framework
for analyzing multi-domain, complex-structured, and high throughput modern array
and next generation sequencing-based 'omics datasets. The work is motivated by
several investigations related to lung cancer; however, the proposed methods and
computational tools are broadly applicable in a variety of contexts involving
high-dimensional data. From a broader scientific perspective, the application of
these novel methodologies to the motivating clinical and genomic datasets will
allow for principled "structure hunting". This will provide more accurate
prediction of clinical outcomes, greater statistical power to detect important
biologically actionable biomarkers for improved risk estimation and treatment
selection for cancer diagnosis and prognosis, and better utilization of
biological domain knowledge to find relationships between different platforms.
It will lead to subsequent implementation of rational biomarker-based and
individualized clinical trials that increase the success rate of personalized
therapies based on molecular markers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these
goals, the following specific aims are proposed: (1) Develop versatile and
flexible statistical techniques for identifying differential genomic signatures
for lung cancer in mixed, heterogeneously scaled single-domain datasets arising
from array and next-generation sequencing based studies. A general class of
nonparametric Bayesian models based on sound theoretical justifications will be
developed and implemented using efficient, scalable algorithms. These models
provide biologically interpretable summaries and enable applicability to a wide
variety of high-throughput datasets. (2) Formulate integrative probabilistic
frameworks for massive multiple-domain data, which coherently incorporate
dependence within and between domains to accurately detect tumor subtypes and
predict clinical outcomes, thus providing a catalogue of genomic aberrations
associated with cancer taxonomy. (3) Foster massively parallel algorithms and
high-performance computational and inferential tools that drastically reduce the
computation times and increase scalability of high-throughput datasets. These
scalable inferential procedures are able to assimilate information from several
platforms and select flexible models with the appropriate dependence structures,
while detecting optimally sparse, non-linear mechanisms for predicting and
identifying tumor subtypes. Because these formulations are fully probabilistic,
they offer substantial improvements over purely algorithmic approaches by
accounting for different sources of variation and providing measures of
inference uncertainty. Since existing simulation-based algorithms do not scale
for massive datasets, theoretical properties of these models will be exploited
to devise data-squashing algorithms for efficient inference. Furthermore, as
traditional CPUs are limited by energy consumption, heat generation and memory
access, software that harnesses the power of low-cost massively parallel
computing tools such as graphics processing units (GPUs) will be developed and
made freely available.