* 1922956
* Collaborative Research:Advancing strategies for in-situ determination and spatial mapping of components within membrane systems for energy conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Carol Korzeniewski, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2024
* USD 302,300.00

Electrochemical systems, such as fuel cells and electrolyzers, have a central
role in the development of electric vehicles and systems for renewable energy
conversion, and recent revolutionary impact on specialty chemical synthesis. In
striving to improve the selectivity and energy efficiency of electrochemical
systems, techniques to directly study the reactions at electrodes under
operating conditions have long been sought for the rapid diagnosis of the
limiting processes. This project will advance in-situ characterization methods
that profile the distribution of chemical components within membranes and
membrane-catalyst components at high resolution. The project outcomes will aid
the design of next-generation membranes for electrochemical systems. The project
will also engage students across all levels in research and integrate research
with mentoring, education and outreach. The project will strengthen
institutional outreach activities targeting female and underrepresented minority
students in middle schools and high schools. The investigators will enrich their
programs with the addition of peer-mentoring components to the Mother-Daughter
program (TTU and Lubbock American Association of University Women) and the Curie
Club (U Utah) that aim to increase retention of students in STEM. By applying
their professional scientific experiences, the PIs are helping to encourage
retention of STEM students and impact underserved groups in their
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the study of bipolar membranes, the phenomena
of ion-depletion, water accumulation, and water-splitting will be investigated
under the applied voltages and transmembrane pH gradients that are of practical
interest for catalytic reaction optimization. A membrane system, based on spin-
castable ion-exchange polymers and deuterium isotope labeled mobile ions, will
be constructed for neutron reflectometry measurements to enable attainment of
spatial resolution approaching 1 nm in profiling the interface separating anion-
and cation-exchange phases. Results will provide benchmarks for furthering the
mass transport and kinetic models that guide strategies for improving device
energy conversion efficiency. In another project example involving biocatalytic
membrane applications, a multi-catalytic cascade utilizing nitrogenase enzymes
for N2 reduction will be assembled through the use of redox polymers that
facilitate electron transfer and ?wiring? of enzymes within the electrode
assembly. In-situ spatial mapping of membrane composition will guide
modifications, based on pendant phenathiazine moieties, for the dual role of
electron transport mediation to nitrogenase and O2 scavenging in a separate,
enzyme-free electrode capping layer. The capping layer will mitigate nitrogenase
sensitivity toward O2 and support efforts toward the important goal of
constructing ambient temperature N2 to NH3 conversion platforms capable of
operation in air. All neutron reflectometry measurements will be conducted in
collaboration with the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Center for Neutron Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.