* 1922190
* Collaborative Conference Proposal:  Support for Conferences and Mentoring of Women and Underrepresented Groups in Political Methodology
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kosuke Imai, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 08/31/2022
* USD 274,275.00

The General Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award continues long-standing
Foundation support for the research and training activities of the Society for
Political Methodology. Past support has propelled the development of the field
of political methodology from a small group in the 1980s to its current position
as a leader in the development of quantitative methodologies across the social
sciences and has contributed to the career development of hundreds of scholars
including nearly every leading researcher in the field today. Support provided
in this award maintains and further develops venues for presenting, discussing,
and accelerating quantitative methods in political science, with a core focus on
encouraging, mentoring, and enabling under-represented groups in political
methodology. Political methodology reaches across research areas in political
science and increasingly beyond, into other disciplines and pure statistical
sciences generating advances that facilitate the creation of new knowledge
across the discipline and the social sciences. Thus, this investment in graduate
students and increased inclusion of under-represented groups have important
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports the research and training missions of the Society for Political
Methodology. Funds provided will: (1) ensure that qualified but insufficiently-
funded graduate students can participate in the Society's Summer Meeting, (2)
continue incentivizing universities to underwrite and convene small
thematically-oriented meetings that emphasize particular technical skills and
foster high levels of networking and mentoring, (3) continue the convening of
small conferences and related efforts for women methodologists, and (4) continue
the development of an aggressive diversifying undergraduate-outreach program,
the Advanced Empirical Research in Politics for Undergraduates Program
(AERoPUP). The AERoPUP program targets undergraduates (particularly women,
under-represented minorities, and students from economically disadvantaged
backgrounds) at colleges and universities and/or majoring in disciplines in
which opportunities for exposure to contemporary quantitative empirical
political science are otherwise limited.