* 1922918
* RAPID:  Upper-Air Observations over the Far Eastern Pacific (OTREC; ChocoJEX II)
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2019,06/30/2020
* GERMAN POVEDA, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2020
* USD 199,429.00

This award supports work on the Organization of Tropical East Pacific Convection
(OTREC) field campaign. The campaign seeks to understand the formation and
development of tropical convective clouds and associated heavy rainfall in the
adjacent but distinct regions of the eastern equatorial Pacific and the
southwest Caribbean, along with their evolution over the intervening portions of
Central America and Colombia. The campaign also examines the genesis and
evolution of easterly waves, large westward-moving atmospheric disturbances
(wavelengths of about 2,000 km) which occur on a weekly basis in the Caribbean
and eastern Pacific. The full set of campaign awards is discoverable on the
nsf.gov/awardsearch webpage by a keyword search on
"OTREC".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work supported under this award contributes to the
campaign by adding a weather station in a region of interest. The station
provides continuous surface observations (winds, pressure, temperature, etc) as
well as weather balloon launches to record vertical profiles of atmospheric
conditions. It is located at Nuqui (6N, 77W), on the west coast of Colombia. The
site is chosen for its proximity to the Choco' jet, a low-level jet flowing
northward over Choco' Province, which extends from the Serrania del Baudo', the
western fork of the Andes in Colombia, to the Pacific
coast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The jet is of interest to OTREC because it extends
significantly offshore and may contribute substantially to rainfall in the OTREC
study area. It may also play a key role in the generation of easterly waves. The
PIs hypothesize that the diurnal cycle of heating and cooling over the western
slopes of the Andes accounts for the diurnal cycle of offshore convection,
despite differences in timing. They also argue that the Andean topography plays
a role in organizing the rain-bearing mesoscale convective systems found over
Choco' Province and the adjacent ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nuqui station
will operate through August and September, with balloon launches four times per
day when the OTREC aircraft is collecting data over the eastern Pacific (see
OTREC award 1758513). The station is also complementary to rainwater sampling
under OTREC award 1759255, for which Nuqui is one of three collection sites. The
project is also a follow-on to ChocoJex, a Colombian-led field campaign focused
specifically on the Choco' jet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A better understanding of
extreme precipitation and its relationship to low-level jets is desirable for
societal as well as scientific reasons. Research under this award directly
addresses these issues, with a particular focus on hazardous mesoscale
convective systems. The work also addresses easterly waves, which can spawn
destructive hurricanes. In addition, the award supports a partnership between US
and Colombian scientists and thus promotes capacity building in the
international research enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.