* 1922541
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Regulation of the transition from primary to secondary ovarian follicle development by androgens in a teleost model
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kristy Forsgren, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2024
* USD 273,447.00

Production of a fertilizable vertebrate egg is a complex process in which a
small and relatively unspecialized cell, the oocyte, is provisioned with a
variety of maternal materials that support fertilization and early embryonic
development. Thus, many aspects of "egg quality", the term used to describe an
egg that can be successively fertilized and lead to a viable offspring, are
determined relatively early. The project will use ovaries from a non-mammalian
vertebrate model to determine how early oocyte growth is regulated by hormones.
Because of the conserved nature of egg development in vertebrates, the research
will improve fundamental knowledge of egg development in vertebrates, including
humans and agriculturally important animals, and may lead to the development of
improved methods to overcome reproductive dysfunction of captive-reared fish in
conservation and commercial aquaculture. The project will integrate research and
education by recruiting undergraduate and graduate students from California
State University Fullerton, a Hispanic Serving Institution, to work with a
diverse group of scientists from the University of Washington, and with
researchers from a federal agency. The goal is to train the next generation of
scientists how to apply molecular tools, bioinformatics, and histology to
biological questions while gaining an in-depth understanding of animal
physiology, endocrinology, and reproduction. The research will be presented to
the scientific community and to the public via established partnerships to
provide trainees with service-learning experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
basic physiology of female teleost reproduction, particularly during the later
stages of oogenesis (e.g., vitellogenesis, maturation, ovulation) is fairly well
understood. By contrast, comparatively little is known about the transition into
puberty. In the ovary, this occurs when the primary growth ovarian follicles
(containing developing oocytes) are recruited into secondary growth. Using a
well-characterized in vitro model using coho salmon ovarian explants, the
investigators have shown that 11-ketotestosterone (11KT), a teleost-specific
aromatizable androgen, promotes the development of primary and early secondary
ovarian follicles, associated with identification via RNA-Seq of altered mRNA
levels of hundreds to thousands of genes, depending on stage. These changes are
consistent with altered hormonal signaling pathways, tissue remodeling, and the
progression to an early secondary ovarian follicle phenotype. The project will
further explore the hypothesis that androgens are essential for early ovarian
follicle by exploiting advances in proteomics, quantitative steroid biochemical
analyses and the availability of homologous recombinant gonadotropins to:
characterize the major endogenous androgens present in the female coho salmon
during the onset of puberty; characterize androgen receptors; document the
development-related changes in ovarian follicle proteins using cutting-edge
proteomics; and explore the potential roles of gonadotropins in regulating
previtellogenic ovarian follicle development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.