* 1922513
* The Fidelity of Glass Reentrants in Crystals: Witnesses of Decompression and Stalling of Magma in Conduits
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Madison Myers, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 411,882.00

As more than 500 million people (9% of the world population) live within the
maximum exposure range of a volcano, some of the most important questions for
studying volcanic systems regard hazard monitoring and mitigation. However, much
of the ability to define the type of risks posed by individual volcanoes relies
on the challenging task of accurate interpretation of their eruptive products
(e.g. pumice and ash), particularly crucial in systems that have not been
historically active. This project aims to improve the ability to use eruptive
products to interpret how large, explosive eruptions evolve over time. To
accomplish this, the erupted products from the 1991 eruption of Mt. Pinatubo
(Philippines) will be studied, one of the largest explosive eruptions observed
in the 20th century. Through quantifying the timescales associated discrete
phases of this eruption, the processes controlling the evolution of these
violent events will be reconstructed. These results will be integrated into the
dense seismic and visual records collected from Mt. Pinatubo, creating an
unprecedented database for linking modern eruption monitoring data with a field-
based approach typically used for interpreting historic deposits. In addition to
these scientific impacts, this will support a woman who is a new NSF PI, and
will support several graduate and undergraduate students. This project is
jointly funded by Petrology &amp; Geochemistry and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mt. Pinatubo
experienced several days of discrete, smaller sub-plinian explosions, which
ramped up to the June 15th climatic eruption. Reconstructing the decompression
history through the Mt. Pinatubo eruptive sequence, and pairing this information
with the seismic record, could provide a remarkable advancement for linking a
common monitoring technique with a readily applied petrographic tool. A
quantitative record of magma decompression during the days of escalating
activity will be obtained by measuring concentrations and gradients of volatiles
(H2O, CO2, Cl, Li, F) preserved in reentrants (open melt pockets hosted in
crystals) and coupling this information with microlite growth timescales.
Through combining these methods with detailed sampling, an understanding for how
long and where magma was stalled during breaks in explosive activity will be
determined. Further information will come from decompression experiments, which
will allow for testing all ascent-rate interpretations through simulations. This
project involves collaborations with scientists at the United States Geological
Survey, three universities within the U.S., and researchers in the Philippines.
Ultimately, the dataset afforded by this project will allow us to ask whether
one can see evidence for what ended up being an escalation in eruptive energy
preserved within the erupted products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.