* 1922391
* SBP: Games for Girls: Informing the Future
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Carly Kocurek, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 145,965.00

The goal of this project is to document and assess the successes and failures of
the Games for Girls movement, which reached prominence in the mid-1990s. The
movement will be studied as an intervention into game development and as an
effort to make computers and computer games more appealing to young girls. Lack
of diversity in STEM fields hinders innovation, depletes the workforce, and
undermines productivity. Efforts to improve this situation over recent decades
have seen both successes and failures with employers, universities, and grant
organizations investing heavily in various initiatives. Understanding the
successes and limitations of a past intervention can usefully inform future
efforts and help optimize them for success. The results of this research will be
published and presented in scholarly venues, and they will also be the topic of
public talks presented by the PI at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, the
Immersive Learning Research Network, the Music and Games Festival, and other
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document a movement aimed at
attracting girls to computing and video games. The PI will conduct oral history
interviews with game developers who were active in the production of games for
girls' titles during the 1990s, former players of these games, and current game
developers. She will also audio record and photograph interviewees. Interviews
will be conducted on-site with interview subjects when possible. The results of
this project will provide insights into the successes and failures of this
industry-driven intervention into digital culture that can be used to inform
contemporary efforts to diversify STEM fields. The PI will process and analyze
all archival materials and interviews to produce a monograph with a scholarly
press and peer-reviewed journal articles. The PI also has plans to present her
results at a minimum of two conferences such as the Digital Games Research
Association, and Foundations of Digital Games), and several public
talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.