* 1922624
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the genetics of seasonal animal migration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Marcus Kronforst, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 870,994.00

Many animals undergo long-distance seasonal migrations to escape deteriorating
habitats, colonize new resources or escape natural enemies. Animal migration has
major impacts on the ecology and evolution of migrating species as well as on
ecosystem functioning. Despite the importance of animal migration, the genetics
underlying this phenomenon remain poorly understood. This project will
characterize the genetic architecture of seasonal migration, using monarch
butterflies as a model system. Because many of the traits related to migration
are shared with other species, this work will also greatly advance our general
understanding of animal migration. There is also a pressing need to understand
the genetics of monarch migration. The population size of eastern migratory
monarchs has dwindled over the last few decades, and it has been suggested that
this spectacular phenomenon may disappear in the near future. A thorough
understanding of monarch migration genetics must be achieved in order to
determine whether monarch migration is at risk of extinction, and whether non-
migratory populations could potentially re-evolve migration to supplement the
dwindling North American population. This project will also have a variety of
broader impacts, including the training of students and post-doctoral
researchers, and outreach activities at public schools, science centers, and
monarch butterfly festivals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonal migration occurs
widely across the animal kingdom, but a comprehensive understanding of migration
genetics is lacking for any species. Migration is not a single trait, but is
better described as a syndrome that includes a variety of traits, including
those involved in metabolism, development, sensory processing and reproduction.
Monarch butterflies are well suited to study migration because of their
naturally occurring variation in migratory phenotypes, and the growing
availability of genetic tools in this species. Monarchs are best known for their
spectacular annual migration in eastern North America, during which millions of
monarchs fly from the US and Canada to overwintering sites in Mexico. What is
less appreciated is that monarchs west of the Rocky Mountains undergo a shorter
migration to the California coast, and that monarchs have formed non-migratory
populations around the world. This project will capitalize on this naturally
occurring variation in migration phenotypes to obtain a comprehensive view of
the genetics of migration. To do this, the researchers will perform genetic
crosses between migratory and non-migratory monarchs and quantify phenotypic
traits related to migration in parental and F2 generations. They will re-
sequence monarch genomes, perform Quantitative Trait Locus mapping and use
targeted genome editing to: (1) identify genomic regions and genes associated
with migration phenotypes; (2) characterize behavior and genetics associated
with divergent migration distances; and (3) functionally test candidate
migration genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.