* 1922890
* Collaborative Research: Obesity as a natural experiment to investigate bone functional adaptation.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Daniel Wescott, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 160,439.00

While it is understood that bone is a dynamic, living tissue that responds to
changes in the forces applied to it, researchers do not yet have a complete and
detailed understanding of this response in humans. This project will compare the
skeletons of individuals who were overweight and healthy-weight during life to
determine the effects of increased loading and altered walking mechanics on bone
microstructure. Results will help clarify the role mechanical force plays in
determining bone microstructure and assess the sensitivity of bone to load
alteration. Understanding changes in bone microstructure as a function of
loading may help anthropologists reconstruct past behaviors from bone form and
may also inform clinical understanding of conditions such as osteoporosis and
osteoarthritis. Elucidating the relationship between body weight and bone
microstructure may also provide forensic anthropologists new insights for
identifying decedents from skeletal material. As part of this project, three
female graduate students will receive diverse and intense hands-on research
training in high-resolution computed tomography, image analysis, and bone
microstructure analysis. In addition, the project will foster public science
outreach, specifically engaging students traditionally underrepresented in STEM
fields.

The theoretical basis behind the scientific understanding of bone functional
adaptation is that bone tissue that experiences high levels of mechanical strain
will adapt by adding bone material, while low strain levels will lead to bone
resorption or reduction. The goal of this project is to test bone functional
adaptation ("Wolff's Law") in humans using obesity as a natural experiment in
load alteration. Results will establish if and how variation in locomotor motion
(kinematics) and applied forces (kinetics) associated with obesity manifest in
the trabecular structure of the human skeleton. The researchers will collect
high-resolution computed tomography image stacks of bones that are part of an
extremely well-documented human skeletal collection. Using novel analytical
techniques and leveraging well-established image analysis, this project will
quantify the patterns of trabecular bone distribution in obese and healthy-
weight individuals across the human skeleton. Results will advance knowledge
about trabecular bone structure in the human skeleton and its relationship to
mechanical loading, produce guidelines for data collection and analysis, and
generate data and software for future research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.