* 1922257
* Improving Methods of Participatory Soil Science through Interdisciplinary and International Collaboration
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Abby Kinchy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 12/31/2023
* USD 507,284.00

Polluted soil threatens the environment and human health in communities
worldwide, yet soil contamination has not been the focus of many public health
interventions, and people who encounter heavy metals in soil are rarely aware of
their presence or the harms they can cause. This project responds to this
problem with a "citizen science" approach to studying soil, focusing on urban
soil. Citizen science involves the public in scientific research; in this case,
testing soil for heavy metal contaminants, exploring the sources of
contamination, and envisioning strategies for protecting public health. A
shortcoming of many citizen science projects is that they attempt to reproduce
narrow disciplinary approaches to a research topic, rather than grappling with
the multifaceted ways that people interact with their environments. In contrast,
this project assembles a multidisciplinary team, including sociologists, a
chemical engineer, an environmental scientist, a geographer, and an artist, to
create a Community Soil Study Toolkit that guides citizen scientists to study
soil contamination from multiple perspectives that are relevant to their lives.
In addition to the environmental knowledge yielded by creating and implementing
this Toolkit, this project provides a unique case study of collaborative citizen
science to address complex socio-environmental problems. The research therefore
helps to answer a central question in science and technology studies (STS): what
kinds of practices are effective for bringing attention to society and culture
into scientific work? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research includes three
interrelated tasks. The first task is a sociological analysis of the soil
testing field, including in-depth interviews with about 20 people engaged in
community-based soil research and extensive analysis of relevant documents, to
understand the social and material obstacles to widespread soil testing. These
interviews and documents provide necessary technical and social context for the
citizen science project, while also illuminating how technologies, standards,
policies, materials, cultural perceptions, political conflicts, disciplinary
pressures, and economic forces create conditions of "undone" soil science. The
second task is the design and diffusion of a Community Soil Study Toolkit,
including do-it-yourself (DIY) arsenic and lead test kits. Creating the Toolkit
includes laboratory work and participatory design, continually documenting and
addressing the tensions that arise between technical and social questions,
across different scales, and in terms of credibility for different audiences.
The third task is to carry out participatory studies of soil contamination with
community-based collaborators, using the Community Soil Study Toolkit and
revising it as necessary. The process and outcomes are compared across contexts
using in-depth interviews with citizen science participants and detailed
ethnographic field notes. The participation of the public in this project serves
to communicate the hazards associated with heavy metals, support local efforts
to raise concerns about contaminated environments, and bring university
researchers and the public together to create social and scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.