* 1922562
* RCN: Integrating and Translating Conservation Paleobiology
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michal Kowalewski, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 519,595.00

This Research Coordination Network (RCN) is developing new ways to use
paleontological and historical data to improve management and restoration of
natural habitats. Fossils and other archives of the past can inform us about
natural habitats that existed before humans appeared on our planet. Moreover,
researchers have shown recently that the fossil record can help us to assess the
ongoing loss of species and habitats. That is, the knowledge of the past can
help us to better protect and restore threatened plants and animals. The project
brings together scientists and stakeholders (communities, agencies, and
industry) to ensure that historical archives effectively assist conservation
efforts. The project benefits society via community-building activities
(workshops and field courses), online training programs (webinars), and student
education programs. Well-tested strategies are maximizing participation of
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Coordination
Network (RCN) is transforming conservation paleobiology from a cluster of novel
academic projects into an applied science that transfers geohistorical data to
stakeholder groups and is adept at responding to stakeholder needs. The project
addresses two key objectives: 1) Internal Integration, which is bringing
together disparate efforts, establishing best practices, connecting efforts
across regions, and coordinating the training of future researchers in these
best practices; and 2) External Integration, which focuses on networking of
scientists and stakeholders to make conservation paleobiology a translational
science wherein new knowledge evolves via interactions between scientists and
scientific data users. To achieve these goals, we are using grass-roots
strategies to build a Community of Practice which is developing (1) Working
Groups that tackle key questions of conservation paleobiology; (2) System-
Focused Field Courses that engage students, junior faculty, and stakeholders;
and (3) Webinars dedicated to training future conservation
scientists/practitioners. The RCN is managed by PI and the Steering Committee
comprised of scientists, conservation practitioners, and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.