* 1922914
* EDGE CT:  Development of a Molecular Toolkit for Integrative Organismal Research in the Microcrustacean Daphnia pulex
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Michael Lynch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,799,999.00

This project is designed to have substantial impact on the research community by
providing a readily accessible molecular toolbox, methodologies, and working
stocks for Daphnia biologists with little prior experience in this area. The
tools to be developed will allow the investigator to focus on any gene, and then
in relatively short order determine the molecular, cellular, developmental,
and/or behavioral consequences of complete gene knockout or gene-
sequence/expression modifications. In addition, tools will be developed to allow
evaluation of the consequences of altering gene function in a small subset of
tissues or for a limited time span. Most notably, strains will be engineered in
ways that will greatly reduce the complexity of future work on gene functions,
minimizing the need for injection of reagents, and ensuring permanent
preservation of key stocks. In addition, a web browser to be developed will
serve as a freely available platform through which investigators can query a
very large data base on the genome-level molecular variation across the species,
simplifying the design of future vectors for genetic transformation and gene-
expression modification. Workshops will help disseminate the research methods
and train potential users from ecology to molecular/cell/developmental biology.
With the development of the proposed methods, we expect D. pulex to become
established rapidly as a major model for the integrative understanding of
organismal biology, from cellular and developmental function to phenotypic and
ecological consequences. The broader impacts of the project will include the
training of students, postdocs, and undergraduate researchers, workshops, and
the dissemination of tools to the large Daphina research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a set of
molecular reagents and genetic stocks to transform the aquatic microcrustacean
Daphnia pulex into a major model for the efficient study of the role of gene
functions in establishing phenotypes. Methods will be developed for efficient
knockouts of gene functions, modifications or replacements of DNA sequences, and
establishment of tissue-specific expression. Specialized Daphnia strains will be
developed with landing sites for efficient insertion of novel gene sequences and
allowing germline- and tissue-specific expression of gene modifications. These
constructs will be permanently maintained on constant genetic backgrounds.
Because preliminary evidence exists that most of the individual steps required
for these methods operate in Daphnia, the development of this platform for
integrative biology has a high probability of success. In effect, by developing
such tools, we (along with other members of the research community) hope to
bridge the gap between molecular/cellular genetics and phenotypic variation
associated with natural biodiversity. Many unique attributes make D. pulex
exceptionally suited for this kind of work: a very short generation time; a
transparent body; a substantial database on ecology and physiology; considerable
morphological and behavioral plasticity; propagation of genotypes by clonal
reproduction, combined with an ability to outcross; the ability to store resting
eggs in a near maintenance-free manner for decades; and broad understanding of
genome-wide sequence variation across the entire species. This project is
designed to have substantial impact on the research community by providing a
readily accessible molecular toolbox, methodologies, and working stocks for
Daphnia biologists with little prior experience in this area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the EDGE program and the
Behavioral Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and
the Division of Emerging Frontiers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.