* 1922755
* Collaborative Research: Signaling Mechanisms in the Crustacean Molting Gland
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* David Durica, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 340,898.00

Crabs, lobsters, and shrimp are ecologically and economically important
crustaceans in marine environments. The hard, calcified exoskeleton provides
protection and support, but restricts growth. As a result, these animals must
periodically shed the exoskeleton, a process called molting. Upon molting,
animals stretch the new exoskeleton before it hardens, providing more space for
tissue growth. The entire process is controlled by molting hormone produced by a
pair of molting glands. The activity of the molting gland is controlled by
environmental signals mediated by the nervous system. Much remains to be known
about the signaling genes that control the molting gland, in particular the
genes required for (1) committing the animal to molt and (2) repressing the
molting gland after the animal molts. Commitment is a “point of no return”
decision that is critical for survival and growth in all crustaceans. Repression
prevents molt induction until synthesis and calcification of the exoskeleton is
completed. This collaborative project involves a team of investigators from four
universities who will use state-of-art DNA and peptide sequencing technologies
to identify genes and proteins essential for the activation, commitment, and
repression of the molting gland and its regulation by environmental signals. The
data generated will be made available to researchers so that they can better
understand how to manage fisheries, develop effective aquaculture practices, and
mitigate the effects of pollutants and climate change. Three postdoctoral
fellows, four graduate students, and 6-8 undergraduates will receive training in
advanced molecular techniques and bioinformatics. An educational outreach
program for teachers recruited from junior high and high schools in northeastern
Colorado will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In crustaceans, paired molting
glands (Y-organs or YOs) produce ecdysteroids necessary for systemic molt cycle
control. Molt-inhibiting hormone (MIH), produced in the eyestalk ganglia,
inhibits the synthesis of ecdysteroids by the YO via a putative G protein-
coupled receptor (GPCR) and cyclic nucleotide second messengers. The project
will use transcriptomic and proteomic tools to determine the signaling
mechanisms that drive YO phenotypic changes over the molt cycle; these are
designated basal in intermolt, activated in early premolt, committed in mid and
late premolt, and repressed in postmolt. The specific aims are to: (1) determine
how MIH signaling inhibits Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin (mTOR) activity; (2)
determine the role of Transforming Growth Factor beta/Activin signaling in YO
commitment; (3) determine the role of ecdysteroids on YO entry into, and exit
from, the repressed state; and (4) characterize the MIH receptor. The first
three aims will quantify the phenotypic effects of experimental signaling
manipulations on YO state transitions. Network analysis of RNA-sequence and
liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry data will determine the effects
of experimental treatments on gene interactions and downstream targets of
signaling pathways. Aim #4 uses transcriptomic tools and a luciferase
ligand/receptor binding assay with recombinant neuropeptides to characterize
candidate GPCRs for receptor function. A thorough understanding of the hormonal
regulation of decapod molting and growth is essential to manage fisheries,
develop effective aquaculture practices, and mitigate potential effects of
pollutants and environmental factors on an economically and ecologically
important group of marine organisms. Three postdocs, four graduate students, and
6-8 undergraduates will receive training in advanced molecular techniques and
bioinformatics, and a grade 6-12 teacher will be involved in educational
outreach on the research topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.