* 1922579
* NRT: Interdisciplinary Consortium for Applied Research in Ecology and Evolution (ICARE): Broadening Participation Across the Environmental Sciences in Baltimore Harbor
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kevin Omland, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,822,789.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County will deliver an innovative training
program designed to broaden participation in the environmental workforce and
empower the next generation of scientists to apply research to environmental
problem-solving. Focusing on the socio-ecological challenges facing Baltimore
Harbor, the NRT project integrates (1) a cross-sector internship in which
students conduct policy-relevant scientific research; (2) a series of skills-
based courses to prepare students for the environmental workforce; and (3)
professionally-facilitated interdisciplinary training sessions that engage
students, mentors, and community stakeholders. The project anticipates training
thirty (30) master's students, including eighteen (18) funded trainees from
Biological Sciences, Geography and Environmental Systems, and Chemical,
Biochemical and Environmental Engineering departments. An additional one hundred
fifty (150) master's and doctoral students are expected to benefit from the
courses developed and implemented through this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program will deliver a two-year, thesis-master's program to students from
underrepresented groups that integrates (1) a series of skills-based courses,
(2) interdisciplinary training with two, cumulative CoNavigator (an
interdisciplinary problem-solving tool) training sessions, (3) an individually
tailored curriculum of disciplinary courses, and (4) a cross-sector applied
research internship. NRT activities will focus on the highly urbanized and
industrialized Baltimore Harbor, which forms the basin of the Patapsco River and
a major tributary embayment of the upper Chesapeake Bay. Though many of the
Harbor's environmental issues are public knowledge, scientific literature on the
health of the Harbor is surprisingly scant. Trainee research projects therefore
will be advised by a team consisting of at least one faculty member and one
professional scientist from industry, government, or the non-profit sector
engaged in socioeconomic or environmental research in Baltimore Harbor. These
off-campus partners will serve as research advisors and instructors for trainees
in a two-way knowledge exchange that helps identify research needed for
implementing new policies or evaluating existing policies to protect the Harbor.
Additional community stakeholders will also participate in the interdisciplinary
training sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.