* 1922871
* TRTech-PGR:   A PeptideAtlas for Arabidopsis thaliana and other plant species; harnessing world-wide proteomics data and mining for biological features
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Klaas van Wijk, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,697,365.00

A major limitation of plant research is the accurate identification and
quantification of proteins from tissues and organisms. Mass spectrometry is a
technology that allows scientists to identify thousands of proteins from a
tissue or organism. Together, the collective set of all proteins is called the
"proteome". This project will generate an atlas of identified proteins in the
model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana, commonly named "thale cress", using
publicly available protein mass spectrometry studies from laboratories around
the world. Such an atlas will then allow the researchers to address a number of
important biological questions about this plant proteome. Once the first protein
atlas has been generated for Arabidopsis, the researchers will also generate an
atlas for two crop species, such as maize, rice, or soybean. This project will
also educate and train young scientists in techniques for processing and
managing mass spectrometry data for understanding the proteome of plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The availability of a high quality annotated genome and a
wealth of publicly available mass-spectrometry (MS) based proteomics data makes
Arabidopsis thaliana an ideal plant for mapping its proteome and improving
genome annotation. The research team will integrate this information with other
systems data to address a range of outstanding questions and hypotheses. Taking
advantage of the Human PeptideAtlas proteome infrastructure, by co-PI Deutsch
and colleagues at ISB, this project will generate the first Arabidopsis
PeptideAtlas based on hundreds of existing MS studies from laboratories around
the world, collected through ProteomeXchange (http://www.proteomexchange.org/),
and reanalyzed through a uniform processing pipeline. All matched MS-derived
peptide data will be projected onto predicted primary protein sequences with
links to spectral, technical and biological metadata. This PeptideAtlas and its
metadata will serve to address several biological questions and hypotheses, such
as which mRNA isoforms are supported by proteomics evidence and is there
evidence for intra-protein cross-talk or competition between PTMs. The
Arabidopsis PeptideAtlas will be linked to TAIR (https://www.arabidopsis.org/)
and other web-based resources. Complete dataset will be publicly available for
download, thus further facilitating data mining by the scientific community and
amplifying the impact of this project. Once the first few builds are released
for Arabidopsis, and following community feedback/interactions, PeptideAtlas
building will be extended to other plant species of societal and/or economic
importance for which extensive and comprehensive MS-based proteomics data are
available (e.g. maize, tomato, rice, soybean).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.