* 1922542
* Using a queueing framework to explore the design principles of synthetic circuits in microorganisms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Madhav Nepal, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,138,000.00

Survival in environments with limited resources (e.g. nutrients) is a challenge
encountered by a variety of microbial systems. Although it has long been
appreciated that microbes adapt and evolve to cope with resource limitations,
there remains a need to better understand how cellular machinery involved in the
processing of finite resources are important in a cell, including molecular
machines that control protein production, degradation, and modification. The
team of investigators explores the underlying design principles governing
synthetic and native biological "circuits" in E. coli that are central to
cellular resource allocation processes. In addition to characterizing the
resource processing and allocation machinery, the project develops an associated
queueing theory (a mathematical study of waiting lines) framework to analyze the
system, which will provide a unifying and intuitive framework for biomolecular
resource allocation systems. As part of the educational Broader Impacts of the
project, investigators will recruit students, including those from
underrepresented groups, to participate in synthetic biology research
experiences. Additionally, the project will provide professional development
workshops for K-12 science teachers to enhance their ability to integrate
synthetic biology modules into their classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
cellular machinery involved in crucial processes such as metabolism,
transcription, translation, and protein degradation are designed to avoid
overloading cellular systems when resources are limited, as overloading could
lead to the formation of waiting lines (i.e., biological queueing). To
investigate queueing in biomolecular processes, this project combines
techniques, such as fluorescence microscopy and microfluidics, with synthetic
biology and quantitative modeling to infer theoretical queueing principles
behind the dynamics of both synthetic and native biological networks. Focusing
on proteolytic pathways in E. coli cells, investigators combine single-cell and
high-throughput techniques to quantify and mathematically model crosstalk, or
proteolytic bottlenecks, between proteins targeted to and competing for multiple
degradation pathways. Results of this project has the potential to advance the
use of queueing theory for the analysis of synthetic circuits and enhance our
understanding of how native biological processes allocate dynamically varying
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.