* 1922066
* Standard Grant: Cochlear Implants, (Re)Distribution, Maintenance, and Cures
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michele Friedner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 12/31/2023
* USD 266,445.00

This project is a multi-sited study of an innovative national program that
provides deaf children below the poverty line with cochlear implants. The
cochlear implant is the oldest and most widely used neuroprosthetic device and
thus presents a rich opportunity to investigate the complex social issues
surrounding the bionic creation, restoration, and enhancement of human
capabilities. The World Health Organization estimates that 460 million people
globally experience hearing loss. While the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities recognizes deaf people as a linguistic
minority who should have access to signed languages, in the last two decades the
use of cochlear implants to mitigate deafness has increasingly become a
normalized procedure, with over 350,000 recipients worldwide. The prevalence of
cochlear implants has sparked debates - e.g., about the ethics of elective
surgery for children, its effects on signing deaf communities, and the very
notions of normality, deafness, hearing, and disability as such. Cochlear
implants create new categories of deaf people, "deaf hearers," who might hear
typically in a sound booth, but who have increasingly complicated relationships
with other deaf and disabled people and the categories of deafness and
disability, and who negotiate access to state resources allocated to disabled
people with different stakes. However, most scholarly analysis and accounts of
these debates and categories have focused on developed contexts. In contrast,
the project analyzes how the category of disability is changing in developing
contexts because of biotechnological interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research ethnographically analyzes how knowledge, practices, and experiences of
and about cochlear implants circulate and interact with one another in a
developing context that is unique in the scope and scale of its state-sponsored
programs directed at deafness. Cochlear implants are material, moral, social,
and political infrastructures that connect people with each other, with
medicine, and with the state and they have the potential to remake identities,
relationships, and educational and livelihood paths. The project involves
conducting ethnographic research at schools, clinics, hospitals, meeting spaces,
family households, and activist events as well as conducting in-depth interviews
with multiple stakeholders including government officials, surgeons,
rehabilitation professionals, cochlear implant manufacturers, educators, deaf
people, and families. The project thus brings multiple discourses together under
one science and technology studies research umbrella to illuminate the
possibilities and limits of biotechnology adoption, adaptation, and maintenance.
Extensive field work provides opportunity to interact with and gather data from
key stakeholders ranging from user support groups and clinical device and care
providers to government policy makers and the World Health Organization. In
addition to a monograph, the project will produce and disseminate working papers
of findings and convene a two-day conference at the University of Chicago
featuring roundtables of diverse stakeholders to facilitate engagement at the
end of this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.