* 1922591
* NRT-HDR: Interdisciplinary Graduate Training in the Science, Technology, and Applications of Augmented and Virtual Reality
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jannick Rolland, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,575,500.00

Augmented and virtual reality (AR/VR) promises to become one of the most
disruptive technologies of the 21st century, revolutionizing how we interact
with each other, with our environment, and with devices and systems. VR uses
advanced display and immersive audio technologies to create an interactive,
three-dimensional (3D) environment. AR uses digital technology to overlay
virtual objects onto the physical world to provide information and embellish our
experiences. Current and envisioned application areas include education,
healthcare, professional training, architectural and product design, remote
interaction, and entertainment. Continued progress in the burgeoning field of
AR/VR requires researchers with Ph.D. training and research experience spanning
multiple disciplines including electronic and computing systems, perceptual and
cognitive neuroscience, optics and imaging, computer vision, acoustics and
audio, and human-computer interfaces. To address this need and realize the
transformative potential of AR/VR technologies, this National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) Award to the University of Rochester will facilitate
the development of a structured, multi-disciplinary Ph.D. training program on
AR/VR. The project anticipates training 62 PhD students, including 12 funded
trainees, from Electrical and Computer Engineering, Optics, Biomedical
Engineering, Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Computer Science, and Neuroscience.
In addition, the project will benefit approximately 300 other STEM graduate
students who will participate in aspects of the training and professional
development. Trainees will gain the vision and skills to advance AR/VR
technologies as well as an appreciation for the broader cultural and societal
implications of these technologies. The project will train inclusive cohorts of
scientists and engineers to contribute to society as technical leaders in
industry, academia, and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will train
a new cohort of Ph.D. students with a unique set of competencies in the AR/VR
domain. It will help shape how future scientists and engineers will be trained
not only in AR/VR but more broadly in human-data-system interfaces. The project
will advance interdisciplinary research with an innovative theme: integration of
quantitative models of human perceptual-cognitive processes into cross-layer
design approaches to create and quantitatively evaluate new AR/VR technologies
and applications. Research thrusts integrated with the training program in a
cross-cutting manner will advance the scientific foundations of AR/VR systems
and impact the design of next-generation AR/VR systems. These research thrusts,
corresponding to four layers of the AR/VR problem domain, are: (1) AR/VR
platforms and computation, (2) perceptual-cognitive aspects of AR/VR design, (3)
machine intelligence for AR/VR systems, and (4) AR/VR interfaces and
applications. The training program contains three new innovative courses
addressing the diverse backgrounds of incoming trainees, exposing them to AR/VR
challenges and providing competency to work on AR/VR projects within multi-
disciplinary teams as well as a variety of structured professional development
activities. In addition, the training will include industry internships and
immersive professional development encounters with industry leaders. Both the
graduate training model and its outcomes will be widely disseminated to the
broader academic community through organized events and a web presence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.