* 1922666
* NRT-HDR: Convergent Graduate Training and EmPOWERment for a Sustainable Energy Future
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Elena Irwin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,980,383.00

A sustainable energy future depends on transitioning the U.S. electric power
system to a cost-effective, resilient, and reliable energy supply, while
decarbonizing energy production and use. This project will exploit the
simultaneous proliferation of data generated from ubiquitous sensing and control
systems and the increasing use of decentralized (often renewable) energy
resources to accelerate energy-technology innovation. Harnessing this data
revolution requires the convergence of a range of energy-sector stakeholders and
disciplines. To meet the challenge and future workforce needs, this National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to The Ohio State University
will train the next generation of energy innovators to work across disciplines
to drive energy-technology and energy-policy innovations. Energy sector partners
will join multidisciplinary teams of faculty and graduate students to create a
high-functioning and inclusive innovation ecosystem using Ohio State's campus as
a real-world test bed. The project anticipates training eighty (80) PhD
students, including thirty-two (32) funded trainees, from diverse fields such as
public policy; computer science; environmental economics; materials science;
geography; and electrical and computer, environmental, and industrial and
systems engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NRT EmPOWERment project leverages
the power of use-inspired research and innovation as a training environment,
bringing practitioners together in a team-building environment. Trainees will
develop their innovation and collaborative abilities through a trans-university
graduate interdisciplinary specialization that delivers integrated training in
data science, energy system modeling, economics, business, behavioral science,
policy, and law. A student community of practice will provide continuity through
collaborative activities, mentoring, and support for retaining students
(especially students from traditionally underrepresented groups) and prepare
students to thrive in a variety of careers. Open to all graduate students in any
field, the specialization and community of practice will use permanent
institutional mechanisms to expand the NRT program's impact and to encourage the
contribution of diverse perspectives (e.g., other STEM fields, law, business,
medicine). The project leverages a 50-year university-industry partnership to
support energy research, operations, and campus sustainability, providing
trainees with concrete opportunities to develop 1) novel digital and physical
components such as batteries, materials, and algorithms; 2) integrated
assessment, optimization, and predictive modeling capabilities for future
scenarios (e.g., economic, environmental, and social); and 3) new policies,
educational mechanisms and business strategies. In addition to driving energy
technology and policy innovations, EmPOWERment will study its own processes,
evaluating the effectiveness of this convergent design in helping students
achieve partner-specified learning outcomes and build their own capacities for
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.