* 1922321
* DMREF: Hydrogel-actuated cellular soft robotic materials with programmable mechanical properties
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Lewis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,750,000.00

Non-technical Description: One of the grand challenges in materials science and
engineering is the ability to design active and adaptive materials that
dynamically change configuration and functionality in response to specific
triggers and changes in the surrounding environment. Architected matter with
shape morphing capabilities and on-demand programmability of mechanical
properties (i.e., soft robotic materials) will have a wealth of applications in
deployable systems, dynamic optics, soft robotics, and medicine. Hydrogels, a
class of stimuli-responsive materials, are promising constituents for designing
such soft robotic materials. Hydrogels can change their volume by several fold
in response to various environmental cues. Furthermore, most hydrogels are
transparent and stretchable, as well as cost-efficient and environmentally
friendly. However, most hydrogels are soft and brittle and the stresses that
they can generate and tolerate are rather limited. To improve their actuation
force and mechanical integrity, they have to be integrated in hybrid systems
with stiffer materials and structures. The project will explore how to combine
hydrogel units with elastomeric cellular scaffolds carefully designed to amplify
the output of the active components. Upon activation, low-stress deformations of
hydrogel muscles positioned in the scaffolds will induce large reconfigurations
in the scaffold morphology and enable work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The proposed project introduces and investigates a new class of
active, reconfigurable, and shape-morphing soft robotic materials with
programmed mechanical properties based on elastomeric cellular structures
actuated by hydrogel muscles. The objective is to establish robust and
computationally efficient methods to capture their highly non-linear response,
to synthesize hydrogels that generate large deformations in response to external
stimuli, to identify cellular architectures that amplify and direct the
hydrogels' response, to develop 3D printing strategies that enables fabrication
of computationally identified material designs, and to solve the inverse problem
of identifying realizable layouts that form soft robotic matter with the desired
behavior. Guided by these studies, the research team will then explore
opportunities for application of the active soft robotic materials in the design
of smart and adaptive structures, including manipulators, reconfigurable
structures and adaptive optics. The research is expected to enable material
design capabilities that shift the current paradigm for soft robotic materials
by creating an efficient work-flow that given a target application identifies
the optimal cellular microstructure and hydrogel
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.