* 1922371
* DMREF: Collaborative Research:Elastomers Filled with Electro- and Magneto-Active Fluid Inclusions: A New Paradigm for Soft Active Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ioannis Chasiotis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,139,113.00

Over the last two decades, increasing research efforts have been devoted to the
mathematics, mechanics, and physics of soft organic solids with the ultimate
objective of capitalizing on the potential that these materials hold to enable a
broad spectrum of new technologies. Among these efforts, recent advances in
mathematical modeling and polymer processing have just revealed elastomers
filled with electro- and magneto-sensitive fluid (as opposed to the conventional
solid) inclusions as a potentially revolutionary class of advanced soft organic
solids that may enable a plethora of next generation sensors and actuators
capable of exhibiting extreme and unprecedented electro- and magneto-mechanical
properties. In this context, this Designing Materials to Revolutionize and
Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports a research collaboration on the
mathematical and computational bottom-up analysis and design and the
experimental synthesis and characterization of the coupled electro- and magneto-
mechanical properties of elastomers filled with three broad types of fluid
inclusions - namely, electrically charged gas-filled pores, liquid-metal
inclusions, and ferrofluid inclusions - with the objective of accelerating the
pace of fundamental understanding and technological deployment of this promising
class of materials. This project will train three graduate students for careers
in academia or industry and will integrate research results in the undergraduate
and graduate curricula at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and the
Pennsylvania State University. The investigators will also carry out activities
to promote interest in high school students to pursue higher education and
careers in STEM programs, and especially in the fields of mathematics and
materials science, through the creation of lesson modules and laboratory
demonstrations. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this project
is three-fold: 1) derive and numerically implement the homogenized equations
describing the macroscopic electro- and magneto-mechanical response of
elastomers filled with compressible and incompressible fluid inclusions directly
accounting for the mechanical, electric, and magnetic interfacial forces at the
elastomer/fluid-inclusion interfaces; 2) deploy the derived homogenized
equations to guide the design of fluid inclusions that lead to porous electrets
and elastomers filled with liquid-metal and ferrofluid inclusions with
exceptional macroscopic electro- and magneto-mechanical properties; and 3)
fabricate and characterize the microscopic and macroscopic properties of
representative classes of electrets with electrically charged gas-filled pores,
elastomers filled with liquid-metal inclusions, and elastomers filled with
ferrofluid inclusions. The theoretical component involves new mathematical
results and their associated numerical implementation that directly account for
the rapid spatial variation (at the microscopic scale of the fluid inclusions)
of space electrical charges and interfacial forces in the homogenization of the
governing equations, namely, balance of momenta and Maxwell's equations. The
experimental component, on the other hand, entails the synthesis of these new
classes of multifunctional material systems and the development of new
experiments that leverage in-situ X-ray tomography and thermally stimulated
depolarization current measurements to extract the interfacial forces and space
charge content and behavior at the elastomer/fluid-inclusion
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.