* 1922782
* SCC: Video Based Machine Learning for Smart Traffic Analysis and Management
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Sanjay Ranka, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,999,770.00

The goal of this project is to further the ability of cities and communities to
deploy technology that saves lives through safer transportation systems. The
approach is to create open source analytics solutions to enable novel
transportation applications that utilize data from low-cost video sensors. Video
data are processed using edge computing (inexpensive computing hardware that
performs analysis without storing significant amounts of data) in order to
reduce the amount of data stored. Social dimensions of the research project
emerge from the deep research partnership between the City and the University,
with the goal to provide replicable and near-term social impacts. The project
aligns with the Vision Zero concept to reduce traffic fatalities, with programs
that are based on education, enforcement and design. By understanding the risk
profile of an intersection through automated detection of near miss events,
communities will be able to proactively design and alter streets and
intersections to be safer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of designing a smart
city, when addressing the technical challenges at the intersection, street and
system levels, has several research components. (i) Development of new
algorithms for multi-target tracking: The problems of occlusion, temporal
assignment of features to objects and target motion will be jointly formulated.
(ii) Integrated optimization and simulation for signal control: We formulate the
problem of estimating signal control parameters (offsets, phasing etc.) in a
network as one of global optimization. (iii) Real-time reinforcement learning is
a natural choice when online machine learning meets real world feedback from the
City. Our ability to obtain and analyze continuous-time data at the network
level will provide insights on how conflict points and patterns can change
through the network. This is expected to impact decisions in traffic management,
smart city planning and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.