* 1922514
* GRC Animal-Microbe Symbioses 2019, Vermont, June 16 - 21, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Angela Douglas, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,375.00

Over the last decade, it has become apparent that the health of all animals,
including humans, are dependent on interactions with complex communities of
microorganisms that live in the gut, on the surface, and at other locations in
the body of the animal host. The Gordon Research Conference on Animal-Microbe
Symbioses provides a unique opportunity for researchers at all career stages to
meet and discuss the latest developments in this burgeoning scientific
discipline. A key topic at this conference is the mechanisms by which
microorganisms protect animals against pathogens (functioning as a "second
immune system"), provide nutrients, and generally sustain the health and vigor
of their animal host. A second important theme for the conference is how the
microbial inhabitants of one animal influence the host's interactions with other
animals and plants, with the potential for cascading effects through natural
ecosystems (e.g., oceans, forests), as well as managed agricultural landscapes.
These scientific discussions will be facilitated by the great breadth of
expertise among the conference participants, including internationally-acclaimed
invited speakers and also early-career scientists, who will present their
research at highly-interactive sessions. In addition to providing the
opportunity for the exchange of information and views in the science sections,
this conference has sessions on professional development. In particular, the
two-day Gordon Research Seminar for early-career researchers includes a panel
event on Science Communication, in collaboration with distinguished science
journalists. As such, the conference will shape the future of how we study,
understand, and manage symbiotic associations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
recognition that all higher organisms live in symbiotic association with
microorganisms has opened up a new perspective in biology. Animals and humans
alike are now considered as complex ecosystems each consisting of the host and
its associated microbiome, which together serve as functional units of
selection. Like a Russian doll, the metabolic processes of the symbionts are
translated into organism functions which can have profound effects on the
ecosystem scale. The conference addresses recent technological and conceptual
advances in a uniquely broad range of hosts (from sponges to humans) and with
diverse symbionts (from organelles, viruses, bacteria to fungi). The broad sweep
of systems and approaches adopted in this conference will facilitate new
insights into common mechanisms shaping diverse associations, and enhance
understanding of the causes and consequences of the loss of symbiotic
equilibrium (dysbiosis). The linked Gordon Research Seminar will offer a venue
for graduate students and postdoctoral researchers to present their findings and
discuss ideas in an informal setting, in conjunction with sessions on Science
Communication. Both the Gordon Research Conference and Research Seminar on
Animal-Microbe Symbioses will promote the fullest participation of scientists of
diverse disciplinary backgrounds, all career stages and ethnicities, with
particular attention to ensuring gender balance and support for under-
represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.