* 1922436
* Student Support for the 35th IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/29/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The annual IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) addresses
research issues in designing, building, managing, and evaluating advanced data-
intensive systems and applications. It is a leading forum for researchers,
practitioners, developers, and users to explore cutting-edge ideas and to
exchange techniques, tools, and experiences. The 35th ICDE is held at Macau,
China April 8 - 12, 2019. This award enables diverse US students to participate
in ICDE-2019, provides opportunities to the students to interact with other
attendees and attend the educational events being offered. The students'
participation in ICDE-2019 is important to the students research training and
will develop the future generation of leaders and workforce in the increasingly
critical data management field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supported students
will have opportunities to showcase their research results, learn about the
cutting edge research conducted by others, and interact with experts at a
premier data engineering conference. ICDE-2019 includes a comprehensive program
including research papers presentations, tutorials, panels, industrial papers,
and technical demonstrations that provide a platform for exchange of research
results and ideas, interaction and education. The program also includes
workshops that demand dedicated coverage due to their relevance to the current
data management research and development, industrial exhibits, and keynote talks
by leaders in academia and industry. The students will also have an opportunity
to participate in a PhD Symposium, which provides a forum for PhD students to
present their research ideas, and interact with and receive feedback from senior
members of the research community in academia and industry. The focus of the PhD
Symposium is on mentorship and providing constructive feedback to the students.
The Symposium fosters a collaborative environment, encouraging constructive
discussions and sharing of ideas. These opportunities will have a long lasting
impact on the future career of the participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.