* 1922234
* DMREF: Collaborative Research: Complex Nanofeatures in Crystals: Theory and Experiment Meet in the Cloud
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Qiang Du, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,150,000.00

Non-technical Description: Everything, from phones to people, are made of
materials. As mankind seeks technological solutions to its biggest problems, we
constantly seek materials that will do their tasks with higher performance. We
want batteries with higher energy density, screens that are touch sensitive,
windows that are smart, and so on. Inevitably, the search for better materials
leads to greater complexity in the materials themselves, including
nanostructuring them: engineering them on a tiny scale of one billionth of a
meter. Recent investigations have shone light on a previously overlooked class
of materials: bulk crystals that naturally have nanoscale broken symmetry
structures patterned over the average crystal structure. These were overlooked
because they are hard to detect experimentally, something which recent
developments in experimental techniques is overcoming. Since they weren't known
about, there was no theoretical effort to find and understand them. However,
recently theoretical support for their existence has come through the discovery
that such nanostructured symmetry broken structures may, in some cases, be
energetically more stable than the undistorted parent structure. Such materials
are being referred to as polymorphous network materials (PNMs). The goal of this
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project is
to understand the origin of this mysterious materials complexity and with the
greater understanding, to discover new PNMs. (Often nature prefers simpler, high
symmetry solutions to its problems. Why is it not the case in these PNM
materials?) The classes of material that are known PNMs are transition metal
oxides, halides and chalcogenides. These are among the most interesting
materials scientifically (exhibiting exotic but poorly understood effects such
as the ability to turn from a metal to an insulator as a function of temperature
or field, high temperature superconductivity and colossal responses to applied
fields) and with many potential technological applications. This project will
combine the theory and the experimental developments with cloud-based
computational infrastructure that will allow a broader range of researchers to
search for novel PNMs, and to understand the existing ones better. A key aspect
of this project will involve the training of the next generation of scientists
and engineers in the use of the Pair Distribution Function methodology in the
cloud platform. The PIs will educate US and African graduate students in the
interdisciplinary research philosophy integral to the Materials Genome
Initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The project will
combine computation to predict, synthesis to make, and x-ray and neutron local
structure characterization to validate the predictions, an approach that
embodies the Materials Genomics philosophy and applies it to PNMs. Quantum
mechanical density functional theory (DFT) calculations will be applied to
supercells of transition metal oxides and chalcogenides that are sufficiently
large to support the PNM effect, to see if nanostructured distortions can lower
the total energy. These will be applied to classes of known materials, such as
hybrid organic-inorganic halides, to search for and characterize the nature of
the PNM distortions. The most promising materials will be synthesized and
characterized using PDF, a diffraction method sensitive to the local
distortions. A computational infrastructure will be built that will save
results, both theoretical and experimental, to databases for later mining. The
infrastructure will be made available to the community to carry out their own
computational 'experiments'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.