* 1922958
* EDGE CT: Genetic tools to study giant viruses
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Todd Reynolds, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,009,308.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years microbiologists
have become aware of abundant "giant viruses" that infect protists. These
viruses have also been implicated as components of the microbiomes of
multicellular organisms. Many of the genes within these giants are considered
novel for viruses: many genes encode for processes only associated with "living
cellular organisms," like DNA replication or DNA repair, are found in these
viruses. Studies suggest that these giant viruses have collected these genes
from across all biology, leaving these viruses with genomes that can at best be
described as mosaics. Moreover many of the hundreds of genes found in giant
viruses remain completely new to science. In spite of this obvious wealth of
information, we remain without tools to study how these giant virus genes
function or if they are even necessary. This study will develop the tools needed
to do genetic research in a model giant virus system (the Aureococcus
anophagefferens Virus) and establish the ability of these tool sets to be
extended to other giant viruses and their hosts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While discovered only 15 years ago, giant viruses
infecting protists have been shown to be distributed across ecosystems. These
viruses contain functional genes encoding processes that can include light-
dependent and independent DNA repair, sugar metabolism genes and genes
associated with the process of translation. Phylogenetic examinations suggest
these genes have been collected by rampant horizontal gene transfer. This study
will develop protocols required to test gene function and activity in a giant
virus (AaV) that infects the pelagophyte Aureococcus anophagefferens. A member
of the Mimiviridae, AaV is a large virus with a complex complement of genes. The
PIs and trainees will develop in vitro approaches to modify and transform AaV,
including the introduction of antibiotic resistance and/or
chromogenic/fluorogenic proteins for genetically tractable selections for use in
subsequent gene replacement studies. The PIs will test protocols on other
Mimiviridae and Phycodnaviridae that infect algae to determine tractability in
other giant virus-host systems. Along with training of a postdoc, graduate and
undergraduate students, this project will develop tools that allow for
hypothesis driven testing in subsequent studies in a system where many (&gt;
60%) of the gene products are annotated as hypothetical. The project will
communicate protocols through training sessions as well as a dedicated workshop,
and document all approaches in open access through protocols.io. Student
journalists will produce material for public consumption, including short videos
focusing on the positive role of viruses in ecology, the importance of technical
reproducibility in science, and several on the fascinating nature of giant
viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.