* 1922649
* NRT-HDR: Internet of Catalysis - Harnessing Data Science for Catalyst Design
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* James Blakemore, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,967.00

Nearly every aspect of modern life depends on catalysts, from fuels to synthetic
fibers, drugs to detergents, and paints to plastics. Catalysts make and break
molecular bonds, turning raw materials into useful products. With increased
global demand for the products of these catalytic reactions, new and reimagined
catalysts are essential to drive innovation and more effectively utilize our
natural resources. Current strategies for developing catalysts rely mostly on
time-intensive, trial-and-error experiments. Recent advances in computer science
and machine learning have the potential to speed up discovery in this field by
automating search mechanisms for these vastly complex and data-rich systems,
ultimately revealing hidden patterns and physical properties that scientists can
use to design novel catalysts. However, to initiate this data revolution in
catalysis, highly skilled individuals are needed who are capable of
collaborating across the chemical and computer sciences. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Kansas will
address this need by training graduate students to harness data to ask and
answer new questions needed for the discovery of safe, effective, and energy-
efficient chemical conversion processes. The traineeship is designed to provide
a unique, scalable and comprehensive training opportunity for fifty (50) MS and
PhD students, including twenty-five (25) funded trainees, from chemical
engineering, chemistry, and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT
program will lay the groundwork for developing novel data mining and extraction
methodologies, which will in turn accelerate catalytic insights and innovations
with potentially far-reaching advances in challenging chemistries such as water
splitting and alkane oxidation. Decades of research in these chemistries have
led to thousands of publications, yet breakthrough catalysts remain elusive.
With focused training in how to harness the plethora of data, researchers will
establish new insights on catalyst structure-function patterns and correlations
in catalytic materials, leading to potentially transformational advances in
these chemistries. The research program will create modularized data mining
frameworks and reveal machine learning techniques that can decipher complex
property/activity relationships in other catalytic systems as well, ultimately
establishing an Internet of Catalysis. This NRT program will prepare a future
workforce of interdisciplinary scholars who are highly skilled communicators and
leaders capable of excelling in a wide array of careers. Initiatives to promote
active inclusion and graduate school resilience will transform the learning
environment and encourage the full participation of women, underrepresented
minorities, persons with disabilities, and veterans. Key training components
include team building with a global perspective, new courses and a certificate
program, hypothesis-based career planning, inclusion and resilience training,
and technical training. This initiative will impact the training of graduate
students across departments and institutions, contributing to the development
and broad adoption of evidence-based teaching and learning practices for
graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.