* 1922633
* PFI-TT: Next Generation Lithium-Metal Batteries for High Performance, Low Cost and Safe Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Nikhil Koratkar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 09/30/2021
* USD 245,500.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation
(PFI-TT) project is to enable the development of high performance, low cost and
safe Lithium-metal batteries. This is expected to translate into breakthrough
improvements in energy density for next generation energy storage and could
deliver ~2X higher performance and ~3X lower cost than the current best Lithium-
ion batteries. This would enable significant reduction in battery weight, size
and cost for laptops, cell phones, wearable devices, all-electric vehicles, as
well as grid storage. Beyond performance and cost, a major focus of this project
is on battery safety. In particular, we will explore novel methods to prevent
short circuiting and heating problems in lithium-metal batteries, thereby
rendering them safe. The deliverable for this project will be a minimum viable
product that can be subjected to third-party validation and also field-tested by
potential customers. Such testing will provide a detailed understanding of
device level performance, cost and safety metrics and will be instrumental in
advancing this technology towards commercial viability. Our traineeship model
aims to develop a robust entrepreneurial and innovation ecosystem. For this, a
broad range of activities (such as entrepreneurship training, communication
skills development, venture support, internships etc.), will be offered to help
students develop a holistic view of their research.

The proposed project aims to replace graphitic anodes with a vastly superior
alternative in Lithium-ion batteries. Instead of storing lithium atoms within a
graphite host, we propose to store Lithium in its metallic form, which leads to
much higher energy density. However, the Achilles heel for any Lithium-metal
battery is the uncontrolled growth of dendrites which can electrically short the
battery. We propose to overcome this challenge by utilizing a novel approach
that involves applying high current densities of optimized magnitude (for
healing purposes) to generate internal self-heat in the battery. This controlled
heating triggers massive surface diffusion of Lithium on the dendritic surface,
which blunts the dendrite tips and smoothens the Lithium metal surface. Our main
objective is to demonstrate safe (i.e., dendrite-free) operation of high energy
density and low cost Lithium-metal batteries in larger format pouch and
cylindrical cells and perform detailed device level characterization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.