* 1922966
* Moving from correlation to mechanism: testing the role of temperature and oxygen change in the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Erik Sperling, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 297,897.00

Oxygen levels and temperature change are generally recognized as two of the most
important environmental factors affecting marine ecosystems, both in the
geologic past and in the modern ocean. This project examines the Great
Ordovician Biodiversification Event (GOBE), a major increase in the diversity of
marine life that occurred approximately 460 million years ago, when there were
dramatic changes in oxygen levels and temperature. This project will use a
unique combination of geological fieldwork, laboratory measurements of trace
metal isotopes, Earth system modeling, and physiological insights from living
organisms to understand the role that both oxygen and temperature play in
driving major events in the history of life, such as evolutionary radiations and
mass extinctions. The results also will help stakeholders better predict how
modern global change will affect living marine populations, with implications
for the future development of economic and food resources (e.g., fishing and
aquaculture). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use an ecophysiological
approach to test the causal role of oxygen and temperature change in driving
biodiversity dynamics during the Great Ordovician Biodiversification Event. This
integrated project will 1) build a record of Ordovician oceanic redox change
using new Mo and U trace metal isotope measurements, and compile temperature
estimates from the literature, 2) conduct the necessary physiological
measurements on brachiopods, bryozoans, mollusks, and echinoderms that are
required to fully leverage the Metabolic Index in addressing paleontological
questions, 3) use Earth system models to build a time series of model states
consistent with available geochemical data, and 4) use the Metabolic Index to
evaluate the proportion of biotic change observed in the fossil record during
the GOBE that can be explained by oxygen, temperature, and their synergistic
combination. The use of physiological measurements to understand how ecosystem
reorganizations can be mediated at the organismal scale creates mechanistic
links that complement the descriptive and correlative methods for testing
hypotheses of climate-ecosystem linkages. Broader Impacts of this proposal
include early career training, ecological conservation, and a STEM outreach
project with local high school robotics teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.