* 1922504
* SusChEM: Non-precious metal substitution into hydrogenation metal alloy catalysts deposited onto redox active supports for facile nitrate destruction in drinking water
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Simon Humphrey, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 343,504.00

United States companies spend almost $3 billion a year buying and making
reduction catalysts to help create fuel, fertilizers, and medicines. Given this
investment and proven success, it is perhaps surprising that these catalysts are
not used to produce potable drinking water. Instead, current drinking water
treatment methods are costly and have potential to harm the environment. The
main reason reduction catalysts are not used to clean water is because they are
made from precious metals that also have a high cost, and water is a low value
product. The research goal of this work is to advance the science of water
treatment by replacing precious metals with inexpensive metal reduction
catalysts to achieve treatment goals at the lowest cost and with the least harm
to the environment. The catalysts will be used to treat nitrate, the most common
groundwater pollutant in the world that results primarily from agricultural
fertilizer. Student researchers will be trained to become future leaders in this
technology, so they can train others to design more effective water treatment
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the proposed work is to advance
the science of supported metal-alloy catalysis for the treatment of the
ubiquitous water pollutant nitrate. The specific objectives are to 1) develop
new metal alloy nanoparticle catalysts with markedly higher catalytic activity
for nitrate reduction; 2) identify electronically active supports that enhance
catalytic activity and stability of alloy metal nanoparticles for water
treatment; and 3) evaluate the environmental impacts and costs of the new
catalysts using life cycle assessment. To address these objectives, a suite of
platinum group metal-based alloy nanoparticles with lattice substituted semi-
and non-precious metals will be synthesized using a novel microwave-assisted
method. The catalysts will be supported on a series of redox active supports and
characterized using advanced microscopic/spectroscopic techniques. The new
catalysts will be evaluated with/without amended indium for nitrate and nitrite
reduction kinetics, and selectivity for ammonia. The results will be compared to
catalyst properties and interpreted with density functional theory to identify
controlling mechanisms. Long-term catalyst stability will be evaluated under
realistic water treatment conditions, and the results used to perform economic
and environmental life cycle assessments. The proposed work will result in new
fundamental knowledge regarding 1) the effects of hydrogenation-inactive metals
on catalysis; 2) the influence of redox active supports on alloy metal alloy
nanoparticle activity and stability; and 3) a quantitative assessment of the
effects of metal alloys on cost and sustainability of catalytic treatment of
drinking water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.