* 1922867
* Isolating Field Effects in Sintering via Ultrahigh Temperature In Situ Nanomechanics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Shen Dillon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/28/2022
* USD 296,579.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Most ceramic products and devices originate from
crystalline powders consolidated at high temperatures; a process called
sintering. Traditional sintering typically requires a large input of energy,
significant equipment costs, and relatively long manufacturing times.
Application of electric fields during sintering can greatly reduce these costs
and processing times. Unfortunately, electric field effects remain poorly
understood owing in large part to (1) the great geometrical complexity of
sintering and (2) a poor understanding of atomic motion and bonding at crystal
surfaces where powder bonds during sintering. The lack of scientific
understanding impairs engineers' ability to design optimal manufacturing
conditions and produce new materials. This project develops a new methodology
that efficiently isolates the physical properties of the material from particle
geometry effects. As a result, unprecedented information about how electric
fields affect bonding and atomic motion on surfaces can be obtained. This
information can define which parameters are most important during electric field
assisted sintering, and as a result, strategies to optimize manufacturing
conditions. The work is technologically relevant to development of new ultrahigh
temperature aerospace materials, advanced optical ceramics, and ceramics in
microelectronics. The project supports the training of a graduate student in
materials science and engineering. Graduates then typically work in industrial
research laboratories in large manufacturing firms. The project also provides
research opportunities for underrepresented high school students and pre-service
teachers, and outreach activities targeted towards K-12 students. These
activities are intended to attract students to science and engineering
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Electric fields can
dramatically accelerate sintering kinetics, as is often observed during spark
plasma sintering or flash sintering. However, the mechanisms underlying these
processes remain highly controversial and poorly understood. The lack of
fundamental knowledge derives from the complexity of the sintering process and
the coupling of the electric field to all relevant diffusional and thermodynamic
coefficients. The experiments isolate these effects by (1) measuring
electrocapillarity coefficients of grain boundaries and surfaces in zirconia
using a nanoscale zero creep experiment in applied fields, (2) quantifying
electric field dependent grain boundary and surface diffusion coefficients via
nanoscale single grain boundary Coble creep and surface smoothing experiments,
respectively, and (3) controlling for anisotropy by using representative low and
high energy bicrystal geometries. The work emerges from the development of novel
ultra-high temperature in situ transmission electron microscopy based
nanomechanical testing methods. The transformational impacts on the discipline
are a new mechanistic understanding of electric field effects on sintering, new
insights into field dependent interface thermodynamics in oxides, and the
development of novel experimental methodologies useful for addressing many
problems in ceramic science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.