* 1922984
* GOALI: Diamond Coated Carbon Fiber Wire Sawing of Silicon Ingots
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Parag Banerjee, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 03/31/2023
* USD 202,653.00

Diamond coated wire sawing of silicon ingots into individual wafers accounts for
11 percent of solar cell production costs. This cost is primarily associated
with generation of silicon powder which is a waste stream and requires energy
intensive recycling strategies. Thinner wires can lead to minimal powder
generation during wire sawing. However, thinner steel wires (smaller than 100
microns in diameter) break easily under the stress required for efficient
cutting of silicon. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) award supports scientific investigations on the use of carbon fiber
wires smaller than 100 microns in diameter in diamond coated wire sawing of
silicon ingots into wafers. Research results from this project will lead to
reduced wastage of silicon and, therefore, reduced dollar-per-watt of silicon
based solar cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research objective is to
establish relationships between sawing conditions (such as wire velocity and
normal force) and the chemical and structural changes of individual diamond
particles coated on a carbon fiber wire. The changes observed in the diamond
particles are softening (i.e., graphitization), cleavage, blunting, or complete
removal from the carbon fiber wire. The approach to achieve this objective is to
measure chemical and structural changes after sawing in diamond particles,
carbon fiber wire, and generated silicon powder using micro-Raman spectroscopy.
This technique can map chemical and structural changes in the diamond particles,
carbon fiber wire and the silicon powder with micron scale spatial resolution.
An industrial sawing machine, and single crystalline silicon ingots with a 15 cm
x 15 cm square cross-section, will be used for sawing experiments. Wire
velocities of up to 25 m/s and a normal force of up to 15 N will be used. The
second research objective is to understand the effects of wear of diamond
particles and carbon fiber on sawing rate. The approach to achieve this
objective is to measure, in situ, wire bowing of the diamond coated carbon fiber
wire as it performs sawing. This allows estimation of wire tension and
frictional forces experienced by the wire inside the silicon kerf during sawing.
As wear proceeds, wire bowing increases and so do frictional forces. Sawing rate
will be measured as the vertical velocity of the silicon ingot as it presses
down on the wire. Parameters such as carbon fiber wire diameter (from 60 µm to
100 µm) and diamond size (from 6 µm to 20 µm) will be varied.