* 1923271
* Early Career Scholar Support for Topical Conference on Electron-Probe Microanalysis  (Quantitative Microanalysis 2019)
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Anette von der Handt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This award supports a topical conference on electron probe microanalysis in June
2019 at the University of Minnesota. NSF will contribute to the costs associated
with bringing 30 early career scholars to this workshop, which includes
undergraduate through post-doctoral and professionals within two years of their
terminal degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative analysis by electron probe
microanalysis is fundamental to earth and materials sciences. Analytical skills
obtained by students are invaluable and form a foundation for quantitative
techniques that are related to x-ray spectrometry. Characterization of lunar and
meteoritic materials is routinely performed by a community that would benefit
from closer ties to the microanalysis community. Micro-Analysis Society (MAS)
Topical Conferences provide this educational support at a very reasonable price
for attendees. Several students have found employment in the microanalysis
community due to their educational experience in meetings organized by MAS.
Current advances in microanalysis of light elements and cathodoluminescence
provide renewed support for technological advances in Li battery and LED
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.