* 1923130
* CSforAll: RPP: Pathways for Advancing Computing Education
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Justin Reich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,249.00

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and the University of
Massachusetts, Boston (UMB) propose Pathways for Advancing Computing Education
(PACE), a researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP) organized as a networked
improvement community (NIC) facilitated by the MIT Teaching Systems Lab (TSL),
the UMB Broadening Advanced Technology Education Connections (BATEC), and
including a consortium of 16 diverse school districts across the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. PACE participants share the common goal of broadening
participation in computing for underserved groups in computer science (CS) in
Massachusetts: females, Black and Hispanic/Latinx, low-income students, English
learner students and students with disabilities. The long term objectives of the
NIC are to (1) refine high school CS curriculum pathways; (2) develop a
dashboard of measures for tracking access, achievement, and equity in CS
teaching and learning; (3) develop shared professional development experiences
around CS equity teaching practices that cut across the different curriculum
choices that individual districts will make; and (4) share new models,
curricula, and professional development resources widely across the state and
across the country. This project will support the first phase of the NIC
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strengthening CS education across the
commonwealth will require creating a diverse set of pathways for different
districts--with different curriculum structures, demographic compositions, and
per pupil expenditures--to make progress towards helping all students meet and
exceed the Massachusetts Digital Literacy and Computer Science standards and
close the many opportunity gaps related to CS education that exist throughout
the state. PACE-appointed fellows (teachers and administrators from 7-8 pilot
districts) will use the Strategic CSforALL Research and Implementation Planning
Tool (SCRIPT) to identify challenges and opportunities in their districts. As
the challenges are identified, the TSL practice space framework--games and
simulations that let teachers rehearse for and reflect upon important decisions
in teaching--will be used to support PACE fellows in co-designing strategies and
interventions to address problems of practice, working towards developing a
prototype district "dashboard" of measures that can be used to track progress
towards equity of opportunity and outcomes in CS education across the district.
The project will iteratively improve on these initial learning experiences for a
second year and map out pathways for expanding the number of districts with PACE
fellows. The project will set the stage for a larger request for proposals (RFP)
that engages other philanthropic and industry stakeholders engaged in CS
education in Massachusetts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.