* 1923163
* CCSS: Autonomous Drone and Ground Robot Cooperative Tasking in Complex Indoor Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Shiwen Mao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 438,894.00

The requirements for automated inventory and precise location of items have
become vital to modern supply chain management. The objective of this project is
to create an innovative ground robot-drone network system, which consists of a
group of autonomous ground robots and drones, to provide inventory counts and
precise locations of passive radio-frequency identification (pRFID) tagged items
in highly complex environments, such as warehouses, retail stores, hazmat
storage facilities, or factories. This project will significantly improve the
state-of-the-art of supply chain management and Internet of Things (IoT)
systems, and provide a significant step forward to fully harvest the potential
of the proposed robotic-drone platform. The project's education plan includes
developing and enhancing various undergraduate and graduate-level courses.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be exposed to the state-of-the-art
techniques, and gain hands-on experience in the cutting-edge technology that is
at the very frontier of modern communications, circuits, and sensing systems
(CCSS). Outcomes from this project will be disseminated through technical
publications, conference presentations, a project website, and at the bi-annual
Wireless Engineering Research and Education Center (WEREC) and RFID Lab
meetings. The team is fully committed to promoting participation from under-
represented groups in research, and will continue such efforts via outreach,
e.g., through the NSF REU and RET programs and collaboration with
HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pRFID technology has been widely deployed in the
past decade for serialized item level identification and data sharing. However,
most pRFID technology implementations utilize fixed reader points, or human
operated handheld scanners, and cannot provide precise item location. The demand
of logistics visibility requires automated inventory and the precise location
information of items. In the proposed research, the autonomous ground robot-
drone network system combined with a precise RFID localization method will
bridge the above gap. By deploying cooperative ground robots and drones, mounted
with commercial off-the-shelf pRFID equipment, to provide automated inventory
and precise location of pRFID tagged items. The framework cooperates
heterogeneous individual items into a coherent system for more complex task that
is not possible for any individual item. The proposed architecture will also
provide an innovative communication, control, and computing framework for
general IoT systems. The framework will be disclosed as open-source tools to
boost relevant research in the CCSS community. The following thrusts will be
accomplished in this project. (i) Ground robot and drone network architecture:
the architecture will be developed to provide communication, computing, and
control for the ground robot and drone to cooperatively operate for generic
tasks. It also provides the fundamental methods for the ground robot and drone
to pair with each other to form a symbiotic system. (ii) Ground robot and drone
indoor navigation: a ground robot enhanced mechanism will be introduced to
enable drone(s) to precisely localize itself in the complex indoor environment.
When the localization goals are achieved, a method will be investigate to enable
the drone(s) and ground robot to safely and efficiently navigate in an object-
rich and confined space environment. (iii) Accurate inventory counts and precise
localization of pRFIDs: the ground robot-drone network will be prototyped to
operate pRFID inventory and provide precise location of pRFID tagged items. (iv)
This project also includes a thorough integration and assessment plan, to test
the proposed ground robot-drone integrated system in real warehouse and retail
store environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.