* 1923743
* Influence of environmental pH variability and thermal sensitivity on the resilience of reef-building corals to acidification stress
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Katie Barott, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2023
* USD 705,395.00

Coral reefs are incredibly diverse ecosystems that provide food, tourism
revenue, and shoreline protection for coastal communities. The ability of coral
reefs to continue providing these services to society is currently threatened by
climate change, which has led to increasing ocean temperatures and acidity that
can lead to the death of corals, the animals that build the reef framework upon
which so many species depend. This project examines how temperature and
acidification stress work together to influence the future health and survival
of corals. The scientists are carrying out the project in Hawaii where they have
found individual corals with different sensitivities to temperature stress that
are living on reefs with different environmental pH conditions. This project
improves understanding of how an individual coral?s history influences its
response to multiple stressors and helps identify the conditions that are most
likely to support resilient coral communities. The project will generate
extensive biological and physicochemical data that will be made freely
available. Furthermore, this project supports the education and training of
undergraduate and high school students and one postdoctoral researcher in marine
science and coral reef ecology. Hands-on activities for high school students are
being developed into a free online educational resource.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project compares coral responses to acidification
stress in populations experiencing distinct pH dynamics (high diel variability
vs. low diel variability) and with distinct thermal tolerances (historically
bleaching sensitive vs. tolerant) to learn about how coral responses to these
two factors differ between coral species and within populations. Experiments
focus on the two dominant reef builders found at these stable and variable pH
reefs: Montipora capitata and Porites compressa. Individuals of each species
exhibiting different thermal sensitivities (i.e., bleached vs. pigmented) were
tagged during the 2015 global coral bleaching event. This system tests the
hypotheses that 1) corals living on reefs with larger diel pH fluctuations have
greater resilience to acidification stress, 2) coral resilience to acidification
is a plastic trait that can be promoted via acclimatization, and 3) thermally
sensitive corals have reduced capacity to cope with pH stress, which is
exacerbated at elevated temperatures. Coral cells isolated from colonies from
each environmental and bleaching history are exposed to acute pH stress and
examined for their ability to recover intracellular pH in vivo using confocal
microscopy, and the expression level of proteins predicted to be involved in
this recovery (e.g., proton transporters) is examined via Western blot and
immunolocalization. Corals from each pH history are exposed to stable and
variable seawater pH in a controlled aquarium setting to determine the level of
plasticity of acidification resilience and to test for pH acclimatization in
this system. Finally, corals with different levels of thermal sensitivity are
exposed to thermal stress and recovery, and their ability to regulate pH is
examined over time. The results of these experiments help identify reef
conditions that promote coral resilience to ocean acidification against the
background of increasingly common thermal stress events, while advancing
mechanistic understanding of coral physiology and
symbiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.