* 1923014
* RAPID: Investigating the incorporation of elements into ice in Lake St. Clair during extreme weather conditions: an analogy for chemical cycling in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Mark Baskaran, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2022
* USD 117,336.00

Sea ice plays an important role in the chemical cycling of elements and
compounds in the Arctic Ocean. Material can be concentrated from the water, from
sediments, and from the atmosphere into ice as it forms near shore, and as it is
transported by currents into the open ocean. The processes by which many
elements are incorporated into sea ice as it forms are poorly understood,
however, in part because it requires being on site and sampling as the ice
forms. The recent occurrence of very cold weather in the midwestern U.S.
provided an opportunity to study these processes in large lakes, that can then
be used to advance our understanding of sea ice. The RAPID funding mechanism
allows a quick response to this unique weather event, at much lower cost than
would be required to mount a similar study of Arctic sea ice. This study will
take place in Lake St. Clair and surrounding rivers near Detroit, between Lakes
Huron and Erie. The project will involve several undergraduate students and a
graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the mechanism of
incorporation of particle-reactive species into ice, the investigators will
collect and analyze a suite of lake ice samples (ice thickness &gt; 12 inches)
from Lake St. Clair and rivers that discharge into Lake St. Clair as well as
precipitation (both snow and rain) for 210Pb, 210Po and 7Be in southeast
Michigan. The objective is to quantify the spatial and temporal variations of
the activities of these isotopes in different sediment grain-sizes trapped in
ice collected from different sites. The results from this study are anticipated
to provide insights in answering two fundamental questions: i) what is the
mechanism that leads to the enrichment (&gt;100 times in some cases) of 210Pb
and 7Be in sediments incorporated in ice (both in fresh water and seawater); and
ii) how does the 210Po/210Pb activity ratio vary in sediment-depleted ice
compared to sediment-laden ice? Since 7Be is completely derived from atmospheric
deposition and ice-rafted sediment is highly enriched in 7Be, how much of the
210Po (210Po/210Pb &lt; 0.1 in precipitation and in aerosol) in sediment- laden
ice is derived from atmospheric deposition and from surface water? In addition,
the study will involve collection of snow and atmospheric aerosols through the
remainder of the winter, to understand atmospheric deposition of isotopes to ice
and the lake surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.