* 1923651
* Prediction of Organic-Vapor Wall Deposition Using a Qualitative Structure Activity Relationship and its Application to the Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Model
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Myoseon Jang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 582,147.00

Environmental chambers are frequently used to investigate atmospheric chemistry
in a controlled setting. This research is focused on developing a model to
predict the interactions of gases and particles with the walls of an
environmental chamber, and to predict what effects these interactions might have
on the results of a study. For example, the wall effects in an environmental
chamber often result in the underestimation of the formation of small particles
in the chamber, an error that can be carried through to air-quality and climate
models. This project is expected to ultimately improve the predictive capability
for the formation of SOA in the atmosphere and improve the estimates of both the
direct and indirect effects of SOA on human health and climate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three objectives of the proposal are to: (1) Predict
the gas-wall process partitioning constant of various semivolatile organic
compounds (SVOCs) and their deposition rate constants using a Quantitative
Structure Activity Relation (QSAR) approach; (2) Integrate the gas-wall process
model parameters with the model that predicts secondary organic aerosol (SOA)
formation; and (3) Evaluate the potential for SOA formation produced via
multiphase reactions of various hydrocarbons using the amended model including
the bias due to the gas-wall process. A model that uses an explicit gas
mechanism to predict SOA formation from multiphase reactions, will be amended
and applied to investigate the impact of gas-wall processes on the formation of
SOA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.