* 1923142
* Development of Statistical Fault Detection Algorithms for Modern Power Grid Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Piotr Kokoszka, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 324,623.00

The national power grid has been undergoing transformational changes and facing
new challenges over the last decade. The grid no longer consists of power
suppliers, like coal, hydroelectric and nuclear plants, which supply power at a
roughly constant rate. Renewable energy sources deliver power in a much less
predictable manner due to their dependence on weather factors. Many retail and
service facilities are no longer pure energy consumers but have become energy
producers by installing large solar farms. In this new environment, it is
important to develop new tools for timely detection of faults. Due to the less
predictable power delivery and consumption, and possible attacks, fault
detection must be based on the understanding of the random structure of the grid
operation whose characteristics can be measured by a new generation of devices.
These devices generate massive data sets, which have not yet been widely
utilized. The PIs will address many specific questions related to the detection
and identification of power grid faults. The PIs will use data obtained from
modern measurements devices and develop state of the art statistical
methodology. Advances made in this research will contribute to the energy
security of the United States. The project will provide training to graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop advanced
statistical theory and large-scale computational tools that will form a
foundation for engineering implementations aimed at detecting and identifying
power grid faults. This will be done within a framework of change point
detection methodology. Specifically, the PIs will 1) develop algorithms for
screening sensor inputs that impact specific protection devices; 2) create
algorithms for fault monitoring, with controlled significance level and expected
time to detection; 3) develop theoretical and practical foundations for a
posteriori change point testing in smart grid networks; 4) work out algorithms
for the identification of subgrids affected by faults and the classification of
faults; and 5) enhance PSCAD/EMTDC simulation tools by incorporating
characteristics of high resolution sensor readings. It will be a collaborative
effort combining the expertise of two statisticians working, respectively, in
stochastic networks and large-scale computing (Wang) and time series analysis
(Kokoszka), and a network engineer specializing in smart grids and signal
processing (Yang).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.