* 1923800
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Networking Identity Research
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Leslie Aragon, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 0.00

Under the direction of Dr. Barbara Mills, Leslie Aragon will conduct research to
study how group identity is constructed at multiple scales and how it might
change over time. Archaeology provides a unique opportunity to develop a
framework for investigating different concepts of group identity and social
interactions among communities with deep time depth in the ancient past. This
project takes a multidisciplinary approach, incorporating social network
analyses (SNA), petrographic analyses, and stylistic analyses across multiple
media to understand internal and external diversity, an important step in
gaining insight into social organization. Using the Hohokam Ballcourt World in
the southern U.S. Southwest as a case study, this research informs upon the
dynamic ways that groups form social boundaries regardless of spatial proximity.
In a broader sense, the project addresses questions regarding the organization
of human communities at varying scales, how people form identities, and the
long-term effects of these processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of her Ph.D.
dissertation research, Ms. Aragon will use archaeological data from across
southern Arizona to examine how people in the prehispanic Southwest formed both
relational and categorical identities among social groups and how those
identities changed or persisted with the rise and decline of the Hohokam
Ballcourt World during the eighth through twelfth centuries (A.D. 700-1100). The
researchers will use a multiscalar network approach to reconstruct group
identities in the Hohokam Ballcourt World based on material culture at 100-year
intervals to create "snapshots" through time. In this way, the project addresses
issues of group adaptation during times of cultural and ideological change and
reorganization. The investigators will use understudied curated material and
published reports to integrate and synthesize more than 50 years of fieldwork
across the study region. Research with existing collections will add to the
stock of information available to managing agencies and will contribute new
information that can be used in the interpretation of sites for the public.
Finally, this research will contribute new methods for studying identity across
time and space, which will be useful to researchers investigating similar
processes, both in the past and present.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.