* 1923051
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,610,803.00

The need to replace the currently used line-spoolers with actual certified
winches has been a pressing need in the fleet for years. The line spoolers which
are utilized throughout the fleet for mooring deployment and recovery efforts
were never intended for use at sea, so it should come as no surprise these line
spoolers haven?t proven themselves very sea-worthy. Line spoolers are portable
winch-like machines designed for stringing and tensioning electric transmission
lines on land. They are not compliant with both UNOLS RVSS Appendix B and 46
CFR. They are inexpensive, however, and have been supported through both the
East and West Coast Winch Pools. The fleet urgently needs to begin replacing its
line spoolers with mooring winches to meet safety standards and regulatory
requirements, and to fully and reliably support field research projects carried
out with moorings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A similar proposal was reviewed in
panel from BIOS as they have begun to support increasing amounts of mooring
work. The Program has decided to begin this transition to actual mooring winches
over the next two years. A group purchase will be recommended to purchase five
winches over two years. Although the WCWP proposal specified a "Markey" winch,
after discussions with the institution, they are satisfied that all winches
could be bought from the same manufacturer and that the volume discount will
make them more affordable. The WCWP will be responsible for working with
Hawboldt, the manufacturer, and BIOS, as well as the ECWP to spec the correct
winch(s). The WCWP will take title to the equipment so if the vessel is retired
or repurposed, the winches will return to the pool. All costs, including
shipping, cables, commissioning, and attendance at the factory acceptance trials
for the five winches are covered in this two-year award. Year one will
constitute the down payment to beginning construction of the winches and the
balance will be released in year two after an annual report documents that the
work is complete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.