* 1923632
* Ideas Labs: Data-Intensive Research in Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Suzanne Weekes, Society For Industrial and Applied Math (SIAM)
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 02/28/2021
* USD 1,197,410.00

In 2016, the National Science Foundation (NSF) unveiled a set of "Big Ideas," 10
bold, long-term research and process ideas that identify areas for future
investment at the frontiers of science and engineering. The Big Ideas represent
unique opportunities to position our Nation at the cutting edge of global
science and engineering leadership by bringing together diverse disciplinary
perspectives to support convergence research. NSF's Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR) Big Idea is a national-scale activity to enable new modes of
data-driven discovery that will allow fundamental questions to be asked and
answered at the frontiers of science and engineering. This project describes a
series of Ideas Labs on "Data-Intensive Research in Science and Engineering
(DIRSE)". Ideas Labs are intensive workshops focused on finding innovative and
bold transdisciplinary solutions to grand challenge problems. The overarching
goal of the DIRSE Ideas Labs is to foster convergent approaches to enable data-
intensive research in science and engineering through a series of facilitated
activities bringing together scientists and engineers working on important data-
intensive science and engineering problems with data scientists.

There are numerous science and engineering challenges that require, or will soon
require, data science to help address research and technological questions.
Advancing knowledge in these areas requires solutions to many modeling and data
challenges such as real-time sensing, learning, and decision making; social,
political, and behavioral implications of machine learning and impacts of new
data uses; issues related to ethics and fairness; and integrating heterogeneous
data for explaining or predicting complex phenomena. There is also a need for
approaches that combine physical models with data driven models for learning and
decision making. Data science tools, such as signal and image processing,
visualization, statistical modeling and inference, machine learning, and
optimization, offer a starting point for solving important scientific and
engineering challenges. However, extracting new information and knowledge from
data will benefit from new, convergent strategies that capitalize on existing
NSF investments in data and cyberinfrastructure and that build synergy between
the researchers with expertise in the generation or measurement of data and
those with expertise in processing and analyzing that data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.