* 1923929
* Collaborative Research: Traversals in Transformation Strain Space and Microstructure Design for High Performance Ferroelastic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Yunzhi Wang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 339,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research to investigate new materials design concepts enabled by a new theory
and computer simulations. The approach will be focused on an important class of
smart materials – ferroelastic smart materials including superelastic metals and
shape memory alloys (SMAs). Crystals can change their structures in response to
an applied field, such as temperature, pressure or stress, electric or magnetic
fields. Crystals have the property that sets of operations on a crystal leave
the crystal looking the same. For example, 90-degree rotations around specific
axes of a cubic crystal rotate atoms into the same positions previously occupied
by atoms; the crystal is thus the same under such symmetry operations. Because
of this crystal symmetry, changes associated with structural phase
transformations can lead to the generation of multiple equivalent structural
states. These states are interconnected by multiple equivalent forward and
backward phase transformation pathways. These pathways can be represented
pictorially as a graph that forms a web dubbed phase transformation graphs
(PTGs). How a crystal traverses a PTG dictates all the “live” characteristics of
structural phase transformations that underpin the practically important
properties of a ferroelastic smart material. PTG analysis offers new
opportunities to engineer smarter microstructures, the structure of crystals on
scales larger than the atomic scale and able to be seen under modest
magnification. Microstructures are connected to properties, particularly
mechanical properties of materials. The PIs aim to develop microstructure
designs that lead to materials with unprecedented properties. This research
project will utilize the PTG "gene networks" in the design algorithms to "breed"
new internal microstructures for improving functionality and performance of
ferroelastic smart materials. The outcome of this research could benefit
numerous advanced technological applications in automotive, aerospace, micro-
electromechanical systems, and biomedical implants. The PTG analysis, just like
phase diagrams in thermodynamics, is a fundamental tool in smart materials
design and it can enrich undergraduate and graduate curricula in materials
science and engineering. The intuitive nature of smart materials and their cool
applications will help to encourage middle- and high-school students to enter
science and engineering disciplines. The new alloy design strategies, PTG
analysis and computer simulation techniques will be broadly disseminated at
conferences, online tutorials, and in academic journals. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research to investigate new materials design concepts enabled by a
new theory and computer simulations. It has yet to be recognized that the
properties and performances of smart materials based on diffusionless
transformations are dictated not only by the symmetry of the individual crystal
structures involved and symmetry-breaking along a single phase transformation
pathway (PTP), but also by the topology and symmetry of their phase
transformation graphs (PTGs). The latter tells us how the multiple structural
states of the parent and product phases are interconnected and what structural
states could be visited by the system during multiple transformation cycles. The
PIs will explore alloy design ideas and will address scientific issues by using
a combination of PTG analysis, ab initio calculations, kinetic Monte Carlo, and
phase field simulations. Specific scientific issues that will be addressed
include: (a) Quantifying the connected pathways and free-energy barriers of
transitions, including the symmetry-dictated non-PTPs that could alter the
topology of PTGs and change the fundamental characteristics of the structural
transformations and hence the functionality and performance of the smart
materials; (b) Seeking answers for the following questions: What is the
consequence of a biased random walk on PTG for microstructural evolution and
functional fatigue? After dispersal on PTG, is there an effective way to “reset”
the dispersed strain states at various spatial locations back to their original
state and recover the original microstructure? (c) Making use of proper
concentration modulations to regulate martensitic transformations and make
linear super-elastic materials with large elastic strain limit, vanishing
hysteresis, and ultralow pseudo-elastic modulus; (d) Characterizing the
temperature- and rate-dependences of these transformations by predicting their
activation strain-volume and pre-dominance of shuffling. Success of the project
holds promise to transform ferroelastic materials
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.