* 1923468
* NSF-BSF and Manufacturing USA: Lattice Oxygen Assisted Methane Activation for Modular Production of Fischer-Tropsch Ready Syngas
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Fanxing Li, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 305,474.00

Methane from shale gas deposits has become an important energy resource. Methane
is commercially used to produce hydrogen and liquid fuels via reforming and/or
partial oxidation. Although significant efforts have been devoted to catalyst
development, conventional methane reforming and partial oxidation processes are
subjected to various intrinsic limitations. The proposed research aims to
investigate a unique family of catalysts for partial oxidation of methane that
are robust, active, and highly efficient. The project will be carried out
jointly by the North Carolina State University research group and a group from
the Blechner Center for Industrial Catalysis at the Ben-Gurion University of the
Negev in Israel (Drs. Moti Herskowitz and Miron
Landau).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team aims to design and characterize a
class of core-shell redox catalysts that are both active methane partial
oxidation (POx) catalysts and effective lattice oxygen (O2-) donors. The redox
catalyst is composed of a transition metal oxide core for O2- storage, a mixed
ionic-electronic conductive shell which facilitates O2-/electron conduction and
inhibits primary oxide sintering/deactivation, and a tailored surface for
methane partial oxidation. The catalyst is operated under a cyclic redox mode
for methane POx (step 1) and lattice oxygen replenishment with air (step 2). The
proposed research will investigate (i) O2- migration pathway in the redox
catalyst and the phase compatibility between a number of core and shell
materials; (ii) controlled synthesis and characterization of core-shell
catalysts; (iii) active metal dispersion and reaction mechanism studies. (iv)
kinetic modeling and demonstration of methane POx in a modular packed bed
system. The proposed redox catalyst is unique since the embedded O2- allows
effective methane oxidation without steam or oxygen. The active O2- also
inhibits coke formation. The perovskite shell increases the sintering resistance
of the primary oxide. It also provides an ideal surface for active metal
dispersion and methane activation. Preliminary studies have led to core-shell
redox catalysts with excellent oxygen storage capacity (20 w.t.%) and high
syngas selectivity (&gt;96%), activity (high syngas yields at 600 degrees C) and
structural stability (tested up to 1,100 degrees C). In addition to training
graduate and undergraduate students in research there are plans to engage high
school students from underrepresented groups in STEM through outreach
activities. The proposed project is responsive to the Manufacturing USA
initiative and supports the mission of the DOE-funded RAPID Manufacturing
Institute led by the American Institute of Chemical
Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.