* 1923836
* Collaborative Research: Tracking the interacting roles of the environment, host genotype, and a novel Rickettsiales in coral disease susceptibility
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Rebecca Vega, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2023
* USD 701,218.00

Historically one of the most abundant reef-building corals in Florida and the
wider Caribbean, the staghorn coral, Acropora cervicornis, is now listed as
critically endangered primarily because of previous and reoccurring disease
events. Understanding the holistic mechanisms of disease susceptibility in this
coral is a top concern of practitioners engaged in conservation and restoration.
The investigators recently discovered a group of parasitic bacteria common
within the microbial community of A. cervicornis that can reduce the growth and
health of corals when reefs are exposed to nutrient polluted waters. Determining
how interactions among the coral host, this parasitic microbe, and the
environment are linked to disease susceptibility provides critical insight and
greater success of future restoration efforts. Yet the complexity of animal
microbiomes and the contextual nature of disease make it difficult to identify
the specific cause of many disease outbreaks. In this project, the investigators
conduct experiments to explore the interactions among different genetic strains
of coral and these bacteria in various nutrient scenarios to better understand
how this bacterium affects the susceptibility of staghorn coral to diseases.
This project also characterizes the genomics, host range, and local and global
distribution of this bacterial coral parasite to determine how its evolutionary
history and physiology drive disease susceptibility in this important coral
species. The project trains two postdocs, one technician, and seven students
(one graduate, six undergraduates) in integrative sciences that span marine
science, physiology, genetics, microbiology, omics, and statistical modeling. A
research-based after school program in Florida is expanded to include
microbiology and create a new program module called Microbial warriors, with a
focus on women in science. The investigators produce documentary style films and
outreach materials to broadly communicate the project science and conservation
efforts to local and national communities via presentations at Mote Marine Lab
and the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry. This project is co-funded by the
Biological Oceanography Program in the Division of Ocean Sciences and the
Symbiosis, Defense, and Self-recognition Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators recently identified a
marine Rickettsiales bacterium that, in corals, can be stimulated to grow in the
presence of elevated nitrogen and phosphorous species. Based on genomic
reconstruction and phylogeography, this bacteria is classified as a novel
bacterial genus, Candidatus Aquarickettsia, and showed that it is broadly
associated with scleractinian corals worldwide. Importantly, using a model
system, the endangered Acropora cervicornis coral, the team has also shown that
the growth of this bacterium in vivo is associated with reduced host growth and
increased disease susceptibility. This project aims to more completely evaluate
the mechanisms behind and impacts of these inducible infections on coral
physiology and host-bacterial symbiosis. The investigators conduct nutrient
dosing experiments on different coral genotypes with various Rickettsiales
abundances. Using a range of omics and microscopy techniques, the team
quantifies the resulting effects on holobiont phenotypes. The investigators are
also comparing the genomes of these bacteria in the different Acroporid hosts
and other coral genera to evaluate facets of the bacterium's evolutionary
history, as well as to identify possible mechanisms of its proliferation,
virulence, and host specificity. This interdisciplinary project mechanistically
links nutrients to temporal changes in host, algal symbiont, and bacterial
parasite physiology and also explain why there is natural variation in these
responses by exploring how host and parasite genotypes and growth dynamics
combined with environmental contextuality alter holobiont
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.