* 1923698
* SBIR Phase II:  Developing Market-Ready Cloud-Based Software for Mass Spectrometry Data Processing
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Robert Smith, Prime Labs Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,293,716.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to reduce the cost and increase the quality
and throughput of mass spectrometry research through the development of advanced
analytical software. Biomedical, biotech, agricultural, and chemical companies
spend an estimated $15B per year on mass spectrometry because of the commercial
value its measurements provide across a broad range of products and services.
This value is highly dependent upon the quality of the software needed to render
the experimental output into usable information. The successful completion of
the proposed research will enable advancements in existing markets through
faster, less expensive, and more accurate data processing, leading to novel
medical diagnostics, new drugs, and other new products beyond the reach of the
current state-of-the-art. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will
address the most pressing problems in mass spectrometry by developing analytical
software that is improved in two ways: 1) it will cut user analysis time in half
through readily customizable automation, interactive hypothesis testing, and
fast intuitive interfaces, and 2) it will answer more experimental questions
through flexible interfaces that allow users to leverage their domain expertise
while intuitively exploring their data. These qualities require leveraging the
proof-of-concept achieved in Phase I, where a cloud architecture was developed,
onto novel interfaces and algorithms to be developed in Phase II. The principle
project goals are to develop an application that allows users to more quickly
complete both repetitive (through automation) and custom (through intuitive,
flexible exploratory tools) analysis in half the time required by present
methods. The time savings will result in much lower personnel cost while
simultaneously increasing the number and type of experimental questions that can
be answered compared to existing software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.