* 1923925
* Tree Ring Dating in Western North America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Ronald Towner, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 244,305.00

Tree-ring dating is the most precise non-documentary method of dating
archaeological materials from the past two thousand years in North America, and
the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research (LTRR) at the University of Arizona is the
only source of archaeological tree-ring dates in the area. With National Science
Foundation (NSF) support, the LTRR operates an analysis program for tree-ring
samples collected by LTRR and other archaeologists from Alaska to Argentina and
from the Pacific Ocean to the Mississippi River. NSF support will allow the
program to keep pace with the ever growing demand for archaeological tree-ring
dating, and to maintain high production levels and short turnaround times. On
average, more than 750 dates from 1500+ archaeological tree-ring samples are
produced annually. These data are integrated into relevant archaeological
contexts to construct refined cultural sequences and examine important issues of
past human behavior that cannot be addressed without accurate, high resolution
temporal control. Among these topics are absolute site, locality, and regional
chronologies, social organization structure, intergroup interaction, and
cultural adaptation to physical and social environments. The program actively
promotes the expansion of archaeological tree-ring dating into new regions such
as the Southwestern deserts, Great Basin, Great Plains, Rocky Mountains, Alaska,
Mexico, and South America; it also supports student research both directly and
indirectly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a wide range of broader
impacts. Its findings will be integrated into undergraduate and graduate classes
in anthropology, geosciences, and other disciplines at the University of Arizona
and other academic institutions. In addition, the project interacts with K-12
programs and provides public tours of the facility to an estimated 12,000
visitors and students annually; it provides instruction for visiting scholars
from around the world and facilitates field and laboratory training for non-
profit, governmental, private sector, and Native American programs. Students
will accrue particular benefits from the reduced cost of analysis, thus allowing
them to conduct extensive research at lower costs. The LTRR tree-ring sample
collections and archives are unparalleled, easily accessed resources for
archaeological research, and an under-construction digital database will enhance
the research value of these resources. Increased understanding of long-term
human adaptation to cultural and environmental variability and enhanced
knowledge of past environmental processes will help develop and implement
environmental and social policy. Project personnel will contribute directly to
formulating policy for managing cultural and natural resources by federal,
local, and tribal land management agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has additional intellectual merits. Exact dating and chronology building
are crucial to understanding human behavior, human-environment interactions, and
processes of sociocultural stability, variation, change, and social evolution.
Either directly or indirectly (through tree-ring dated ceramics), tree-ring
dating underlies the chronology of Southwestern prehistory and many aspects of
the documented history of the region. The project will also generate climatic
reconstructions that are combined with reconstructions produced by other
paleoenvironmental disciplines such as geology, pollen analysis, volcanology,
and trace element studies. In addition to illuminating past environmental
processes, these integrated reconstructions will provide a solid empirical
foundation for examining the interrelationships between human behavior and
environmental variability. Finally, the project's efforts to expand research
into areas previously thought to be unsuitable for archaeological tree-ring
dating provide absolutely dated "hinge points" for archaeological chronologies
in the Sonoran Desert, the Great Basin, the western Great Plains, Alaska,
northern Mexico, and South America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.