* 1923429
* EDGE CT: Catalyzing regeneration research by developing functional tools for post-embryonic stages
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alexandra Bely, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2023
* USD 935,322.00

Injury is widespread in nature and animals possess varied mechanisms to cope
with damage or the loss of body parts. One of the most dramatic injury responses
known is regeneration, the regrowing of a body part that has been lost. Although
this ability is quite limited in some animals, such as mammals, many others are
able to regenerate extensive parts of their body. Technical challenges have
severely limited the study of the genes involved in regeneration in some of the
most highly regenerative animals. Annelids, or segmented worms, include numerous
highly regenerative species but there are no robust approaches for studying the
genetic basis of regeneration in this group. The team of investigators of this
project develop new approaches for testing the function of genes during
regeneration in three highly regenerative annelid species. This work will open
up the possibility of identifying the genes and molecular pathways responsible
for the remarkable regenerative abilities of annelid worms, and is expected to
help catalyze research in other groups of animals. Technical advances are shared
broadly with relevant research communities through roundtable discussions at
scientific conferences, a laboratory-based hands-on workshop, a project blog,
and other online forums. The team of investigators also develop and disseminate
general educational resources about regeneration and its study, including an
educational comic book and teaching materials for high school science teachers
and students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a central technical
challenge for studying regeneration in many animal groups: manipulating gene
function in post-embryonic life-history stages. The project is executed by a
close-knit team of researchers and focuses on developing functional approaches
to interrogate the genotype-phenotype relationship in three focal annelid
species with distinct life histories and adult growth patterns: Platynereis,
Capitella, and Pristina. In Aim 1, post-embryonic delivery techniques are
optimized using a combination of injection and electroporation. In Aim 2, knock-
down approaches using morpholinos and siRNAs in post-embryonic stages are
developed, and in Aim 3, gene knock-ins and knock-outs in post-embryonic stages
using CRSPR/Cas9 are developed. The work is expected to have a strong catalyzing
effect on research, with an increase in the power of inquiry in these other
soft-bodied and vermiform animals for existing research labs, an increase in the
number of research labs utilizing such organisms and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.