* 1923144
* How the brains of elementary school children access and combine words: A normative database of basic responses and a public repository of naturalistic narrative data
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Liina Pylkkanen, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 568,036.00

The proliferation of noninvasive methods to study brain function has
revolutionized the neuroscience of language, a uniquely human ability that
cannot be studied in animals. So far, most of this research has focused on the
adult's brain, as opposed to the child's. Given our poor understanding of the
neurobiology of language development, we lack an important background for
understanding children's language disorders and for planning surgical treatments
for children with neurological disorders such as epilepsy, since such surgeries
need to spare language cortex. This project uses magnetoencephalography (MEG) to
establish this critical background. The focus will be on two basic processes
that form the foundation of human language: word retrieval and the composition
of words into larger phrases. Elementary school children from New York City
public schools will be invited to participate via science outreach activities in
the schools. The data will be entered into a public database that will provide a
resource for research and education. The experimental protocol is a combination
of a tightly controlled design, built upon prior research on adults, and a
naturalistic stimulus, containing fun science-themed narratives. Data from the
naturalistic stimulus will offer vast analysis possibilities. To assure that the
possibilities are maximally leveraged by researchers, these data will be
released to the public on a rapid timescale, at the end each project year. This
work will offer research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students.
The project is also a significant STEM opportunity for the participating
children, as during the lab visit, the experimenter will explain the basics of
MEG and how one can capture tiny magnetic fields inside human brains. Overall,
the project aims to transform the neuroscience of language in children by
providing the basic science that is needed for more detailed understanding to
emerge in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific scientific objective of
this project is to characterize the spatiotemporal profile of lexical retrieval
and phrasal composition in 1st, 3rd, and 5th graders, with their parents serving
as the adult controls. The experimental protocol offers (i) the first systematic
spatio-temporal characterization of children's neural processing of single words
and phrases, as compared to the activity profiles of the children's parents;
(ii) a tightly controlled within-subjects and within-items comparison of the
neural circuits involved in language comprehension vs. production in children
and adults and (iii) a measurement of a simple form of dialogue, engaging both
the comprehension and production of words and phrases within a brief trial. An
important outcome of the research is a database, from which users will be able
to download activity time-courses for specific brain regions during the three
experimental tasks. Study participants will also listen to a naturalistic
stimulus, with a fun science themed content designed for children. The
naturalistic stimulus will allow assessing whether results from the controlled
laboratory tasks scale up to a more ecologically valid setting. All MEG
recordings from the project will be made publicly available. The project is a
large-scale endeavor to engage a diverse sample of New York City children in a
neuroscience activity that will significantly advance our understanding of how
language is processed in the brains of elementary-school
children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) that seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.