* 1923126
* The Generation of Banded Chorus Waves in the Earth's Radiation Belt
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jacob Bortnik, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 352,292.00

Radio waves are naturally produced in the near-Earth space environment. Chorus
waves are a type of such radio waves that interact with relativistic particles
in the radiation belts. Understanding the interactions between these waves and
particles is important for predicting the changing space environment and its
societal impacts. In particular, this allows us to predict space weather and
prepare for impacts to national commercial and defense satellites and
communications - a priority set out in the National Space Weather Action Plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore the origin of banded chorus
waves in Earth's radiation belt by analyzing data from the Van Allen Probes and
performing particle-in-cell simulations to aid in interpretation. Naturally
occurring chorus waves are believed to play a key role in accelerating
relativistic electrons in the Earth's outer radiation belt, and in precipitating
~keV (and higher) electrons to the upper atmosphere, causing diffuse aurorae and
pulsating aurorae. Chorus typically occurs in two distinct frequency bands
separated by a gap at half of the electron gyro-frequency. The origin of this
two-band structure has been a half-century-long open scientific question. This
project, by systematically surveying the chorus waves and their properties right
in the source region, will explore whether the spectral gap at half the electron
gyro-frequency is generated at the magnetic equator, or is formed by damping as
the waves propagate to higher latitudes. The electron distributions that
accompany banded chorus waves will be statistically investigated and linear
growth calculations made to investigate the direct energy source of banded
chorus waves. Based on typical observations of waves and particle distribution,
1-Dimensional and 2-Dimensional particle-in-cell simulations will be performed
to explore the multi-stage interaction processes that could account for the
banded chorus waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.