* 1923986
* HDR DSC: Collaborative Research: Creating and Integrating Data Science Corps to Improve the Quality of Life in Urban Areas
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Sharad Sharma, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop a team-based data science corps program
for undergraduate students from Computer Science, Information Systems, and
Business integrating both academic training as well as hands-on experience
through real-world data science projects. This project is a collaborative effort
with the University of Maryland Baltimore County as the coordinating as well as
an implementing organization, and the University of Baltimore, Towson
University, and Bowie State University as implementing organizations. This
project focuses on the city of Baltimore as an exemplar for other cities in the
US and across the globe. The project team will collaborate with a number of
communities in the city of Baltimore to integrate real-world data science
projects into classroom instruction in data science. The specific objectives of
this project are as follows: (i) Develop the technical, analytical, modeling,
and critical thinking skills that are key to success as a data science
professional; (ii) Connect a cohort of students to communities, organizations,
and projects that can benefit from the power of data science; (iii) Nurture and
support innovative thinking in solving some of the key challenges facing the
real world; (iv) Promote a better understanding of the power and pitfalls of
data-driven discoveries to improve the quality of life in urban communities; (v)
Increase the data science workforce capacity to support this critical area that
is of growing importance in society; and finally, (vi) Evaluate the effect of
the proposed data science corps on student learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create a core set of knowledge that will be valuable in developing
solutions for real-world urban settings with the understanding that not all
projects will require the application or use of every topic covered in the data
science corps program. The core set of knowledge includes data collection and
cleaning, data analysis using machine learning and deep learning techniques,
data visualization including geospatial data and virtual reality, data privacy
and security, and infrastructure for smart cities including IoT-based sensor
networks. The proposed data science corps program will have two main phases:
instructional phase (10 modules in total) and real-world team projects (5
modules in total). The project teams consist of students who have taken a course
in at least one of the following areas: data collection and analysis, big data,
machine learning including deep learning, smart cities, cybersecurity,
geospatial data analysis and visualization, and virtual reality. Examples of
team projects include: (i) developing community-based indicators that are
compiled from open data portals and parametric and non-parametric statistical
techniques to understand the relationship between urban sustainability and a
range of factors including cleanliness and environment, crime and safety,
business and economics, social and political, housing, health, and education;
(ii) combining deep learning models such as convolutional neural networks (CNN)
and long term short term memory recurrent neural networks (LSTM-RNN) to develop
prediction models for derelict buildings that are likely to become vacant; (iii)
combining sensor data and social media for automated information extraction,
validation, and quality checks that can be beneficial to both citizens and
emergency managers in crisis situations such as flash floods; (iv) developing
smart streetlights that are networked LED systems that can be adjusted based on
time of day and motion and can report outages back to central operations; and
(v) developing augmented reality-based systems that leverage systems such as
Microsoft HoloLens and mobile devices for building
evacuation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Data
Science Corps program focuses on building capacity for harnessing the data
revolution at the local, state, national, and international levels to help
unleash the power of data in the service of science and society. Projects in
this program are being jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the Data
Revolution Big Idea; the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, Division of Information and Intelligent Systems; the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education; the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Division of Mathematical
Sciences; and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences,
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.