* 1923927
* Collaborative Research: Resolving Spatial and Temporal Variations in Near Shore Wind Stress via Advances in High Frequency Radar
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Anthony Kirincich, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 574,802.00

Wind is a critically important driver of ocean waters, so observations of
surface winds as they vary in time and location are important to our
understanding of ocean circulation. How water moves in the regions near
continents can affect the movement of commercial fish stocks, search and rescue
efforts, and many other human endeavors in the nearshore region. Yet available
buoy or satellite-based wind observations lack the resolution in time and space
needed to fully capture the wind as it drives coastal waters. Today, a
distributed network of oceanographic radar systems exists which measure ocean
currents remotely from land-based stations. This project will use these radars
to also observe winds remotely over the range and resolution needed to capture
the wind's full effects on the coastal ocean. It will expand on recent efforts
to extract the wind's signal from the observations collected by oceanographic
radars in Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and California. The team will also deploy
wave buoys and autonomous surface vehicles to ground-truth the data collected
and refine the models used to translate radar returns into wind speed and
direction. These observations will aid weather forecasts, and improve our
understanding of the coastal ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
observations of the surface winds from buoys or satellites provide either high
temporal coverage or high spatial coverage of the nearshore, but never both.
Land-based high frequency (HF) radars have the potential to fill this
observational gap. This work will couple recent theoretical results, high
quality radar observations, and independent wind and wave observations to
further develop HF radar-based wind extraction models. Using new and existing
datasets from both the New England Shelf and Santa Barbara Channel, this effort
seeks to improve our understanding of the complex relationship between surface
winds and the signals observed by HF radar systems. Validation studies will be
carried out in areas observed by multiple types of radar systems and with
significant spatial structure in the surface wind field, using both fixed buoy
and mobile, Autonomous Surface Vehicle (ASV)-based wind sensors. These
observations will be used to refine our understanding of the relationship
between surface wind stress and the signal observed by HF radars, enabling
accurate and spatially dense observations of wind forcing throughout the coastal
zone. The proposed effort will advance recently developed wind extraction models
and strengthen parameterized links between radar backscattered power and wind
speed and direction. Applying recent developments in direction finding methods
and developing improved calibration techniques, the method will be generalized
to arbitrary radar systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.