* 1923574
* Fostering Utah Education Learning for Grades 4-6 Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2023
* Helen Hu, State Office of Education, Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,974.00

This project is expanding computer science into rural elementary schools in Utah
by designing and testing a process for adaptation of existing computer science
resources into elementary science classes in grades 4-6. It leverages a
partnership between the Utah State Board of Education, Westminster College, and
the Central Utah Educational Regional Service Center to addresses the question,
“How can states and regional networks support rural districts in curating and
adapting national resources for computer science education?” It is creating
professional learning communities that bring together rural Utah elementary
teachers with experienced science and computer science teachers, as well as
educational technology trainers and national K-6 computer science teachers. The
computer science units will be made available through CANVAS modules (the state
licensed learning management system) as a way of making them accessible to other
Utah rural teachers beyond the original cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is investigating the process of adaptation of national computer science
resources to rural K-12 needs, the rigor of the units created, and the success
of implementation in the classroom. The team is using data on the challenges
faced by teachers in those schools to iteratively refine targeted supports that
include curriculum adaptations, differentiation of professional development
(PD), and system-level supports that address the specific needs of rural school
elementary teachers. To assess the usefulness of the adaptation, creation, and
implementation process, the research involves interviews with both teachers and
development team experts. Additionally, teachers are completing PD exit surveys
and monthly implementation surveys. The team is also examining state data usage
associated with the modules through the CANVAS platform as a way to measure
implementation. The research is informing a model process for adaptation of
national materials for computer science in rural K-12, and is being shared with
the national computer science research community. This project is funded by the
CS for All program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.