* 1923534
* EDGE CT: Developing transgenic and lineage tracing tools in planarians
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Nicholas Melosh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,001.00

Planarians have captured the imagination of generations of scientists, and today
play a critical role in our efforts to understand development and regeneration.
These small flatworms can regenerate their entire body from small tissue
fragments. As a result of the current surge in the sequencing technology,
tremendous progress has been made over the past two decades to understand
planarian biology from a variety of perspectives, including but not limited to
regeneration, stem cell, animal body plan and evolution, germline, nervous
system, metabolism, innate immunity, signaling pathways, regulatory RNAs, and
genome stability. Yet the entire field has been limited by the lack of tools for
transgene expression and genome editing. At the same time, technological
innovation has exploded for transfection and gene editing of mammalian cells. In
particular, nanotechnological approaches can very locally disrupt the cell
membrane and inject molecular cargo directly, providing both low cell toxicity
and high delivery efficiencies. In this project, the researchers will use the
novel nanotechnology, "nanostraws," to deliver genetic materials into planarian
cells, and provide a simple and effective means for transgene expression and
genome editing. This project also aims to rapidly disseminate the new technology
by facilitating data, protocol, and materials sharing across labs, and
organizing training workshops. In addition, because of planarians' appealing
regenerative ability, childlike cuteness, and ease to rear in the lab, the
researchers will promote the usage of planarians in teaching, education, and
outreach activities to engage non-scientists' interests in modern biological
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planarians have been a powerful animal model to
study tissue regeneration and stem cell biology. They have the unique capacity
to regenerate the entire body from minute tissue fragments using pluripotent
somatic stem cells. During this process, they reset the body axes and rebuild
all organs in appropriate proportions. Although extensive genomic and
transcriptomic information is available, progress on addressing causal genotype-
phenotype relationships in planarians has been severely hindered by a lack of
transgenic tools despite decades of attempts. Enabled by the recent technical
advances made in the investigators' laboratories, including cell culture and
transplantation methods, novel nanotechnology for gene delivery in hard-to-
transfect cell types, and successful expression of luminescence reporters in
planarian cells, they aim to address this long-standing challenge. This research
project aims to develop and disseminate the methodology and resources for
planarian transgenesis. Specifically, the goals of this project include (1) to
develop nanoscale electroporation methods for transgene delivery in planarian
cells, (2) to demonstrate genome editing using CRISPR/Cas9, and (3) to enhance
the collaboration, training, and diversity of the planarian research community
to address a broad spectrum of questions in molecular, cellular, organismal, and
evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.