* 1923202
* Collaborative Research: Dissociating Perceptual and Motor Correlates of EEG Mu-Alpha and Beta Oscillations in Emotional Action Simulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Eric Moody, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 56,639.00

From jumping jacks to jumping for joy, the "body language" of human movement
provides&lt;br/&gt;important information about the intentions and emotions of
others. Growing evidence suggests&lt;br/&gt;that we understand others' mental
states by internally recreating, or simulating, their
external&lt;br/&gt;actions. Yet questions remain about how different brain
systems contribute to action simulation,&lt;br/&gt;and whether this process is
linked to individual differences in social perception abilities.
This&lt;br/&gt;research uses electroencephalography (EEG) to examine brain
activity associated with action&lt;br/&gt;simulation during observation of
emotional body movements, both in typically developing&lt;br/&gt;individuals and
in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), a condition associated
with&lt;br/&gt;social perception impairments. By testing the link between EEG
measures of action simulation&lt;br/&gt;and emotion perception capabilities
across a broad sample of individual socio-emotional&lt;br/&gt;functioning, these
data will provide a rigorous theoretical framework for understanding
the&lt;br/&gt;neural basis of emotional action simulation. More broadly, the
research may provide new&lt;br/&gt;insights into the neural origins of social
impairments observed in ASD, potentially leading to&lt;br/&gt;improved diagnoses
and therapies. Finally, these activities will promote undergraduate
training&lt;br/&gt;in the STEM disciplines by providing authentic research
opportunities for students including&lt;br/&gt;women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will examine the relation
between perceptual and motor circuits in&lt;br/&gt;emotion simulation. In a
previous EEG study, the investigators found distinct neural
markers&lt;br/&gt;associated with the observation of emotional and emotionally-
neutral actions. Emotional actions&lt;br/&gt;elicited a reduction of cortical
"mu" alpha rhythms (9-12 Hz) linked to perceptual aspects of&lt;br/&gt;action
simulation, but neutral actions produced enhanced beta-band oscillations (14-20
Hz)&lt;br/&gt;associated with motor planning and response inhibition. Both
effects were attenuated in a nonclinical&lt;br/&gt;sample of individuals
reporting greater autistic tendencies, suggesting these neural&lt;br/&gt;markers
are sensitive to individual differences in social-emotional traits. The proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;will investigate the contribution of motor circuits to mu-
alpha suppression for emotional actions&lt;br/&gt;by comparing action execution
with observed emotional action and varying the familiarity and&lt;br/&gt;ease of
simulating observed emotional actions. Examination of individuals with ASD
will&lt;br/&gt;distinguish how mu and beta band activity relate to individual
differences in emotional&lt;br/&gt;processing, allowing assessment of whether
neurodevelopmental disruptions of sensorimotor&lt;br/&gt;systems play a role in
emotion simulation deficits. Collectively, these studies will
provide&lt;br/&gt;important insights into the relations between EEG measures,
action simulation processes, and&lt;br/&gt;emotion
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.