* 1923062
* AMPS: Deep Stochastic Models for Space-Time Weather-Driven Grid Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* William Kleiber, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,924.00

The power system is changing rapidly with the introduction of large amounts of
distributed energy resources such as distributed photovoltaics and loads with
demand response potential. The addition of uncertain and variable distributed
energy resources requires better understanding of potential impacts on grid
operations. Direct testing on the grid is not possible, and the reliance on
computer simulations for varying degrees of the distributed energy resource
penetration is necessary. The companion mathematical challenge is in generating
realistic scenarios of supplies and loads at the customer level, often at high
spatial and temporal resolutions involving joint generation of tens of thousands
of correlated space-time variables. Moreover, such processes are plagued by
discontinuities due to electrical device switching in loads and microscale
weather variations in distributed photovoltaics supply. This project represents
an end-to-end effort developing new mathematical tools that will be applied to
realistic electricity network testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a framework for space-time jump-diffusion processes that capture
realistic non-Gaussian behavior of distributed energy resources and loads at
high time frequencies. Such models will yield unprecedented insights into
distributed energy resource implications on current and future grids. The
testbed for the new framework and methodology is a state-of-the-art distribution
simulation network dataset, Smart-DS. Results of this research will have
potential impacts in infrastructure and energy planning by studying grid
responses to varying levels of the distributed energy resource adoption. The
statistical models will be applicable to a variety of fields including financial
mathematics, environmetrics, geography and ecology. Moreover, this research will
support student training at the intersection of statistics and energy science,
who will gain interdisciplinary and collaborative experience with domain
scientists during summer internships at the National Renewable Energy
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.