* 1923216
* Collaborative Research: Intelligent and Agile Robotic Legged Locomotion in Complex Environments: From Planning to Safety and Robust Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kaveh Akbari Hamed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2023
* USD 242,543.00

This project will advance the progress of science, national prosperity and
welfare, by enhancing walking capabilities of robotic systems. While legged
robots are becoming more mechanically sophisticated, their agility, dexterity,
and dynamic stability are still far from capabilities of their biological
counterparts (such as animals and humans) in real world situations. The
overarching goal of this project is to create a formal foundation to enable
intelligent and fast motion planning, safety, and robust control for a multitude
of agile behaviors of autonomous legged machines in real-world situations. This
research will have broad societal impact through seamless integration of control
theory, optimization, and intelligence to enable ubiquitous use of increasingly
sophisticated robots. Such robots will be able to effectively assist, or serve
as remote extensions of, humans in situations of extreme danger, such as
industrial accidents and natural disasters. The integrated educational plan will
have broad impact by designing new courses. STEM-based outreach initiative for
K-12 students, teachers, and under-represented minorities, and engagement of
undergraduate students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance knowledge in the largely unexplored field of intelligent and robust
legged locomotion through key innovations in controls and analysis. Intelligent
and fast motion planning algorithms, based on hybrid systems theory,
optimization, and perception, will be created for dynamical models of legged
locomotion in complex environments. The project will address the synthesis of
robust-optimal controllers, based on nonlinear control and matrix inequalities,
for agile and dexterous locomotion. It will also create safety-critical control
algorithms, based on set invariance and quadratic programming, for real-world
implementation of robust controllers that guarantee obstacle avoidance in
unknown environments. To bridge the gap between theory and implementation, this
research will transfer the theoretical innovations into practice through
experiments with two advanced quadrupedal and bipedal robots in researchers'
laboratories at Virginia Tech and Caltech sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.