* 1923229
* Exploring the Success of HBCUs Development of Blacks Earning Engineering and Computing Graduate Degrees
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Alexandra Strong, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew A. Verleger
* 08/31/2024
* USD 361,507.00

Historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) have played a critical role
in the production of African American and Black students in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). For graduate degrees, between 2002 and 2011,
the National Science Foundation found that HBCUs comprised all ten of the top
baccalaureate-origin institutions for Blacks who went on to obtain a doctorate
degree in science and engineering. The predominance of HBCUs in the preparation
of Black students for graduate programs suggests a need to better understand
this under-explored success case and, in particular, the practices of these
institutions that support prospective Black students as they explore and apply
to graduate school. Identifying and disseminating these success cases will
encourage HBCU and non-HBCU leaders to add resources towards matriculating more
undergraduate students in STEM including increasing the number that go on to
pursue masters and PhDs in engineering and computing. In addition, this study
will provide an opportunity for non-HBCU organizations to better understand
HBCUs, their culture and how they can be more strategic in partnering with them
as well as recruiting and retaining engineering and computing HBCU students at
the graduate level. Through the resulting evidence-based insights and
recommendations, this project will contribute to the goals outlined by the
National Academies: (1) increasing underrepresented minority students' interest
in graduate STEM degrees, (2) retaining and graduating Black students in those
programs, and (3) documenting best practices for others to use.&lt;br/&gt;Using
a three-phased study, the research team will (1) examine the pathways and
experiences of HBCU engineering and computing undergraduates who are interested
in graduate school and (2) isolate the individual, institutional and cultural
factors that contribute to their overall undergraduate experiences and lead to
successful completion of engineering and computing graduate programs. Phase I
will seek breadth by collecting survey data from current students and recent
alumni associated with engineering and computing programs at HBCUs. Phase II
will serve to develop rich insights from three particular HBCUs through in-
depth, interview-based case studies. The three institutions will be selected
through purposive sampling using maximum variation techniques of the Phase I
results. Phase III will involve sharing the integrated results from Phases I and
II with HBCU students and stakeholders during two validation workshops at the
2021 National Society of Black Engineers National Convention and at the 2021
Annual American Society for Engineering Education Annual Conference. The
integrated results of these three phases will add to the research community's
understanding of the experiences of Black students at HBCUs including the
contribution of administrators, faculty and staff towards their students'
interest, eventual pursuit and completion of engineering and computing graduate
degrees. In addition, empirically-informed dissemination workshops will engage
and equip stakeholders from HBCUs and other institutions to examine their own
practices and adopt approaches that can increase underrepresented minority
students' interest and preparedness for graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.