* 1923069
* RUI: Alternative splicing in the regulation of plant innate immunity
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Hua Lu, Saint Bonaventure University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

Plant diseases threaten crop yield and lead to billions of dollars of losses
each year worldwide. RNA alternative splicing is a conserved mechanism to
increase the diversity of transcripts and protein functions, and has been
implicated in plant defense against pathogens. This project will elucidate the
molecular basis governing the interplay between RNA alternative splicing and
plant defense. This will contribute to the current understanding of plant
defense mechanisms and eventually facilitate developing strategies to improve
crop plants with better balanced growth and defense, and ultimately with higher
productivity. This project will be used as a platform to engage undergraduate
students, K-12 teachers and high school students from rural WNY, including the
Native American population, in a series of STEM career readiness training
exercises in the summer that can be replicated at other undergraduate
institutions. Some research components of this project will be integrated in
classroom teaching and laboratory investigations. Throughout the courses,
students will practice critical thinking, proposal writing and professional
presentations. Exercises will be provided to enhance resource and data
management skills in students. This project aims to provide students a first-
hand experience and to increase their competencies for future careers in the
STEM fields. Teaching materials developed in this project will be made available
for others to adapt and/or adopt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong evidence from the
preliminary work indicates that a splicing regulator, SR45, acts as a suppressor
of innate immunity in Arabidopsis. This project aims to elucidate how SR45,
regulates plant innate immunity, a novel role of the gene that has never been
characterized before. To achieve this goal, the following objectives are
proposed: (1) to investigate how SR45 affects plant innate immunity in response
to a variety of pathogen species using genetics approach and a suite of defense
assays; (2) to confirm and characterize the involvement of putative
alternatively spliced SR45-associated transcripts in plant immune response using
molecular and genetic approaches; (3) to identify new pathogen-induced and
SR45-dependent alternative splicing events in plant immune responses using RNA-
seq with pathogen-infected inducible SR45 silencing line leaf samples and mock-
treated leaf and the non-silencing line as control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.