* 1923451
* TECt: Preparing Northeast Florida's Secondary Teachers to Foster Computational Thinking in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* William Klostermeyer, University of North Florida
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 291,579.00

The University of North Florida (UNF) will implement Teachers Enhancing
Computational Thinking (TECt): Preparing Northeast Florida's Secondary Teachers
to Foster Computational Thinking in Computer Science -- to build on current
collaborative initiatives to prepare 30 teachers to teach computer science (CS)
courses through professional development (PD) and coursework leading to state
certification in CS. TECt will engage multiple partners from UNF, Duval County
Public Schools, and the Northeast Florida STEM2 Hub, along with CS teachers and
experts in education, CS and business in addressing the gap in the availability
and access to CS courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High school students in Duval
County in northeast Florida typically graduate without any CS instruction.
Although a state certification exists for CS K-12 instructors, no local colleges
or universities offer teacher certification programs. As a result, few teachers
can become fully prepared CS educators, and few students are exposed to
meaningful computer science instruction. TECt will change that, using a science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) Ecosystems framework within a Research-
Practitioner Partnership (RPP) to prepare and support these teachers in teaching
rigorous CS courses. The RPP will define the problems of practice, address
equity throughout the partnership, and implement research to determine the
effectiveness of the TECt structure in preparing high school CS
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.