* 1923962
* Collaborative Research: The Influence of Sponge Holobiont Metabolism on Coral Reef Dissolved Organic Matter and Reef Microorganisms
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Amy Apprill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 243,262.00

The seawater around coral reefs is typically low in nutrients, yet coral reefs
are teeming with life and are often compared to oases in a desert. Life exists
in these 'marine deserts' in large part, due to symbiotic associations between
single-celled microbes and invertebrates such as corals and sponges. The
concentration and type of dissolved organic matter (DOM), a complex pool of
organic nutrients such as amino acids, vitamins, and other diverse compounds,
also affects the health of coral reefs. The composition of DOM on coral reefs is
linked to both the composition of free-living microbes in the seawater and to
the nutrition of filter-feeding organisms, such as corals and sponges. However,
the factors that influence the composition of DOM on coral reefs and the
consequences of how it changes are not well understood. Recent work suggests
that sponges could have a significant impact on the composition of reef
dissolved organic nutrients, depending on sponge species due to differences in
filtration capacity and in their symbiotic microbial communities. This project
characterizes how diverse sponge species process DOM on coral reefs and
determines the impacts of this processing on the free-living microbial
community. Seawater is collected from sponges (pre- and post- sponge filtration)
on coral reefs in the relatively pristine region of Curacao, and incubation
experiments measure the impact of sponge filtration on the growth of the free-
living microbial community. The organic nutrients of seawater samples are
analyzed using cutting-edge techniques to distinguish the types of nutrients
that are processed by sponges. The incubation experiments, using free-living
microbes collected from the coral reef, quantify the impact of sponge filtration
on the growth and composition of this community. This project provides
fundamental understanding of how sponges contribute to the base of the coral
reef food web. As the human-driven impacts continue to alter the composition of
organisms on reefs, this understanding is necessary to predict changes to reef
microbial food webs and is thus essential for scientists, reef managers, and
policy decision makers. This project trains undergraduate students and a
postdoctoral scholar and contributes to undergraduate and K-12 education through
development of sponge-centric lessons that focus on local U.S. east coast
aquatic environments as well as coral reef ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponges vary in their capacity to filter seawater and in
their associated microbial communities, leading to diverse metabolic strategies
that often coexist in one habitat. While it is well-established that sponges are
important in processing dissolved organic matter (DOM), an important reservoir
of reduced carbon compounds, and transferring this energy to benthic food webs,
there has been limited work to understand the consequences of sponge processing
on the composition of coral reef DOM and on pelagic food webs. Specifically,
while studies have shown that exudates of corals and algae select for specific
groups of picoplankton (autotrophic and heterotrophic, respectively), similar
data for sponges are required to understand the multiple factors that shape the
composition of DOM and of the picoplankton community on coral reefs. Thus, this
project is aimed at addressing a major knowledge gap of the role of sponge-
derived DOM (sponge exometabolome) in coral reef biogeochemistry. An in situ
sampling design targeting prominent Caribbean sponges and picoplankton
incubation experiments is coupled to address both the composition of sponge
exometabolomes and delineate shifts in the picoplankton community derived from
sponge exometabolomes. Molecular-level changes to seawater DOM by sponge
processing and the impact of these changes on the overall coral reef DOM profile
is assessed with two DOM analysis techniques: a commonly used fluorometry
technique (fDOM analysis) and with high-resolution mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).
Additionally, microbiome and functional gene profiling, growth metrics, and
nutrient analyses are employed to assess changes in the picoplankton community
in response to sponge exometabolomes. Advanced data analysis techniques then
synthesize data generated by each approach to provide novel insight on a poorly
uncharacterized biogeochemical pathway on coral reefs. The work outlined here
represents entirely novel information on the impact of sponge metabolism on the
composition of DOM, sheds light on biologically important molecules involved in
benthic-pelagic coupling, and importantly, generates data using standardized
methods, thus facilitating comparison to previous and future DOM
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.