* 1923326
* I-Corps: English language teaching program providing personalized instruction in sentence construction
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Christina Vorndran, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to fill a
void in the products and services that teach language to children with autism
and to non-native English speakers. Approximately one-third of individuals with
autism exhibit a deficit in expressing themselves in sentences. The traditional
language remediation for autism is in-person therapy. Computerized therapies
offer more intensive instruction at lower cost, but existing programs do not
fully address the language deficits seen in autism. In addition, the National
Council for Education Statistics reports a population of English as a Second
Language (ESL) students that grew from 8.1 percent in 2000 to 9.5 percent in
2015. The program developed here offers both ESL and autistic students
personalized, automated instruction, along with a comprehensive curriculum, in
core areas of English: grammar and syntax. Mastering these requires a level of
extensive practice, personalized learning, and linguistic expertise that exceeds
both the capacities of in-person therapies and teacher-directed instruction, and
the capabilities of the language software programs that are currently on the
market.

This I-Corps project involves the development and commercialization of an
English language teaching program providing personalized instruction in sentence
construction. Informed by research showing that mastering a language requires
active practice, the system uses pictures and verbal prompts (spoken and
written) to prompt learners put words together into specific types of phrases
and sentences. These targeted language structures gradually increase in length
and complexity. Learners construct their responses from scratch through open-
ended word-button clicking, keyboard typing, or speech. The system provides
interactive, step-by-step feedback (both spoken and written) that is informed by
principles of explicit and implicit learning. This feedback, enhanced through
color-coded highlighting, diagnoses problems with word choice, word endings, and
word order, guiding users through self-corrections to well-formed sentences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.