* 1923943
* Modeling of Crater Floor Deformation in Relationship with Lava Lake Activity
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Christelle Wauthier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,754.00

Volcanoes create natural hazards (lava flows, ash plumes, earthquakes etc.) that
can pose risk to the local population and economy. This project aims to better
understand how volcanoes work and forecast future eruptions, knowing where and
how much magma is located beneath the volcano. Magma conduits and storage areas
beneath a volcano constitute the magma plumbing system. Lava lakes offer a
unique window into the superficial part of a magma plumbing system. However,
only a few volcanoes on Earth host a lava lake (semi-) permanently. Nyiragongo
Volcano in the Democratic Republic of Congo, hosts the largest lava lake on
Earth. Nyamulagira Volcano, the neighbor of Nyiragongo Volcano, also hosts a
small lava lake in a pit crater since 2014. By imaging the ground deformation
around lava lakes in the summit areas of those volcanoes, we can model and
visualize the magma plumbing system. The two volcanoes targeted for analysis in
this project are hazardous and can quickly transition from open-vent lava lake
activity to dangerous and fast eruptions. In particular, the hazards posed by
Nyiragongo are considerable, as highlighted by the last deadly eruption in 2002.
Given that other volcanoes in the U.S. (Hawaii) and elsewhere share similarities
with the Congo volcanoes, the research proposed here has broad implications for
volcanoes and eruption forecasting worldwide. This project is conducted in
collaboration with scientists in Belgium and will support research and graduate
and undergraduate education and training at Pennsylvania State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the following question at two
hazardous volcanoes hosting lava lakes: What is causing the deformation of
Nyiragongo and Nyamulagira (Democratic Republic of Congo)'s crater floors? The
project will take advantage of recent spatially and temporally dense Synthetic
Aperture Radar (SAR) datasets acquired over Nyiragongo and Nyamulagira volcanoes
(Democratic Republic of Congo). Those dense datasets are processed with a
recently developed InSAR time series approach, the Multidimensional Small
BAseline Subset (MSBAS) method (Samsonov and d'Oreye, 2012) that allows to
ingest different satellite and orbits within the same SBAS algorithm to output a
detailed time-series of ground displacements. Then, the project will aim to
model the ground surface deformation observed in the summit areas of both
volcanoes during periods of various lava lake activity. The ground deformation
of the crater floors is due to one, or a combination of, the following factors
that will each need to be thoroughly investigated and tested at each volcano:
lava flow cooling and subsidence, pressure changes in a shallow reservoir,
motion along caldera ring faults, and magma intrusion cooling and subsidence. By
integrating several remote sensing geodetic (ground surface deformation)
datasets processed with an innovative time series approach, with other remote
sensing based lava lake surface heights, thermal anomalies and gas (i.e., SO2),
together with other ground-based measurements such as seismic and gas, a
conceptual model of the shallow part of the magma plumbing system will be
developed at two volcanic systems. This project is cofunded by the Prediction of
and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.