* 1923150
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the hydrologic consequences of urban irrigation across the U.S.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* George Jenerette, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 374,405.00

All components of the water cycle are altered by human activities in cities, and
the impacts of these changes on urban water and climate are still poorly
understood. Urbanization affects climate, the amount of water in soil (soil
moisture), and the type and amount of vegetation across the landscape. All of
these factors strongly impact evapotranspiration (ET): the flux of water from
land to the atmosphere. Urban ET is poorly predicted by hydrologic models that
do not adequately represent human actions, such as irrigation. Yet, urban
irrigation can have large effects on climate, soil moisture, and plant growth
and survival. This study addresses the extent to which ET is limited by soil
moisture, atmospheric water demand (a function of humidity and air temperature),
or the density and distribution of vegetation within and across U.S. cities.
Measurements will be made in three urban regions: Los Angeles, CA (a semi-arid
city where irrigation has been declining due to drought response policy), Salt
Lake City, UT (semi-arid but still heavily irrigated), and Tallahassee, FL (high
rainfall and very high urban tree cover). These cities represent urban settings
with different water cycle components. This project will advance knowledge and
understanding of urban ET, improve basic climate and water cycle models, and to
contribute to efficient water management in cities and urban landscapes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban hydrologic data are still sparse relative to
observations in natural and agricultural systems. To advance a generalizable
understanding of urban hydrology, it is necessary to explore categorizable
differences within and across cities in the balance of water supply (soil
moisture as supplied by both irrigation and precipitation), plant demand for
water uptake (as determined by the magnitude, distribution, and composition of
leaf area), and atmospheric evaporative demand (net radiation and vapor pressure
deficit). The project will examine similarities and differences in these fluxes
within and across cities by quantifying irrigation efficiency, its variability,
and its key drivers. The contribution of each component of the soil-plant-
atmosphere system to ET fluxes is likely to vary in mesic vs. arid/semi-arid
climates and according to local irrigation practices as well as urbanization
processes that influence land and vegetative cover. By sampling cities that are
hypothesized to span different combinations and ranges of irrigation practices
and likely limits on urban soil moisture, vapor pressure deficit, and ET, the
investigators will test a general framework that can be applied beyond these
specific cities and measurement sites. Ultimately, this project will use the
extensive datasets collected in this study for advancing mechanistic models of
urban landscape ET as an alternative to empirical crop and landscape coefficient
approaches. The results will be disseminated to stakeholders and extension
specialists who are focused on improving turfgrass management, outdoor water
management, and urban water policy. The investigators will also leverage
programs for recruiting and retaining undergraduate and graduate students from
under-represented groups to build a diverse, interdisciplinary team aimed at
broadening participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.