* 1923201
* AMPS: Stochastic Aging Modeling and Failure Prediction of Power Grid
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Mohsen Zayernouri, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 231,292.00

In the case of foreign attacks, identifying the most sensitive regions in the
American power grid while predicting cascade failure is a vital task with
significant national interest due to the energy distribution and security
concerns. Such large-scale networks are influenced dynamically by a substantial
number of stochastic inputs, such as weather, aging, external attacks, composing
a high-dimensional uncertainty space that propagates. Our stochastic models and
sensitivity analysis we obtain reliable predictions of the network's failure
uncertainty evolution and identify sensitive regions, facilitating decision
making and preventive actions during catastrophic events. This study will break
a new ground on identifying the most vulnerable regions also enhancing the
reliability and resilience of power grid as a whole. This is of critical
importance, where the environment and public safety are at risk. the novelty of
our approach is that we carry out a 'detailed stochastic failure modeling' for a
small yet representing component, e.g., electric wire/cable and a mechanical
part subject to thermo-electro-mechanical load, and then, to develop a 'physics
and math informed lumped element modeling' of failure and aging for the expanded
and global system. Therefore, in our approach, the underlying physics and data-
infused modeling would minimally be compromised as it is in the common practice.
One graduate student will be supported in each year of this 3 year
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The power grid network in the United States is an
engineering wonder of complexity, interconnectivity and robustness. However, the
high connectivity can potentially lead to cascading failures with the loss of
single components. The majority of disturbances is caused by natural events,
such as storms, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes. Still, one third of major
blackouts have non-natural causes, including human errors, machine failure and
intentional attacks. We formulate a new computational-mathematical phase-field
based model for thermo-electro- mechanical failure analysis of generating points
(sites) on the power grid and the power-transmission lines. Moreover, we develop
a reduced-order model which can be in real-time fashioned examined subject to
different working/weather conditions across the US. Subsequently, we will
approximate the 'probability failure' of the prominent source/generating points
also the aging grid network links. We study the propagation of failure
uncertainty front through the power grid and identify regions of 'critically
high risk' which would be affected by the malfunction of power grid. The model
is a robust tool for faster decision making in case of blackouts, prevention of
malicious attacks and in prudent, secure expansion of the already complex power
networks. With data obtained through smart grid used in monitoring power grid
operations, the probabilistic framework serves as a real-time asset in the
prediction of rare catastrophic events. In terms of deliverables, in addition to
published papers and organization of mini-symposiums in conferences and
workshops, we will also provide properly documented open source codes
accompanied with benchmark power-grid simulation
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.