* 1923528
* EAGER: Understanding and Categorizing Metadata
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Susan Landau, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 290,207.00

Communications metadata is necessary for the delivery of services. But such
metadata leaks information about user intent and behavior. Through timing, for
example, one can determine whether a Twitter account is a bot, while through
packet length, what language is being spoken in an encrypted Voice Over Internet
Protocol (VoIP) call. Thus, protecting a user's privacy and security is
complicated. By examining multiple different sets of metadata usage, this EAGER
seeks to develop a categorization of the types of information that metadata
reveals. Applications of the work should lead to the development of better
technical and policy protections of user privacy and security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main contribution of this proposed research is a
categorization of the types of uses to which metadata is applied. There are many
uses in metadata usage (how is the data collected, is it aggregated with other
data, etc.); this categorization will focus on developing clean types of
information revealed through metadata capture and use. Such a categorization of
metadata usage will have several important applications. Delineating different
types of knowledge gained through the use of metadata (e.g., information about
the device, information about the user), will simplify providing better
technical protections for user privacy and security against such attacks.
Furthermore, by categorizing the different ways metadata is used, it will be
possible to more easily understand which usages are privacy invasive and which
are not, and thus to develop more privacy-protective policies surrounding
metadata usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.