* 1923269
* CS4SA-HS: Developing a collaborative of secondary computer science teachers to increase Latinx participation in CS
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Timothy Yuen, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,196,226.00

The University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) and teachers and administrators in
the San Antonio Independent School District (SAISD) -- a district with a
majority Latinx student population -- propose a researcher-practitioner
partnership (RPP), CS4SA-HS. The project will design and implement a rigorous
teacher professional development (PD) program to develop a qualified high school
computer science (CS) teacher workforce in Texas. It will target non-CS high
school teachers and prepare them to become highly qualified CS teachers of
linguistically and culturally diverse learner populations. Overall, CS4SA-HS
aims to increase Latinx participation in CS by building a collaborative of
secondary teachers who are prepared to teach CS in their diverse classrooms,
become advocates for and leaders of CS education in their districts, and
contribute to broadening participation in CS and other STEM areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Its specific aims are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Create
and deliver a teacher PD program that emphasizes building foundational CS
knowledge and skills and adopting culturally responsive approaches to CS
teaching; &lt;br/&gt;(2) Increase CS learning opportunities in school
communities of large Latinx populations; &lt;br/&gt;(3) Establish a CS Pathway
curriculum that meets the needs of communities with large Latinx populations;
&lt;br/&gt;(4) Create sustainable and scalable CS PD opportunities within and
across schools through teacher leadership; and &lt;br/&gt;(5) Advance the
knowledge and research in CS teacher education, culturally responsive CS
education, and teacher professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are
two main research questions: (i) In what ways can PD prepare secondary teachers
from non-CS backgrounds to successfully teach CS in their culturally and
linguistically diverse classrooms? (ii) Does culturally responsive CS teaching
lead to increasing participation of Latinx students in CS? The project will
increase our understanding of effective high school CS education for minority
learner populations, providing best practices with respect to high school CS
teacher PD and its impact on increasing Latinx participation in
CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.