* 1923628
* Learning Computer Science Through Tabletop Games in a Dual Language Immersion Middle School
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Margaret Niess, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,016,000.00

A computer programming approach is often used to introduce computer science,
which can be intimidating and frustrating to some teachers and students. In
response, researchers at Oregon State University (OSU) and practitioners at a
dual language (Spanish and English) immersion middle school will use their
current Research Practitioner Partnership (RPP) to develop and investigate a new
approach using "unplugged" game play of familiar tabletop games to teach
students how to think computationally. They will develop an innovative CS for
All curriculum to teach 6th and 7th grade students about computer science (CS)
using well-known tabletop games that are agnostic of gender, ethnicity, and
socio-economic status, such as Tic-Tac-Toe and Go Fish. Through the natural
social interaction during game playing, students will work together using
scaffolded templates to identify computational concepts and describe the
computation in the game. The project will also develop domain-specific languages
(DSLs) for articulating game descriptions as a model for teachers to understand
and implement the CS curriculum using semi-formal algorithm representations, and
inform a set of supports for teachers and to transition from unstructured to
formalized programming language notations. This CS for All project contributes
to the understanding of how to introduce computation to middle school students
and teachers in a way that is scalable and easily adaptable to support its
widespread adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research components of the project
will examine the usability of the program including the usefulness of the
representative algorithmic templates, the effectiveness of the curriculum
approach for teaching core CS concepts and problem solving skills, and how the
program address equity issues related to diverse student attributes, interests,
motivations, and gaps in prior CS instruction. Multiple data sources, including
student surveys, teacher interviews, classroom observations and workshop
documents, will be gathered and analyzed both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Beyond the curriculum and DSLs created in this project, the key experiences
uncovered in this RPP will be documented and be used to inform the development
of other successful RPPs that share the needs unique to dual-language immersion
schools with many dual-language learners, as well as extend the existing RPP
addressing computational needs to more schools across the district and state
through a professional learning community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.