* 1923679
* Travel Support: 15th International Symposium on Bioinformatics Research and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Zhipeng Cai, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The International Symposium on Bioinformatics Research and Applications (ISBRA)
has a track record of driving informatics research by providing a forum for
discussion of latest results in all aspects of bioinformatics and computational
biology and applications. The 15th ISBRA will be held in Barcelona, Spain in
June. A distinguished set of international leaders will provide the keynotes and
the students will have an opportunity to present their research in posters
sessions. The funds will provide for student travel support for participation in
the technical program as well as in tutorials and poster sessions. Extended
abstracts are published by Springer-Verlag and full papers will be published by
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interface between computer science and the biological sciences has been one of
the most fruitful areas of interdisciplinary research. The current ISBRA meeting
will provide an opportunity for students to meet in a variety of situations with
both colleagues and world leaders and enhance overall professional development
for the next generation of scientific leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.