* 1923557
* EDGE TT: Genetic Transformation of Broadleaf Plantain (Plantago major) and Narrowleaf Plantain (Plantago lanceolata)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Cankui Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 452,915.00

More than 250 species in the Plantago genus are distributed throughout the
world, many of which are of broad interest because of their medicinal properties
and their ability to reduce toxic heavy metals from soil and water. Plantago
species are also widely used as experimental model systems for both basic and
applied agriculturally-relevant research. For example, Plantago was one of the
first species used to study male sterility, an important reproductive trait that
has been exploited for crop improvement. Despite its economic and scientific
importance, efficient modern molecular tools for Plantago are lacking and
represent a significant bottleneck that hampers efforts to provide an in-depth
understanding of the processes and underlying regulatory mechanisms and the
fundamental discoveries necessary for future crop improvement. This project aims
to provide the tools for genetically testing gene function through the
development of efficient plant transformation methods in Plantago. Broader
impacts of the project include the wide dissemination of protocols and other
project outcomes to the broader plant research communities and the engagement
and training of high school students, particularly those from underrepresented
groups in science, through participation in existing programs at Purdue.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Plantago genus has many unique features that have led
to a series of exciting discoveries, from the initial observation and
description of male sterility 143 years ago to studies focused on elucidating
unique aspects of sugar transport in plants, and more recently the involvement
of vasculature in response to mineral deficiency. In the last two decades, a
large number of research groups over the world have conducted transcriptomic,
proteomic, metabolomic, and biochemical studies and identified thousands of
candidate genes and proteins that likely participate in the diverse biological
processes observed in the Plantago genus. This project aims to advance the
direct testing of gene function in Plantago by establishing efficient
transformation methods in two widely used Plantago species, broadleaf (P. major)
and narrowleaf (P. lanceolata) plantains. These two species were chosen because
of their popularity as model systems by the Plantago research community, their
low ploidy (2x) and small genome sizes, as well as their amenability to genetic
modification. All protocols and resources will be made freely available and
accessible to the public through a project website, a publicly available video,
multiple publications and on-site training workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Enabling Discoveries through Genomic Tools (EDGE)
and the Plant Genome Research Program (PGRP) in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.