* 1923065
* Controlling Two Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Tamar Gollan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 753,606.00

Over 20% of the US population speaks a language other than English at home and
bilingualism has long been the norm outside the US. The value of knowing more
than one language is becoming increasingly relevant as technology develops and
US industry connects with individuals all over the world, even with just a
handheld device. People who speak multiple languages have greater potential to
connect with a broader audience or customer base. At the same time, research has
demonstrated that knowledge of more than one language can change some aspects of
native language use: the burden associated with bilingualism can lead to subtle
but significant disadvantages in some aspects of cognitive performance (e.g.,
vocabulary), but to significant advantages in other aspects (e.g., resolving
conflict, sustained focus of attention). Such differences have potentially
serious implications in many settings, including educational and medical
settings. For example, how should bilingual children best be served in school
settings to enable them to learn English quickly while maintaining knowledge of
their Heritage Language spoken in the home? What methods are best to pursue when
attempting to identify learning disabilities in bilingual children? At the other
end of the lifespan, in aging bilinguals, what is the best method for
identifying current or possibly imminent cognitive decline?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies will investigate the consequences of
bilingualism for language and cognitive processing by comparing bilinguals with
monolinguals in a series of behavioral experiments designed to test how
bilinguals choose which language they intend to speak and how this process is
more generally related to choice behaviors. Bilinguals will read aloud sentences
that mix languages, will be asked to switch between languages or between other
(non-linguistic) tasks, name pictures in both languages, or translate between
languages. Relationships among these tasks will be examined. A driving
hypothesis underlying the current work is that 1) bilinguals maintain control
over which language they speak at least in part by relying on cognitive
abilities not related to language and 2) bilingual language use can improve
general abilities related to rapid switching, monitoring, and resolving conflict
between response alternatives (e.g., needing to avoid distraction). This
hypothesis will be tested by examining how performance changes when more than
one language must be controlled and whether training with language switching
improves general cognitive abilities and vice versa (e.g., if managing response
competition transfers across non-linguistic and linguistic tasks). These studies
will clarify the relationship between bilingualism and cognitive test
performance and establish conditions that minimize possible costs and maximize
potential benefits of bilingualism. The proposed studies will develop
theoretical models of cognitive control and bilingual language processing, which
will lay the groundwork necessary to develop theory-driven approaches to
assessment and treatment of cognitive and linguistic abilities of young and
aging monolinguals and bilinguals alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.