* 1923786
* 18th International Congress on Plant-Microbe Interactions Travel Awards, Glasgow, Scotland, July 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Roger Innes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2020
* USD 22,500.00

The 18th International Congress on Plant-Microbe Interactions (IC-MPMI) will
convene in Glasgow, Scotland, from July 14 through July 18, 2019. For the last
36 years, this meeting has been the premier forum for announcing and discussing
the most innovative scientific discoveries elucidating the molecular events by
which plants and microbes interact. The program will include a mix of
established and young investigators working on pathogenic and symbiotic
associations using diverse biological systems. The plenary and concurrent
sessions will highlight the latest advances in fundamental research (e.g. plant
immune system, pathogen virulence mechanisms, and the evolution/ecology/cell
biology of plant microbiomes and symbioses) as well as translational studies
(e.g. novel approaches for disease control, breakthrough technologies, and
engineering staple food crops) critical for advancements in agricultural
science. Funding from the National Science Foundation will be used to partially
defray the travel costs of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers, and
early career faculty so that they can afford to attend this conference. Special
attention has been made to promote broader participation of minorities, women,
first-generation students, and the disabled. Importantly, advances through
research and education in plant-microbe interactions facilitated by this
conference are fundamental to ensure sustained production of high-quality crops
and to meet the increasing demands for food and energy worldwide in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important and unique function of the IC-MPMI is
to unite research specialists who otherwise would not cross paths (e.g.
specialists studying and implementing new technologies, tools and approaches to
solve diverse questions related to plant-microbe interactions). Past meetings
have been successful at fostering the exchange of scientific information,
critical discussion, and establishing strong collaborations across a broad range
of research topics and geographic locations. The meeting has also provided
significant training value for graduate students and post-doctoral scholars.
Travel fellowship awardees will participate in a small meeting workshop designed
to promote public outreach. As part of this workshop, awardees will prepare a
short 'elevator talk' designed to explain the purpose and significance of their
projects in simple terms. Talks will be recorded, presented during the
conference, and posted on social media. These activities are expected to enhance
student participation and learning, as well as inform others who are not able to
attend this meeting. We anticipate that the new student workshop will foster new
connections required for the success of our next generation of scientists.
Several of the participating scientists have links to companies and institutes
developing agricultural technology. Student exposure to these entities will be
key for those interested in government and industry-related
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.