* 1923649
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: The futures of reef services in the Anthropocene
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2022
* John Kittinger, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2022
* USD 215,999.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research project, which is an international coalition
between US scientists and those from eight other nations from around the world
seeks to better understand, model, and predict the social-ecological dynamics of
coral reef systems, worldwide, across scales and in terms of current drivers
impacting coral reef environmental services, especially those related to the
abundance and diversity of fish. The research was motivated because coral reefs
are the most diverse hotspots of marine life on Earth upon which whose health
and resilience the livelihoods of hundreds of millions of people, worldwide,
depend. Because reefs are impacted directly and indirectly by the activity of
humans (climate change, erosion, invasive species transport, over harvesting) a
holistic model of these interconnected systems are needed to secure long-term
human development and well-being, as well as preserve marine biodiversity and
critical natural capital. This research focuses on coral reef fish because they
are a main link between reef ecosystems and human societies due to the role they
play in securing food for humans, recreation, etc. This research employs a
focused, transdisciplinary modelling approach that involves the development and
application of scenarios of biodiversity and ecosystem services for coral reefs
around the globe and across spatial scales that are relevant to multiple types
of ecosystem/conservation management decisions. The work will couple socio-
economic dynamics with biodiversity considerations to examine the impacts of
various drivers and impacts of environmental change on reef systems,
specifically the impact on fish. Projections of the impacts and expected changes
in ecosystem services due to different environmental drivers and combinations of
drivers will be made out to the year 2100. Broader impacts of the work include
the collaboration of US scientists with world leaders in coral reef ecology from
eight other countries (The Netherlands, Sweden, Norway, UK, Australia, Canada,
France, and Switzerland), with each country funding its own scientists and parts
of the project. There will also be significant outreach to stakeholder groups,
including conservationists and policy makers, and the public via a range of
print and multimedia outlets (newsletter, films, the Internet, and public access
to research data and modeling software). To reach a broad audience, some of the
materials will be generated in multiple languages. To disseminate results to
other scientists and key stakeholders and to generate additional discussion on
the topic, a series of summer schools will be developed and a final symposium
with an international participant list will be held. Additional impacts include
the support of a researcher from a group underrepresented in the sciences at an
institution in an EPSCoR state (Hawaii) which helps to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in the sciences and the training of a postdoctoral
scholar in transdisciplinary, international, team-based research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers participating in a
project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23
countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral initiative
designed to support research projects that contribute to the development of
scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding and solving
critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was to improve
and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research relevance and its
acceptance and to address gaps in methods for modelling impact drivers and
policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels of
uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data accessibility and fill
gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, the funded project will examine the
impacts of direct and indirect drivers of human environmental change on coral
reef systems and their associated ecosystem services. The project will quantify
five key ecosystems services provided by coral reef fish. Data analysis will
include biomass estimates tied to human livelihoods, nutrient cycling that
affects fish stock productivity, regulation of the carbon cycle that affects CO2
concentrations, fish nutritional value and food security, and the cultural value
of coral reef systems that sustains human wellbeing and tourism activities. It
will also determine the governance, social, economic, and environmental
conditions under which coral reef ecosystem services are currently maintained or
threatened by. This will include multivariate and non-linear model analysis of a
global database of fish surveys from over 5,000 coral reefs encompassing
gradients of environments, habitats, and impact of fishing. Research goals will
be to predict the potential futures of shallow coral reef ecosystems and their
services under various global change scenarios and their ability to deliver
services up to the year 2100. Research results will be generated in such a way
that they can be used to inform decision making and management approaches that
can aid reef-dependent communities globally and maintain critical marine
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.