* 1923297
* EDGE CT: Virus-inspired, lipid-mediated transfection and genetic manipulation of the marine coccolithophore, Emiliania huxleyi
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Kay Bidle, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,205,295.00

Marine phytoplankton collectively contribute more than half of Earth's oxygen
and are responsible for &gt;90% of photosynthetically derived carbon in the
oceans, making them the basis of marine food webs. The dominant eukaryotic
members of this group are diatoms, dinoflagellates, and haptophytes. Haptophytes
include coccolithophores, which contribute approximately one-third of the total
marine calcium carbonate production through calcite-based biomineral cell walls
(coccoliths) and profoundly impact carbon cycling. Their global distributions
and associated activities are so extensive that they can be seen from Earth-
orbiting satellites. Despite the wealth of knowledge gained through past
experimental studies on the physiology, calcification, photosynthesis, and host-
virus interactions in these organisms, there is a critical gap in understanding
the genetic and cellular mechanisms controlling the responses of
coccolithophores to changes in their environment. This gap is largely due to a
chronic lack of scientific tools to experimentally manipulate gene expression
and elucidate the function of key genes. This project aims to develop a novel
approach for genetically manipulating coccolithophores leveraging the well-
characterized lipid-based interaction between coccolithophore cells and viruses
that routinely infect them at sea. This work will uniquely enable future studies
on a wide range of physiological processes ranging from biomineralization to
photosynthesis to virus infection, allowing for fundamental insight into the
genetic and biochemical controls of key biological processes that impact these
globally distributed and ecologically important organisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emiliania huxleyi is a globally dominant
coccolithophore capable of forming large blooms visible from space. It
contributes approximately one-third of the total marine calcium carbonate
production through the biomineralization of calcite-based cell walls
(coccoliths) and profoundly impacts the marine carbon and sulfur cycles.
Consequently, it has emerged as a model marine microeukaryote to understand the
ecophysiology and cellular mechanisms of calcification, photosynthesis, host-
virus interactions, and key biological processes that impact upper ocean ecology
and biogeochemistry. However, despite the availability of genomic and
transcriptomic sequence data, the inability to manipulate gene expression
creates a severe bottleneck in using functional genomics to understand how
environmental changes impact this ecologically relevant organism. This project
aims to address this gap by developing a novel, lipid-based transfection method
in E. huxleyi that takes advantage of decades of research into host-virus
interactions in these organisms that have revealed a specific lipid-mediated
interaction between E. huxleyi and its associated Coccolithoviruses, EhVs.
Specific goals are to: 1) generate expression constructs for the overexpression
of reporter genes driven by E. huxleyi and EhV-derived promoters; 2) identify
and purify novel lipids associated with EhVs; 3) develop a method for
associating and/or encapsulating plasmid expression constructs in liposomes and
EhV-derived virosomes (liposomes composed of viral envelope glycoproteins and
lipids); and 4) perform transfection experiments in E. huxleyi with reporter
gene constructs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the EDGE
program and the Behavioral Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Program in Biological Oceanography in the Directorate
of Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.