* 1923539
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Integrating core CI literacy and skills into university curricula via simulation-driven activities
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Rafael Ferreira da Silva, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 238,707.00

Scientific and societal progress in the 21st century relies on a large,
heterogeneous, and evolving ecosystem of Parallel and Distributed Computing
(PDC) technologies. And yet, most college students graduating today from
computing curricula have little exposure to PDC concepts and practices. There is
thus an imminent risk that the emerging scientific workforce will be ill-
prepared for using and developing those computing infrastructures that are key
to progress. Teaching PDC early and effectively in university curricula is
notoriously difficult, in part due to the need to provide students with access
to and meaningful hands-on learning opportunities on actual PDC platforms. This
project addresses this challenge directly by relying on simulation technology:
it provides students with hands-on learning opportunities that do not require
access to any PDC platforms. This makes it possible to teach the full gamut of
PDC conceptual and practical topics effectively and at any higher education
institution in the nation. The pedagogic activities being developed in this
project can be integrated into existing university courses and also provide a
sound basis for developing new courses, starting at freshman levels. By
supporting education in a view to modernizing the scientific workforce, this
project promotes the progress of science, as stated by NSF's
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Years of Cyberinfrastructure research and
development have resulted in a rich set of abstractions and interoperable
software implementations that can leverage a wide range of hardware platforms.
It is crucial to provide students with hands-on pedagogic activities through
which they can acquire the PDC conceptual and practical knowledge necessary for
them to join a workforce that develops and uses this Cyberinfrastructure.
Requiring that these activities be conducted on actual hardware and software
stacks limits participation because only few institutions have access to secure
representative, stable, and possibly large deployments that can be used for
educational purposes. The main insight behind this work is that simulation
promotes both participation and pedagogy because it allows students to
experience arbitrary Cyberinfrastructure scenarios, only requiring that they
have access to a standard laptop computer. This is feasible due to the recent
development of simulation frameworks for easily developing simulators of complex
distributed systems that afford simulations that are both pedagogically accurate
and scalable. Given this insight and this recent development, this project
develops simulation-driven interactive pedagogic activities for a spectrum of
Student Learning Objectives (SLOs), ranging from standard PDC SLOs as well as
SLOs relevant to current and emerging Cyberinfrastructure practices. The
activities are organized in modules with a prerequisite structure, and come with
guidelines for integration into existing university courses, starting at
freshman levels. Several pedagogic strategies are employed through which
students execute interactive simulations with configurable levels of details
along various narrative paths. Research questions include determining which
strategies, with which levels of simulation details, work best for which
SLOs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.