* 1923922
* Exotic Continua: Geometry, Topology and Mechanics in Soft Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Shankar Venkataramani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This grant is being funded by the Condensed-Matter and Materials Theory program
in the Division of Materials Research and by the Applied-Mathematics program in
the Division of Mathematical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;While the engineered world
is built with straight lines and rigid components, nature is filled with
beautiful, soft and undulating shapes. We see these shapes in lichens and in
corals, in kale and in sea slugs, in cacti and in flatworms. A natural question
is why? Why are frilly, crenelated forms ubiquitous in nature, and what
potential evolutionary benefits arise from these shapes? What can we learn from
nature to help develop soft and flexible robots for practical applications?
These are some of the questions that will be addressed in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;The short answer is that an undulating, ruffled shape
possesses some fascinating mechanical properties that influence the ways in
which living organisms grow, move, and otherwise interact with their
environment. To understand these mechanical properties and, further, to use them
to model natural systems as well as for technological design, we have to turn to
ideas and tools from multiple disciplines: mathematics (differential geometry),
materials (elasticity), and mechanics (forces and motion). This project will
explore connections between these disparate fields and develop new theoretical
and practical tools for modeling and designing with soft/flexible materials.
&lt;br/&gt;This project includes specific applications to growth, plants, marine
invertebrates, and soft robotics, and will, therefore, be of interest to
researchers in applied mechanics, physics, biology, and engineering. This
research is strongly interdisciplinary and offers excellent opportunities for
training the next generation of scientists and mathematicians in a variety of
technical skills, as well as in their ability to abstract, model, and design
complex systems for practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;A template, that nature
uses repeatedly, is that of a ruffled, undulating shape. We see it in a
multitude of living organisms. A natural question is why? More precisely, what
is unique about this ruffled, undulating shape that it is so prevalent in
nature. The answer seems to lie in some fascinating mechanical properties this
shape confers on organisms, properties that arise from interesting topological
and geometric considerations. Studying this interplay between topology, geometry
and mechanics is the overarching theme of this project.&lt;br/&gt;The ruffled
shape arises naturally in thin elastic objects that are intrinsically negatively
curved. These are examples of exotic continuua, i.e. materials that self-
organize into collective states that display local signatures of geometry and
topology. The self-organization manifests itself as extreme pliability and
strongly nonlinear and spatially inhomogeneous response to external forces. This
phenomenon has important biomechanical implications, as well as potential
technological applications for biomimetic design. The PI proposes to investigate
the mechanical properties of a class of materials that exhibit these features:
non-Euclidean elastic thin sheets. &lt;br/&gt;This project weaves together three
disparate strands of research to create new theoretical and numerical tools for
modeling and analyzing the mechanics, growth, and dynamics of soft materials.
These ``formerly unrelated" areas are (1) Discrete differential geometry, which
develops discrete analogs of concepts in continuous geometry and has been
developed in the context of graphics and computer science; (2) The study of
Lorentz surfaces with roots in pure mathematics and investigations into the
causal structure of 2D spacetimes; and (3) The invariant variational bicomplex,
which arose from a study of the interplay between symmetries and calculus of
variations, and has roots in analysis, group theory and geometry. &lt;br/&gt;The
interplay between theoretical questions and practical applications in this
project offers excellent opportunities for education and interdisciplinary
training to undergraduate and graduate students. The PI will continue ongoing
efforts to encourage undergraduates to participate in scientific research, help
beginning graduate students transition into starting research, mentor graduate
research associates, and actively work with people from groups that are under-
represented in the mathematical sciences to help advance their scientific
careers. All of these efforts are geared toward developing a diverse,
innovative, and broadly trained STEM workforce in our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.