* 1923448
* 2019 Chromosome Dynamics Gordon Research Seminar
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Kevin Lang, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2020
* USD 5,000.00

The award will provide support for graduate students and post-doctoral
researchers to attend the 2019 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Chromosome
Dynamics (June 22-23, 2019 in Newry, ME), to be held just before the associated
Gordon Research Conference (GRC; June 23-28, 2019). These conferences bring
together young and established investigators from multiple disciplines, ranging
from mathematics and computing to biology, who are studying chromosome
structure/dynamics and function. The GRS is focused on early career scientists,
and it provides an effective forum for them to discuss research through seminars
and poster sessions, exchange ideas and resources informally, and develop their
professional network. A notable programmatic activity is a panel discussion on
mentoring and career development with the keynote speaker and a diverse group of
faculty mentors. The GRS is organized and co-chaired by two post-doctoral
fellows, and it serves as a significant career development experience for them
as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New technology development has accelerated
discoveries in chromosome biology in recent years. It has also led to high
levels of specialization that have a profound impact, but can also hinder fuller
understanding of how the biophysical properties of packaged DNA influence the
function, maintenance and propagation of the genetic code. The GRS and GRC serve
as a vital link for investigators by facilitating discussion of the latest
discoveries in topics such as chromosome organization and the impact on gene
regulation, DNA replication and repair in the chromosomal context, meiotic
chromosomal organization and segregation, as well as centromeres and chromosome
stability. The GRS in particular will facilitate training and professional
development of the next generation of scientists, including underrepresented
minorities, in the field of chromosome biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.