* 1923378
* Thinking Globally, Acting Locally: Increasing CS Capacity and Equity by Developing a Regional CS Teacher Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Robin Flatland, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 344,753.00

Siena College proposes to leverage and expand an existing researcher-
practitioner partnership (RPP) to create a new community-focused professional
development (PD) model for preparing high quality computer science (CS) teachers
capable of increasing the number and diversity of students in their schools' CS
classrooms. Siena College's past work and strong ties to secondary CS and
mathematics education in New York State's Tech Valley region are ideal for
developing a regional CS teacher community and for addressing, in a significant
manner, the problem of underrepresented groups in CS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
work has five key components: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Community Based PD for In-Service
Teachers: A new PD program will prepare in-service math/technology teachers to
teach Siena's introductory college level dual-enrollment CS course or a high
school level CS course. It will integrate teachers, counselors, administrators
and college faculty into a sustainable CS professional learning community via
the dual-enrollment program, annual CS outreach events for teachers and their
students, and collaboration with the local Computer Science Teachers Association
(CSTA) chapter.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Diversity Initiative: Drawing on expertise in the
RPP, high school teachers will be assisted in developing and implementing plans
for increasing the number and diversity of students in their CS classrooms,
customizing their plans based on the unique conditions, opportunities and
challenges at their high schools.&lt;br/&gt;(3) In-Service Teacher Second
Certification in CS: Pathways will be created for in-service teachers to earn up
to fourteen college CS credits over the two year grant period. These credits can
count towards New York State's recently approved second certification in
CS.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Pre-Service Teacher Initial Certification in CS: A new program
for CS initial certification for undergraduates will be established, making it
one of the first in New York State. As a tool for recruiting current
undergraduates into the program, Siena students will have opportunities to serve
as assistants for CS teachers in the RPP. &lt;br/&gt;(5) Community Building
Programming: The Siena College CS Department will continue to support and expand
its outreach activities which include programs for high school students and
sponsorship of the Upstate New York CSTA chapter
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.