* 1923739
* SpecEES: Cooperative Green RF Sensing over Shared Spectrum
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Hongbin Li, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Radar occupies a significant fraction of the spectrum below 6 GHz. This is a
highly congested frequency band also heavily used by wireless communications. In
recent years, there has been a growing demand from the wireless sector to free
up more of the government-held spectrum, including those allocated to radar, in
order to expand mobile broadband capabilities, promote wireless innovation, and
boost the economy. Nonetheless, radar stakeholders are often unwilling to share
their spectrum due to lack of incentives, as well as concerns over interference
from the wireless communication devices that can disrupt the radar operation.
This project considers such a spectrum-sharing scenario between radar and
wireless communications and proposes a set of research efforts that are aimed to
motivate radar stakeholders to open their spectrum for sharing. Specifically, it
will develop new spectrum sharing protocols and cooperative radio frequency (RF)
sensing techniques that protect, secure, and incentivize the radar users with
reward of energy efficiency and enhanced sensing capabilities bestowed by
sharing. The proposed research is expected to provide win-win solutions that
will not only enable the radar to better detect, image, identify, and track
targets with higher energy efficiency, but also allow wireless devices to enjoy
significantly improved spectrum access opportunities. On the educational front,
this project will offer opportunities for curricula development, training of
undergraduate and graduate students, summer research programs targeting local
high school students, and recruitment of students from underrepresented groups
to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets a spectrum sharing
scenario, where radar owns and is willing to share its spectrum with wireless
communication users under the condition that the radar operation is not to be
compromised. The proposed efforts are integrated through the following four
research thrusts: (1) a radar-centric cooperative design framework for spectrum
sharing that protects the radar while improving the wireless communications; (2)
a cooperative illumination approach that allows the radar to exploit wireless
communication sources as passive illuminators; (3) a cooperative RF sensing
paradigm whereby the radar and multiple spectrum-sharing communication devices
cooperatively perform a distributed RF sensing task; and (4) security and
privacy with radar and communication cross design that capitalizes on a new
hybrid authentication scheme using integrated cryptographic credentials and non-
cryptographic device fingerprints. The proposed RF sensing framework allows the
radar to constructively employ co-channel communication sources as passive
illuminators, which provide free illumination power and, more importantly,
additional multi-static sensing geometries that enable the radar to achieve
enhanced sensing capability and energy efficiency, i.e., the green RF sensing.
To address the security and privacy issues inherent in the proposed framework,
this project will develop a new hybrid authentication scheme that leverages
unique device fingerprints and data analytics tools including deep learning to
secure the proposed spectrum sharing and cooperative sensing
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.