* 1923278
* AMPS: Optimal Transport Algorithms for Stochastic Uncertainty Management in Modern Power Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Abhishek Halder, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 279,830.00

The legacy power grid of the twentieth century has undergone transformational
changes in the last two decades -- industry deregulation leading to competitive
electricity markets, deep penetration of renewables for reducing the carbon
footprint, large scale deployment of sensors such as phasor measurement units
and smart meters enabling unprecedented monitoring capabilities and utilizing
flexible loads for demand response to close the loop in real-time. These new
elements have introduced significant heterogeneous uncertainties in the power
systems, requiring the future grid to be not only resilient against these
uncertainties, but also to dynamically steer these uncertainties when possible.
This research project will deliver a set of novel mathematical algorithms and
numerical toolbox to propagate and control the stochastic uncertainties modeled
as time-varying joint probability density functions subject to complex
interconnected power systems dynamics. The theory and algorithms to be developed
in this research project will have impact on multiple applications in power
systems including the transient stability analysis under stochastic load
perturbations and intermittent renewable generation, as well as the design of
controller to steer the state probability density function over finite horizon
to achieve desired transient performance under uncertainties. Concomitantly, the
mathematical framework will be generic enough to be applicable for ensemble-
level prediction and control in any large network of nonlinear oscillators, with
potential applications in systems biology, and robotics. Overall, the proposed
scientific activities will significantly shift the perspective on how the
mathematical analysis and scalable simulation of interconnected uncertain
nonlinear systems can be done. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typically, the joint
probability density functions of interest for realistic power systems simulation
have high dimensional support, and trajectory-level nonlinearities induce non-
Gaussianity, thereby requiring non-parametric computation. For example,
transient stability analysis in the presence of stochastic renewables, and
uncertainties in the initial conditions and parameters requires scalable yet
rigorous predictive algorithms that do not suffer from the "curse-of-
dimensionality". The proposed research will enable fast prediction and finite-
time minimum effort control of joint probability density functions in power
systems simulation by harnessing the emergent theory of optimal mass transport
and Schrodinger bridge. The algorithms to be developed in this project will
avoid spatial discretization or function approximation, and instead use the
novel proximal recursions on the manifold of probability density functions via
probability weighted scattered point cloud evolution -- an approach the
principal investigator has recently developed. The resulting algorithms will be
able to handle real-time stochastic simulation with thousands of interconnected
generators and loads. This research will contribute to the development of next-
generation algorithmic tools at the confluence of applied probability,
optimization and control theory by specifically exploiting the structural
nonlinearities in power systems dynamics. From an engineering perspective, this
research will catalyze disruptive innovation on power systems stochastic
dynamics and control simulation with a general-purpose numerical toolbox
permitting rapid proliferation. The project will help build the principal
investigator's leadership in education at the University of California Santa
Cruz by integrating the research in classrooms and outreach activities. Software
toolbox resulting from this research will be released via
GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.