* 1923364
* Liquid Crystals Gordon Research Conference "Soft Order and Topology Motives in Biomedicine, Nanoscience, Cosmology, Living Matter and Emergent Industries"
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Ivan Smalyukh, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 02/29/2020
* USD 20,000.00

This proposal seeks support for the 2019 Gordon Conference on Liquid Crystals to
be held 7-12 July 2019 at Colby-Sawyer College in New London, NH, USA. The
associated Gordon Research Seminar will take place on the weekend before, 6-7
July 2019. It is anticipated that many of the students attending the GRS will
stay on for the GRC meeting. The GRS/GRC will bring together a diverse
interdisciplinary community of researchers working at the frontiers of liquid
crystal science and technology, broadly defined. The unique interaction of
liquid crystals with light, and especially their response to laser beams, allows
one to control their structure and opens numerous possibilities for
technological applications. Liquid crystals composed of - or doped with - nano-
sized particles are of a great interest for emerging new applications such as
the tunable and frequency selective negative index media. The anticipated new
technological developments are closely related to many interesting emerging
problems in basic science of liquid crystals that attract great interest. Being
at the nexus of materials science, biology, soft condensed matter physics,
chemistry, optics, and photonics, the conference theme is inherently
interdisciplinary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference focus will be on recent
advances at the interface between soft condensed matter physics, biomaterials,
biotechnology and optics that promise to open conceptually novel directions of
research. The speakers will be specifically asked to emphasize the open/emerging
questions and unsolved problems. Understanding the underlying physics,
chemistry, and biology of systems that possess liquid crystallinity will be
emphasized. The program will include talks that address these topics through
experiment, theory and simulation, and it will also integrate fundamental and
applied perspectives. The broader impacts of this conference lay in its
structure. The conference will take the form of a summit, bringing together
prominent scientists as well as students and postdoctoral fellows. The
conference will provide ample opportunities to foster networking between
students and junior researchers, to make connections with many of the leading
scientists from a wide variety of fields, and to establish exciting new
collaborations. Among invited participants at the GRS and GRC are University
Professors, Company CEOs, Journal Editors (e.g. from Nature Communications),
Program Managers from US funding agencies (NSF, DOD and DOE), Group Leaders at
national laboratories, etc. Communications with these individuals in the
research area of liquid crystals will broaden the perspectives of postdocs and
students for future career options that they have for future career
options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.