* 1923815
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Societal Collapse and Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Jose Raul Ortiz Vallejos, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 25,200.00

Jose Raul Ortiz, a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Arizona, will
investigate how Maya highland communities were affected by potential immigration
after the abandonment of lowland centers during the 9-10th centuries. Recent
research on the Terminal Classic in the Maya area shows that Maya communities
were differentially affected by collapse processes and their responses were
variable, including cases of disruption and abandonment, short flourishment, and
resilience and transformation. Ortiz's research will focus on the detection of
migration from a potential receiving end, a theme that has been addressed in
other worldwide ancient migration cases but that has been minimally tracked in
other Maya sub-regions. Questions about the effects of the Maya collapse,
including the impact of lowland population movements, have been less frequently
addressed for the highlands. The results of this research will contribute to the
growing discussion on how social identity, specifically of the ancient Maya,
intersects with technology, and how migrants can be detected in the
archaeological record. Ortiz's work seeks to make a positive impact on the
indigenous Qeqchi Maya living near the site by providing important culture-
historical information from their own cultural past and promoting collaborative
participation, re-ownership, and safekeeping of local cultural heritage. The
results of the project seek to publicly discuss the myriad ways that Maya
communities experienced the Maya collapse by contesting popular and catastrophic
beliefs of this social process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the direction of Dr.
Takeshi Inomata, Mr. Ortiz will conduct archaeological research at Kixpek,
Guatemala. This ancient settlement is located at the northern edge of the
highlands immediately south of the lowlands region. Funerary pottery found at
the site indicates a Late Classic to Early Postclassic occupation (AD 600-1200),
showing that the community lived through the Classic Maya collapse. The site of
Kixpek on the Chixoy drainage presents an opportunity to examine how a highland
community experienced social processes that happened during and after the
Terminal Classic. Did migrants relocate among their neighbors at the northern
highlands and what evidence of this migration is available at this region? Did
highland ceramic technologies persist or change with the potential introduction
of new social groups after the Maya collapse? Ortiz will conduct excavations in
Group B and presumed habitation areas surrounding the main plaza in order to
obtain pottery samples from pre- and post-Maya collapse periods of occupation.
Laboratory analysis will include detailed ceramic analysis by stylistic and
technological attributes through macroscopic and microscopic techniques for
pottery classification. Ortiz will evaluate the continuities and changes in
technological systems, specifically in pottery, obsidian, and burial practices
at Kixpek, amidst the potential relocation of people after the Terminal Classic
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.