* 1923880
* CNH2-L:  Transition Dynamics in Integrated Urban Water Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* George Hornberger, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,499,157.00

Urban water-supply systems consist of both physical infrastructure and policies
that govern their use. These systems are designed to be adaptable to a wide
range of supply and demand conditions. However, climatic and social shifts are
placing new stresses on water-supply systems that require substantial changes,
also called transitions, to maintain system performance. This research analyzes
transitions across 12 large-scale urban water systems in the United States to
achieve two goals: 1) to better document the interactions among various
environmental and human factors that may prompt transition, and 2) to identify
which infrastructure and policy design choices can foster practical transitions
to increase sustainability. To accomplish these goals this project will gather
and analyze long-term human and environmental data to synthesize relationships
and trends, and develop two complementary models to identify pathways that can
lead to a sustainable water-supply transition. This project will directly
involve stakeholders in multiple stages of the research to both learn from their
experiences and ensure that outputs meet their needs. This project also will
provide education and training opportunities to help students develop the
competencies needed to collaborate across fields, a skill that is essential to
tackle current environmental challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research utilizes a "convergence" approach to investigate how integrated urban
water systems can be managed effectively as they face increasing pressures from
climate change, population growth, and other environmental factors. This
research will involve a longitudinal analysis of system stressors, an
examination of hydrological detection and change, construction of a Bayesian
model to forecast the probability of stressors exceeding thresholds for
transition, and development of a dynamic model to identify promising design
choices. This project will benefit urban water-supply systems in four ways by:
1) combining institutional analysis with dynamic modeling to gain new insights
into the role of institutions in shaping system dynamics; 2) linking the
detection and attribution of hydrological change to watershed and policy
processes, which will result in new knowledge about the drivers and the impacts
of hydrological change; 3) synthesizing quantitative and qualitative data,
stakeholder knowledge, and inductive and deductive modeling approaches to
enhance system performance; 4) identifying how specific infrastructure and
institutional design choices affect system resilience and transition
probability. Knowledge relating design to outcomes is key because, although
cities cannot control the dynamics of hydrological or human systems, they can
alter design choices. Examining urban water transitions can also offer general
insights for other socio-environmental challenges where preemptive intervention
will be beneficial.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.