* 1923568
* CNH-L: Energy Transitions and Environmental Change in East and Southern Africa's Coupled Human, Terrestrial, and Atmospheric Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Pamela Jagger, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 03/31/2023
* USD 892,121.00

Wood fuels are used as an energy source for cooking, heating, and small-scale
industrial activities by a large number of people in the developing world. As
populations increase, the effects of burning wood or other biomass on the
vitality of forests, air quality, and human health or well-being can be severe.
This project investigates the dynamic connections among these areas of concern
and evaluates strategies that can alleviate problems in the future. It examines
how people use forest resources for energy and whether these habits are altered
by the introduction of more efficient cooking stoves and other new technologies.
The effects on forest condition will be examined through direct measurements and
modeling. Measurements of air quality will determine how pollution levels will
be affected. The field sites are in Malawi and the results will be scaled up to
determine the possible changes in the larger regions of eastern and southern
Africa. This research has the potential to improve forest condition and air
quality in areas at risk of severely declining environmental conditions, and
improve the quality of life for large numbers of people who depend upon these
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
investigate linkages between the use of biomass energy in Southern Africa and
its coupled impacts on human, terrestrial, and atmospheric systems. Quantitative
and qualitative field observations of both human and natural systems, scenario
development, and modeling of both the atmospheric and land-use changes will
further examine these linkages and quantify the magnitude of human influence.
The project will explore how natural and human system resilience can be enhanced
at local, national and regional scales assessing the impact of a scalable
household energy intervention. This study couples both terrestrial and
atmospheric systems with the human system, providing a new dimension on human-
environment relationships. It also adds new insights into the relative effects
of a wide array of biomass energy uses on land-use land-cover changes, air
quality, and human well-being. The project also evaluates a scalable household
energy intervention targeted at the poorest and most vulnerable households, and
models its influence on terrestrial and atmospheric systems in future scenarios.