* 1923004
* RII Track-2 FEC: Computational Methods and Autonomous Robotics Systems for Modeling and Predicting Harmful Cyanobacterial Blooms
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Holly Ewing, Dartmouth College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2024
* USD 5,989,336.00

The world's freshwater lakes are a crucial source of water for human use, for
drinking, irrigation, cooling, recreation, and food production. However,
provision of these essential lake services is threatened by the increased
incidence of harmful cyanobacterial blooms in lakes worldwide. Harmful blooms
decrease lake water quality, clarity, and aesthetics, negatively impact property
values, and can threaten human and animal health through the production of
potent toxins that can damage multiple organ systems. This project aims to
unravel the drivers of where, when, and how cyanobacterial blooms develop and
spread, by combining robotics and big data technologies with traditional water
sampling. The project will advance the ability to evaluate and predict
cyanobacterial blooms, potentially allowing earlier public health interventions
in recreational lakes and in lakes that supply drinking water. Interventions can
enable improved water treatment and distribution. The project's workforce
development activities will train next generation professionals to work and
communicate across disciplines and communities in order to address complex
scientific problems that have major societal implications, though use of big
data tools and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the tools of big data
jointly with robotics, sensor networks, and limnological sampling, the project
develops strategies for real-time, adaptive, autonomous environmental data
collection and processing to enhance the ability to predict the development of
harmful cyanobacterial blooms in lakes with incipient blooms. Specifically,
autonomous surface vehicles equipped with a suite of sensors measuring physical,
chemical, and biological parameters and unmanned aerial vehicles equipped with
hyper-spectral, multispectral, and visible-light cameras will generate large
volumes of data on lakes during the onset and succession of cyanobacterial
blooms. Post-acquisition processing and model development will examine controls
on the genesis and spread of blooms in near-real time. The project brings
together an interdisciplinary group of investigators with expertise in big data,
environmental science, ecology, human demography, instrumentation, and robotics
from four EPSCoR jurisdictions: Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and South
Carolina. Partnerships with the participating institutions, local lake
associations, municipal water providers, and state agencies will produce large-
scale datasets of physical, chemical, and biological factors influencing water
quality from lakes in all four states, which will then be used to create new
models to predict harmful cyanobacterial blooms. Over a dozen early career
scientists will be trained in interdisciplinary research. Community partners
will be engaged in data collection, data interpretation, and implementation of
monitoring and management strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.