* 1923195
* Development of a Miniaturized Electromechanical Biosensing Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Walter Hu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 349,999.00

The objective of this project is to develop a miniaturized, low cost, and high
throughput biosensing technology that can be applied to a wide range of
applications in medical diagnosis and biomedical research. U.S. health care
spending is dramatically high and growing, making the ballooning cost of
healthcare a major challenge for the nation. Affordable and ubiquitous screening
technologies allowing frequent testing for early diagnosis of diseases are
effective preventive methods to reduce health care cost. The proposed effort can
pave the way towards low-cost sensors with simple and rapid sensing procedures
for home based monitoring of regular bodily functions/parameters, and point-of-
care diagnosis of more complex disorders. Furthermore, performing such research
in an academic environment has the added advantage of training a few highly
skilled engineers that can have significant contributions to the industry over
the course of their career. Expertise in micro, nano and biomedical science and
engineering is in high demand in the current high-tech US economy. Two full-time
PhD students and up to three undergraduate researchers will be educated and
involved in the proposed research and development activities. To promote
diversity, efforts will be devoted to recruitment of highly qualified students
from under-represented and minority groups to be involved in the activities.
This project will also allow the investigators to enrich and invigorate their
ongoing micro/nanotechnology educational and outreach programs by producing
valuable new knowledge and interesting material for courses, lab tours, and
demos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed biosensing platform utilizes micro to
nanoscale electromechanical resonators as highly sensitive mass sensors capable
of detecting and measuring adsorption of fractions of single molecular layers
onto their surfaces. There have been significant advances in micro/nanoscale
electromechanical resonator technologies over the past two decades, mainly
driven by applications of such devices as frequency references and filtering
elements in electronics. With dimensions in the lower to submicron range, such
devices can have mass sensitivities in the pico-gram to femto-gram range for
microscale, and down to atto-grams and below for nanoscale resonators. This is
several orders of magnitude better than that of conventional quartz crystal
microbalances (QCM). High-resolution biomolecular sensors can be realized by
covering the surface of such devices with a self-assembled monolayer of a
selective molecular recognition element (MRE). However, despite their tremendous
potential, utilization of Micro/Nano-mechanical resonators in biosensing
applications remains almost non-existent. This is mainly due to the major
bottleneck of operating such devices in contact with liquid media, where almost
all biosensing activity takes place. Due to their small dimensions and
consequently large surface area to volume ratio, the quality factor (Q) of such
resonators drops significantly when immersed in liquid to the point that their
resonance response completely disappears. Under this project, a comprehensive
multi-faceted effort will be launched to further enhance MEMS resonator
performances in contact with biological solutions and address some of the
associated challenges for development of a general purpose biosensor array
technology that can be applied to a wide variety of sensing applications. A new
micromechanical structure is proposed, comprising of a piezoelectric resonator
fabricated on a thin membrane with a backside reaction cavity where the
molecular bonding to the membrane occurs. The membrane isolates the resonator
and electrical signals required for its operation from the biological sample in
order to achieve optimal performance for the device in contact with
liquid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.