* 1923234
* EDGE CT:  Improving and Streamlining Systems for Functional Studies of Non-Model Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* William Barbazuk, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 12/31/2023
* USD 849,007.00

Exploration of fundamental processes in plants has been aided through the
development of new evolutionary model systems that permit comparative analyses
of genes, genomes, development, and adaptation. Although most crops and the
worst weeds arise as a consequence of genome doubling (polyploidy), genetic
processes in polyploids are largely unknown. The plant genus Tragopogon (also
known as goatsbeard) is a member of the sunflower family and an ideal system for
examining the immediate consequences of genome doubling. Likewise, new
evolutionary models are required for comparative analyses of morphology,
development, and other phenotypes in flowering plants. Amborella trichopoda, the
sister to all other living flowering plants, is a tractable genomic model that
is providing new insight into patterns of genome and morphological evolution in
flowering plants. Despite being excellent evolutionary models used by global
research communities, neither Tragopogon nor Amborella is considered a
functional model, limiting their usefulness for studying gene function. The goal
of this project is to optimize transformation and gene editing methods for use
in both Tragopogon and Amborella. Broader impacts include wide dissemination of
methods and resources to a broad community of plant biologists and the training
of students and postdoctoral scientists with emphasis on team science,
collaboration for innovation, and the value of melding plant diversity and
comparative genomics for understanding the connection between genome and
phenome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to refine and make widely
available two new genetic systems in the non-model plants Tragopogon and
Amborella trichopoda. Specifically, efforts will focus on establishing efficient
CRISPR/Cas9 and CRISPR/Cpf1 gene editing platforms that are tailored for both
Tragopogon and Amborella and are sufficiently flexible to be applicable to other
related plant species. Project objectives include: (1) developing and improving
genetic transformation methods to enable genome editing in Tragopogon and
Amborella; (2) establishing a CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing toolkit that will then be
extended to include CRISPR/Cpf1 using protoplast transient assays and stable
transgenics in Tragopogon and Amborella; and, (3) further developing the CRISPR
systems for optimal gene editing of both specific candidate gene loci and genes
of unknown function, enabling phenotypic analyses of gene-edited versus unedited
plants to directly link genotype to phenotype. If successful, this research will
provide an easy-to-use gene editing/genetic transformation system for Tragopogon
that will enable further analyses of the gene functional drivers of whole-genome
duplication (WGD), as well as a wide range of novel research on gene function
and phenotype in Asteraceae independent of WGD. Likewise, a feasible editing
system in Amborella, the sister to all other extant angiosperms, will enable
integrative analyses of gene function for comparative study of floral morphology
and development, sex expression, habitat specialization, and other processes.
All protocols and resources will be made freely available and accessible to the
public through a project website and an interconnected series of fellowships,
workshops, and cross-training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by the Enabling Discoveries through Genomic Tools (EDGE) and the Plant Genome
Research Program (PGRP) in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.