* 1923503
* CSforAll: Making CT: Integrating Computational Thinking into Elementary Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Deepti Joshi, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 298,501.00

The goal of this project is to develop and investigate a model to support P-5
teachers in implementing interdisciplinary, computational thinking-integrated
lessons. The strategy is to employ a model of professional development that was
previously developed to support elementary teachers to integrate computational
thinking into their teaching of school subjects. This study turns attention to
the systemic support for broadening and sustaining this integration of
computational thinking through development of a research practice partnership
between the Citadel and Charleston Progressive Academy, an elementary school
serving a historically marginalized urban community. The study analyzes how
teachers develop expertise in integrating computational thinking activities and
how the broader school system provides supports for realizing and sustaining
this development. Ultimately, the findings serve as a foundation for design of
scalable elementary teacher professional development and ongoing support for
computational thinking integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the two years of
the project, at least 10 teachers will engage in reflective PD sessions held
throughout the academic year and summer. In these, teachers will explore, co-
design, and implement activities that integrate computational thinking into
their existing content area standards and curricula. The computational thinking
activities, which will include standards-based lesson plans and resources, offer
both plugged and unplugged components, so that students and teachers have
opportunities to understand the conceptual underpinnings of computational
thinking with and without computers. Surrounding this effort is support from a
broader set of stakeholders, including researchers and school administrators,
that facilitate the project's efforts and provide formative feedback. Over the
two years of this study, cycles of design and analysis are used to refine
conjectures for the design of computational thinking lessons and related teacher
professional development from this broader community's perspective. The study
provides a set of empirically-tested design conjectures from which others can
develop computational thinking lessons and professional development specifically
tailored to other state, district, or school contexts. Research on this project
is studying the trajectories of teacher learning, as they increase their ability
to integrate computational thinking into their teaching of school subjects. In
addition, analyses include investigations of the research-practice partnership
itself, focusing on how this partnership works with school-based stakeholders to
best support teachers toward its goals. This project is funded by the CS for All
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.