* 1923778
* SpecEES: Scaling Deep Learning Models for Cellular Spectrum Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ben Zhao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Spectrum management in wireless networks is a challenging task that will only
increase in difficulty as complexity grows in hardware, configurations, and new
access technology. Government agencies and wireless providers need robust and
flexible tools to monitor and detect anomalies (i.e., both faults and
misbehavior) in physical spectrum usage, and to deploy them at scale. This
project targets the open challenge of spectrum anomaly detection for wide-area
cellular networks, providing a practical architecture to monitor, diagnose, and
secure spectrum usage. The project will significantly improve spectrum
efficiency, while tackling multiple open challenges related to energy efficiency
and security. The technical component of the project will be tightly integrated
with educational and outreach programs to engage female and underrepresented
students into research, while offering a mentoring platform. The project will
develop and strengthen collaborations with academic, government and industry
partners, across multiple areas of spectrum measurements, energy-efficient
systems, security, and applied machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
concept driving this project is the integration of a distributed spectrum
measurement platform with an efficient deep neural network-based anomaly
detection framework. Deep learning in this context introduces multiple
challenges, including scalability, lack of location-specific training data, lack
of misuse events in data, and potential for adversarial attacks. Our proposed
work addresses these with a combination of context-agnostic training, transfer
learning, semi-supervised clustering for detection of anomalies and adversarial
countermeasures. The proposed system will incorporate spectrum measurements
taken by various static and mobile observers, and use these measurements to
train an efficient, scalable, and robust anomaly detection module driven by deep
neural network models. The detection module will run on both static and mobile
observers, allowing the system to detect and diagnose spectrum anomalies in
real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.