* 1923372
* EDGE CT: NSF-BSF: Functional Genotype-Phenotype Mapping in the Mexican Blind Cavefish, Astyanax mexicanus.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Suzanne McGaugh, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,148,464.00

A central question in biology is how does ecology and environment shape
development, physiology and behavior of an organism. The blind Mexican cavefish
has emerged as a powerful model to address this question. The species comes in
two forms: an eyed, ancestral form, and at least 29 independently evolved cave-
dwelling forms. This species is unique among model systems for addressing
questions in evolutionary biology, but the lack of genetic tools in this model
has limited its use in identifying genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying
the evolution of complex traits. The experiments in this project will establish
a broad genetic toolkit in the blind Mexican cavefish and surface conspecifics.
The tools generated in this proposal will allow for the manipulation of genes in
precise tissues, and a swapping of genes between ancestral surface fish and
evolved cave-dwelling animals. The project will build on an established outreach
program to bring the research to the broader public. The project will establish
a set of K-12 training plans utilizing the cavefish to teach various topics in
evolution to primary and secondary school children. Second, the project will
establish a podcast entitled, the Research Diaries. The Research Diaries
recently completed its first season, and season two will focus on non-model
systems. Third, in order to bring the tools generated to the broader public, and
in order to facilitate as many non-model systems as possible, the project will
generate an annual workshop for non-model systems, were researchers can come to
the PI's lab and work with the developed reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic
tools in model systems have revolutionized biology, and has provided
unparalleled insight into biological principles. However, the relatively few
numbers of genetically amendable organisms provides a limited view of the
diversity and complexity of biological processes. This project will develop
transgenic and gene-targeted approaches for an emerging system in evolutionary
biology, the blind Mexican cavefish, Astyanax mexicanus. A. mexicanus comes in
two distinct forms: an ancestral eyed form, and at least 29 populations of
evolved cave-dwelling fish. The project will first generate tissue specific Gal4
lines, and corresponding UAS effector lines for manipulating gene function in
precise tissues. The project will focus on several tissues relevant to cavefish
programs including neuronal, eye, and liver tissues. The project will also
generate tamoxifen inducible Gal4 lines. Next, the project will generate lines
with site-specific attP site, and the project will use these lines to integrate
promoter regions in surface and cave forms. Finally, the project will develop
CRISPR/Cas9 technologies in these fish, and will devise strategies for swapping
genes between surface fish and cavefish. Taken together, these experiments will
not only establish genetic tools in this non-model system, but will also
establish methods for determining genotype-phenotype interactions and the
molecular basis for complex traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-
funded by the EDGE program and the Behavioral Systems Cluster in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems and the Evolutionary Processes Cluster in the
Division of Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.