* 1923147
* EDGE CT: Precise genome editing in a lepidopteran insect tailored for stable transformation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Arnaud Martin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2024
* USD 672,764.00

One out of ten species known to humans are moths and butterflies of the
Lepidoptera order. Although this biodiversity provides new opportunities to
understand the genetics of those insects, experimenters have been limited by the
lack of a tractable laboratory system for routine genetic analysis. In this
Enabling Discovery through Genomic Tools project, the team of investigators
develop the Indian-meal moth as a laboratory system for discovery in
lepidopteran genomes. This species is highly fertile, hardy, economical to
maintain, allowing the development of moth lines embedded with genetic tools. In
particular, the investigators optimize cutting-edge genome editing techniques
for marking cells and tissues of interest. These efforts will open new avenues
of research about the physiology, immunology, reproduction, developmental
genetics, and evolution of an insect order of enormous diversity that includes
numerous species of economic and ecological importance. To maximize worldwide
impact, this project includes the training of young scientists, and the
assemblage of a collaborative community of genome editors working with a pest
that infests grain storage units and households alike all over the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the lack of model system for routine
functional genomics in Lepidoptera, this Enabling Discovery through Genomic
Tools project will develop and disseminate tissue-specific assays and genome
editing standards fro this lineage using the mealmoth Plodia interpunctella. In
addition of being an important pest of stored food across the world, this
organism is tailored for genome editing due to a unique suit of reproductive and
rearing features (e.g., ease and low-cost of maintenance, injectable eggs,
resistance to inbreeding, successful CRISPR targeting), an available genome
sequence, and translucent stages and tissues that facilitate the screening of
fluorescent markers. In particular, variations of CRISPR Homology-Directed
Repair (HDR) is optimized using a dominant rescue assay in which thousands of
injected individuals are screened for the targeted repair of a recessive
mutation. Optimization assays are designed to yield meaningful comparisons of
the in vivo performances of transformation methods for short allele replacements
and long DNA knock-ins, and to catalyze further innovation across other insect
emerging systems. Beyond their use in fundamental research, the tools developed
here are expected to potentiate the integrated management of crop pests and
forest defoliators, and to inform the biology of important food chain components
and pollinators. Finally, Plodia itself shows a worldwide distribution and
presents a threat to global food security. The low-cost of maintenance and EDGE-
derived resources will thus stimulate work in this system at an international
scale. As part of this project, the team of investigators organizes symposia at
scientific meetings and trains a community of scientists interested in working
with Plodia in their laboratories. This project is funded by the Behavioral
Systems Cluster of Integrative Organismal Systems in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.