* 1923963
* Conference:  Plant Biology 2019 PUI Faculty Development Workshop, San Jose, CA; August 3-7, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Crispin Taylor, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 41,061.00

This award supports travel to the American Society of Plant Biologist's (ASPB's)
annual Plant Biology 2019 conference for individuals associated with Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) attending a half-day workshop focused on
designing undergraduate research projects to increase the probability of
publication and a PUI career panel discussion. PUI faculty focus predominantly
on undergraduate education and research, making significant contributions to
science by generating knowledge in their fields while mentoring future
researchers. PUIs are critical incubators of the next generation of scientists;
students who attend institutions with a focus on undergraduate teaching and
research are more likely to remain in a STEM major, compared to those at
institutions with a greater emphasis on graduate programs. For underrepresented
minority students, training programs that include combinations of research
experience and mentorship have broadened participation in the STEM disciplines.
However, scientists entering faculty careers at PUIs face a difficult transition
from a research-intensive environment to a heavy teaching load, typically with
the expectation of mentoring undergraduate research; limited funding; and few
colleagues with similar research interests. ASPB and the Plant Biology
conference provide important resources for plant biologists at PUIs to maintain
connections with the broader scientific community. Although it is the travel
awardees and those who attend the workshop and panel who will receive the most
direct support from this funding, this professional development opportunity will
provide far-reaching benefits to their undergraduate researchers, ASPB, and the
federal agencies that support PUI research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grant funding
will support greater PUI faculty participation at Plant Biology 2019 through
competitive travel grants and PUI-specific programing, including a career panel,
half-day workshop, and section meeting. Despite 1/3 of PhD students and postdocs
expressing a strong interest in PUI careers, scant attention is paid to
mentoring pre- and early career PUI faculty, especially those from
underrepresented minorities, toward establishing academic independence. The PUI
career panel at Plant Biology 2019 addresses requests from graduate students and
postdocs for information about career paths and opportunities at PUIs. Those
attending the panel will have the opportunity to enter into one-on-one
partnerships with experienced PUI faculty who will help those preparing for or
beginning a PUI career. In addition, colleagues at R1 institutions will learn
how to best support and advise graduate students and postdocs in their labs who
are applying to PUI faculty positions. A specific challenge for faculty at PUI
institutions is taking research conducted by multiple undergraduates (who are
often involved with a project for a short duration), and piecing that work
together into "publishable units". The PUI workshop will focus on designing
undergraduate research projects with publication in mind and navigating the
writing and publication process once the research is completed. Workshop
participants will leave better equipped to take the knowledge generated in their
labs and disseminate it through publications in their field. This will not only
benefit those faculty members and their students, but also increase the rate and
extent of dissemination of scientific knowledge. This award was co-funded by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the Plant Genome Research
Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.