* 1923011
* EDGE TT: Developing transformation capacity for Anthoceros agrestis to facilitate gene function studies in hornworts, a remarkable phylum of plants
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joyce Van Eck, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2023
* USD 548,419.00

This research aims to enable gene function studies in hornworts
(Anthocerophyta), a distinct lineage of bryophytes. Outcomes from this work will
facilitate investigating the exceptional ways hornworts fix nitrogen through
symbiosis with cyanobacteria and fix carbon using a specialized carbon-
concentrating mechanism (CCM). Hornworts are also critical for understanding
major transitions in plant evolution because they represent a critical step in
the formation of land plants and have a set of unique developmental features.
The genetic transformation and gene-editing tools developed in this study will
be disseminated broadly and rapidly to the scientific community. A symposium and
a workshop will be held to build a thriving hornwort community and provide
hands-on experiences on hornwort research tools. In addition, through the Boyce
Thompson Institute Summer Internship program, three undergraduate students will
be mentored. The interns will be able to take advantage of the integrative
nature of this project, and learn plant tissue culture, wet lab experiments, and
bioinformatics. Finally, by enabling genetic research to investigate hornworts?
unique cyanobacteria symbiosis and CCM, this project could have agricultural
implications to improve nitrogen and carbon assimilation in crop plants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite having the potential to address a diversity of
long-standing questions in biology, research on hornworts has been limited by a
lack of genetic tools. Past research using RNA-sequencing and comparative
genomics has identified several candidate genes involved in cyanobacteria
symbiosis and CCM, but further investigation of these candidates is limited by
the lack of a reverse genetic toolkit. Gene transfer or transformation in
hornworts has been demonstrated, but the efficiency is very low and results are
inconsistent. The goal of this project is to establish robust transformation and
gene editing methodologies in the hornwort Anthoceros agrestis. Enabling genetic
research in hornworts will not only complement the other two bryophyte models
(the moss Physcomitrella patens and the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha) but
will also provide unprecedented opportunities to study a unique plant with
unparalleled biological properties. A wide range of scientific communities will
benefit, including researchers working on plant evolution, developmental
genetics, paleobiology, photobiology, plant-microbe interaction, and
photosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Enabling
Discovery through GEnomic tools (EDGE) Program and the Plant Genome Research
Program (PGRP) in the Division of Integrated Organismal
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.