* 1923754
* BPRC Planning Grant: Nurturing Resilient Students and Teachers
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Cheryl Talley, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,330,112.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to undertake an institutional self-analysis and conduct
research in preparation for a Broadening Participation Research Center.
Broadening Participation Research Centers are expected to serve as a national
hub for the rigorous study and broad dissemination of the critical pedagogies
and culturally sensitive interventions that contribute to the success of HBCUs
in educating African American STEM undergraduates. The BPRC Planning project at
Virginia State University seeks to build a system of sustained academic
enrichment programs that will allow students, particularly those who are under-
represented in STEM fields, to enter a series of coordinated interventions while
in elementary school and exit them when in college. While matriculating
throughout the program, students will be given opportunities to use their skills
and experiences to give back to their community. The focus of the interventions
with each grade level cohort will also be to encourage the best and brightest to
become Math and Science teachers themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for
STEM Education is a multi-tiered teacher and mentoring development program for
teachers and students at every stage of learning and readiness. The cornerstone
of the Center for STEM Education approach is the preK-16 model that pairs HBCUs
with local school districts. The Center for STEM Education is designed to
develop student interest, motivation, and persistence in STEM disciplines and to
cultivate effective teaching and mentoring skills at all levels of development.
This program will expose students, teachers, university faculty, mentors,
education administrators, and community stakeholders to a variety of year-round
community engagement and summer enrichment programing. The training is designed
to increase the motivation and persistence of students in STEM disciplines and
enhance the effectiveness of teaching and learning in those disciplines. The
target audience are students from schools where most students routinely score in
the bottom achievement quartile of state-mandated standardized tests. This
project will mobilize a potential army of supporters with the same objective as
the school system: increasing standardized test scores, particularly in math and
science. In addition, this project has the added benefit of eventually
developing well-trained math and science teachers that are willing, able and
committed to work in those very school districts. The interventions at each
grade level will also be designed to address the key psychosocial and cognitive
factors that have been revealed by our research to impact STEM learning in
African American students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.