* 1923145
* Collaborative Research: Improving Power Grids Weather Resilience through Model-free Dimension Reduction and Stochastic Search for Optimal Hardening
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jie Xu, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 72,508.00

Severe weather is the leading cause of power outages in the United States,
leading to tremendous economic and social costs. Given days-ahead weather
forecasts, hardening power lines can significantly mitigate cascading outrage
risks, shorten the time to restore electricity, and therefore improve power
grids weather resilience. Due to resource constraints, such as time and/or
budget, it is important to identify the optimal hardening plan with the
constraints. Given the large number of power lines on the grids, searching for
the optimal subset of power lines of hardening is challenging. In this research,
a novel searching approach for optimal hardening plan with practical constraints
is studied. The method takes the advantages of high-dimensional data analysis
from statistics and discrete optimization via stochastic simulation from
operations research and makes fundamental theoretical and algorithmic advances
to optimize power grids hardening plans and reduce cascading power outage risks
in severe weather. Because of the broad economic and societal importance of
power grids, the research has broader impact on the welfare and security of the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a model-free dimension
reduction method to improve the computational efficiency of discrete
optimization via simulation for improving power grids weather resilience through
optimal power line hardening. The dimension reduction method ranks the subsets
of the transmission lines according to power loss caused by their disconnection
from power grids. The new method does not need to assume a specific statistical
joint model between power loss and all considered line combinations and only
uses the marginal information of the line combinations, and thus are generally
applicable for hardening planning. A new stochastic search algorithm that
exploits the dimension reduction capability is then proposed to reduce the size
of the effective search space given resource constraints when preparing for
severe weather conditions. To improve computational efficiency, the stochastic
search algorithm uses an informative Gaussian mixture prior to incorporate
dimension reduction results while achieving asymptotical convergence and
constructs a hierarchical sampling distribution using dimension reduction
results. The model-free dimension reduction and stochastic search algorithm are
generally applicable to a variety of other disciplines, e.g., the protection of
other critical civil infrastructures such as road
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.