* 1923329
* Student and Early-Career Support for Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) 2019 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Victor Lee, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) is a bi-annual
interdisciplinary international conference supporting advanced research in
learning technologies in support of collaborative learning. Providing doctoral
student and early-career support for attending this conference in prior years
has had a significant impact on the career and research of participants from
diverse domains such as computer science, information science, education,
psychology, and cognitive science.

This project provides travel stipends for 5 doctoral students and 5 early-career
researchers from U.S. universities to attend CSCL 2019, held in Lyon France,
June 2019. Participants attend a Doctoral Consortium and an Early Career
Workshop. The intellectual merit of this proposal hinges on the selection of
top-quality doctoral student research and early-career researchers, potentially
improving the dissertations of these graduate students and the research of
early-career academics. As such it is an important capacity-building project
that leverages the expertise of the CSCL community and the outcomes of previous
workshops held. The broader impacts include multiplying opportunities to develop
international collaborations in the field of learning sciences and advanced
learning technologies, and supporting the career development of some of the best
and brightest researchers in multiple disciplines who work in this
interdisciplinary area. By supporting a pipeline of high-quality US scholars
from multiple disciplines into this interdisciplinary field, this proposal helps
ensure US participation and parity in this productive and vital area of
research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.