* 1923602
* Girl Power by Design: Broadening Participation in Information and Communication Technology Pathways
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Deidre Sessoms, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

California State University Sacramento and Elk Grove Unified School District
(EGUSD) will develop a Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP), called Girl
Power, that aims to improve the representation of girls in rigorous, engaging,
high school computer science (CS) courses. Most CS courses at the high school
level in EGUSD are taught in "Information and Communication Technology" (ICT)
career pathways. Career pathways are a rapidly growing reform movement in
California, especially in high needs districts that enroll large numbers of low-
income, diverse students. The Girl Power project aims to ultimately increase the
number of girls who enroll in an ICT Pathway in EGUSD by 75%.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish this, Girl Power will use developmental and
adaptive teacher professional development in Culturally Responsive Computing
(CRC) pedagogies and rigorous computer science content across multiple courses
in the district, including the Exploring Computer Science curriculum. The use of
CRC will align content with girls' interests and concerns. The Girl Power
partnership will develop a highly functioning RPP that implements a design-based
research (DBR) study that examines how EGUSD computer science teachers'
instruction using CRC pedagogies affects the recruitment and success of girls.
Specifically the research will focus on questions around (1) teacher's
recruitment of girls into ICT career pathways 2) girls' success in and
completion of the ICT pathways, and 3) the impact of teacher professional
development in CRC and CS content on girls' recruitment and success in CS
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.