* 1923127
* Molecular mechanisms of the sense of touch
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Sviatoslav Bagriantsev, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The ability to sense the world though physical contact is essential for all
living organisms. The sense of touch is essential for navigation in the
environment, object recognition, detection of pain and pleasure. It facilitates
the establishment of maternal bonds and underlies the development of social
behaviors. The sense of touch includes the sense of physical contact and
temperature, but the mechanism is poorly understood. This project seeks to
reveal molecular principles underlying the detection of physical touch, and
understand how temperature influences this process. These studies will use
tactile foraging ducks that allow examination of these general physiological
problems through the perspective of a tactile specialist animal. This research
will provide mechanistic insights into the process of touch detection and reveal
general principles of mechanosensitivity in vertebrates. The broader impact
activities aim to promote science among school students, with a focus on ethnic
and socioeconomic groups underrepresented among scientists. The PI will reach
out to schools in CT, MA and NY to teach how people feel touch, warmth and cold,
how they see, smell or taste. Most of the trainees are female, underrepresented
minorities, economically disadvantaged, or from families without prior college
graduates. The activities are designed and implemented by undergraduates, PhD
students and postdocs from the lab, under close supervision of the principal
investigator. This approach provides a unique teaching experience to our lab
members and help them advance professionally to become educator-
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many vertebrates, fine tactile tasks are
accomplished by organs covered with glabrous skin, such as the palm of hand in
primates, or the bill of tactile foraging ducks. These organs specialize in the
detection of the lightest forms of touch, such as transient contact and
vibration, via mechanosensory corpuscles. How corpuscles convert touch into
electrical signaling, what molecules are involved and how they work, remains
largely unknown. The investigators will approach this problem by studying
mechanosensitivity in the bill of tactile specialist ducks. They showed that
duck bill contains numerous lamellar corpuscles innervated by trigeminal
mechanoreceptors. Here, the investigator proposes to use the duck model to
reveal general principles of touch detection by neuronal and non-neuronal
components of mechanosensory corpuscles. This project aims to: (1) Determine the
molecular basis of tactile-thermal interaction in neuronal mechanoreceptors.
Mild cooling potentiates tactile acuity in vertebrates, but the mechanism is
unknown. This project will test the hypothesis that cooling increases the
ability of neuronal mechanoreceptors to convert touch into excitation, and
identify the molecular basis of this process. (2) Investigate whether lamellar
cells from Herbst (Pacinian) corpuscles can detect touch. It is well established
that lamellar cells form a cushion around the neuronal core, acting as a passive
mechanical filter. The investigator aims to test the hypothesis that lamellar
cells are also mechanically sensitive, and are able to convert touch into
excitation, actively contributing to the detection of
touch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.