* 1923957
* CNH2-L:   Climate Change and the Coupled Dynamics of Tropical Forest Ecology and Human Food Production
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Douglas Kennett, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,599,123.00

The emergence of food production represents one of the most significant positive
changes in the history of human society. Food production set the stage for
virtually all subsequent cultural developments. Coincident with these changes
was the rise of cultural selection replacing natural selection as the
determining force in the ecology and evolution of plant and animal species. Food
production was tightly tied to climate and drought and significant changes in
these factors often resulted in disruption of production and cultural collapse.
This award investigates the origins of food production in the tropical lowlands
of Belize, Central America occurring from 3000-6000 years ago and the ecological
and cultural response to a three-century drought that began 4200 years ago.
Climate modeling, environmental reconstruction and archaeological inference of
human adaptation will be used to evaluate the long-term relationships among
these factors and changing socio-environmental dynamics. This study will provide
insights to the experience of thousands of generations of human responses to
environmental change and potential guidance so that future generations can be
more resilient to major environmental changes. This research is transformative
in advancing basic understanding of interactions between how human populations
feed themselves and tropical forest ecology in response to profound
environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will examine how drying
environmental conditions affect human subsistence practices and how intensified
food production, in turn, affect local vegetation patterns. Food production is
one of the most significant developments in the history of the human species and
as the determining force in the evolution of a select number of plant and animal
species. Food production has long been acknowledged as setting the stage for
virtually all subsequent cultural developments by increasing the carrying
capacity of land, the degree of sedentism that is possible as well as greater
population density. As a result, the production of food was a required
prerequisite for the establishment of urban life. Food production is also
necessary to underwrite the division of labor within society that allowed
farmers to support ever-increasing numbers of non-producers such as political
rulers, priests, engineers and scientists. Environmental change is often posited
as resulting in cultural collapse. The reconstruction of human occupation and
forest floral species diversity in the tropical lowlands of northern Belize,
Central America will be reconstructed from 6000-3000 year ago to document how
food production and settlement patterns were affected by climate change and, in
turn, how local vegetation was reconstituted. This reconstruction will be
accomplished by combining archaeological excavation that document human
habitation and lake sediment coring to reconstruct changing patterns of plant
pollen from economically useful species and charcoal that result from human
burning of local vegetation to increase soil productivity. Research will focus
on the "4.2 ka BP event" that caused three centuries of climate disturbance
world-wide between 4200 and 3900 years ago. Evidence of human settlement
patterns and diet from before, during and after this period will be used to
evaluate paleoecological evidence of changing species availability and the
extent of anthropogenic disturbance through the use of fire. Evidence of human
settlement patterns and diet will be evaluated in light of expectations of niche
construction theory (NCT) and optimal foraging theory (OFT) and related to
evidence of changing species availability and the extent of anthropogenic
disturbance on the landscape with fire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.