* 1923375
* Integrating Computer Science into the Elementary Curriculum in Culturally Relevant Ways: A Researcher-Practitioner-Partnership in Native-American Serving Districts in Wyoming
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jared O'Leary, American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,748.00

Native American communities are underrepresented in computer science
professions, and there is a need educationally to make this domain relevant to
Native cultures. The American Institutes for Research--in collaboration with the
Wyoming Department of Education, three Wyoming school districts on the Wind
River Reservation, and BootUp Professional Development--will write, pilot, and
refine a curriculum for grades 3-5 that integrates computer science and Wyoming
Indian Education for All social studies standards in culturally relevant ways.
In 2022, this curriculum is being published by Wyoming Department of Education
for all districts in the state to use as they implement newly mandated Wyoming
computer science and Indian Education for All social studies standards. The
project is also making the curriculum available to other districts and states
nationwide that serve Native students with suggestions about how to adapt the
curricular materials to make them locally relevant to the populations they are
serving. The team is providing a report for local and state education agencies
with "lessons learned" on how to integrate computer science education with other
elementary school content in Grades 3-5. In this way, the project not only is
broadening participation in computer science for historically underserved Native
American students living on the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming but also is
reaching Native American students throughout Wyoming and the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer science education has been focused largely on
policies and curricula for secondary students. Elementary school teachers often
express concern that they do not have time to teach computer science, given
competing pressures to teach other subjects. The proposed study will generate
curricular resources that integrate computer science with social studies
standards, thus providing a solution to this challenge. BootUp Professional
Development is authoring the curriculum, and the American Institutes for
Research is leading a networked improvement community focused on refining the
curriculum to ensure that it is usable, useful, and culturally relevant.
Participants in the networked improvement community include the Wyoming
Department of Education, 25 classroom teachers from three Wyoming districts,
staff from BootUp Professional Development and American Institutes for Research
researchers. In 2022, the project is disseminating curricular resources that
other districts nationwide can adapt and use and will also produce a model for
how to design an integrated curriculum in a way that is culturally relevant. In
addition, the project is demonstrating how participating in both professional
development and a networked improvement community that focuses on formative
feedback can result in higher levels of teacher self-efficacy, teacher content
and pedagogical knowledge, and, ultimately, student mastery of computer science
content standards. This project is funded by CS for
All.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.