* 1923187
* EAGER: Real-Time: Free-Floating Wireless Implantable Optical Stimulators for Untethered Optogenetics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Wen Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 03/31/2020
* USD 80,000.00

Optogenetics, the use of light-gated ion channels or pumps to excite or inhibit
the transient activity of genetically targeted neurons by pulses of light, has
proved its enormous potential for understanding neuronal circuit mechanisms
underlying brain functions and behavior, and ultimately, for providing
therapeutics to treat numerous neurological and psychiatric disorders. Despite
the rapid development of optogenetics tools over the past decade, tethered
optical devices pose significant limitations in experimental animals and even
more so in potential clinical applications. This proposed research will address
fundamental challenges in tethered optogenetics systems, by developing a
distributed, wireless (untethered and battery-less), implantable optical
stimulator architecture that is more power efficient, significantly safer, and
more practical for translation to clinical applications. The successful
completion of the project will yield a new neural interface tool to
significantly expand the utility of the rapidly growing field of optogenetics,
which has become the frontier in brain science research, gene therapy, and new
drug discovery for a variety of neural diseases. In addition, the project will
train graduate students in multidisciplinary research and broaden K-12 education
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) through integrated
outreach activities, including the NSF sponsored Research Experiences for
Teachers (RET) Program at Michigan State University.

The proposed wireless optogenetics stimulator will integrate a mm-sized,
Parylene-coated system-on-a-chip (SoC) with an embedded receiver coil, surface-
mount storage capacitors, and microscale light-emitting diodes (microLEDs) to
selectively stimulate the target neural tissue. Researchers will tackle
inefficiencies in wireless power delivery to the neural tissue using: 1) a four-
coil telemetry link including an implantable high quality factor resonator to
enhance wireless power coupling efficiency; 2) a built-in mirror to reflect
backside illumination of microLED for improving light throughput; and 3) a
switched-capacitor stimulation (SCS) structure of the SoC to directly charge an
array of storage capacitors from the inductive link and periodically discharge
them into a microLED without loading the inductive link. A single wireless
stimulator enables localized optical stimulation of targeted neurons with high
spatiotemporal resolution, while a cluster of such implants enables easy access
to large-scale neuronal circuits with minimal invasiveness and movement
restriction. The proposed device also enables a significantly safer and more
practical solution for potential translation of optogenetics into behaving
animal research and clinical applications. Removing the chronic physical trauma
of tethering can effectively minimize tissue damage and enable efficient and
stable chronic wireless optical stimulation. Moreover, the distributed, epidural
implantation strategy permits selective stimulation of any desired area in the
cortex. This new paradigm will offer neuroscience community an unprecedented
level of flexibility with unlimited experiment duration in an enriched,
untethered environment, without requiring small animal subjects to carry bulky
batteries around.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.