* 1923321
* EDGE:  CT:   Development of foundational multiplex genome engineering tools for non-conventional yeast
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Farren Isaacs, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,976.00

The breadth of genomic diversity endows organisms with rich biosynthetic
capabilities and allows them to adapt to diverse environments. This species
diversity in biological systems has tremendous potential to solve global
challenges, such as the remediation of hazardous waste, producing new drugs and
designer cells to alleviate human diseases, and the synthesis of novel chemicals
and materials to ensure environmental sustainability. These challenges motivate
the need to develop entirely new functional genomic tools, and enabling
technologies to modify genomes on a large scale. Specifically, methods are
needed for parallel and continuous directed evolution of gene networks or
genomes to enhance understanding and expedite the design and evolution of
organisms with prescribed functions. In this project, the investigators address
these challenges through the development of multiplex genome engineering
technologies in non-conventional yeast species. This project also promotes
interdisciplinary education, including the specific expansion of STEM education
and career opportunities for underrepresented minorities and women. Further, the
investigators create experiential learning modules that bring genome engineering
research to K-12 and undergraduate classrooms and connect students to the
science in the laboratory. This new outreach program ensures that advances made
in this project benefit a broader community and contribute to motivating and
training young scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
we seek to develop cross-species multiplex genome engineering technologies to
enable gene function discovery in non-conventional yeast (NCY) species. By
integrating state-of-the-art molecular biology, laboratory evolution, and
synthetic biology technologies, this project creates a new framework for
studying and generating genetic variation. This framework is focused on
establishing cross-species genome editing capabilities in nonconventional yeast
with improved capabilities of delivering synthetic DNA in cells. The ability to
introduce many targeted genome modifications at base-pair level precision
establishes a general strategy for multiplex combinatorial genome engineering in
NCYs and more broadly for eukaryotes. These advances enable the construction of
targeted sets of genetic variants that can be functionally studied to elucidate
causal links between genotype and phenotype and reprogram cellular behavior. In
the long-term, the present work will transform the way scientists perform large-
scale genetic modifications in non-conventional yeast species and usher in an
era wherein globally reprogramming cellular behavior will become simple,
inexpensive, and empower researchers to uncover new biological phenomena,
elucidate causal links between genotype and phenotype, and design and reprogram
organisms. In sum, this project provides new directions for academic and
industrial efforts related to genome engineering, while simultaneously training
the next generation of scientists and engineers to be full participants in the
work force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.