* 1923164
* Toward a Theory of Systems Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* George Hazelrigg, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 496,670.00

The research objective of this award is to provide a framework for and begin the
derivation of a mathematically rigorous theory of systems engineering. Systems
engineering has often been taught and practiced based on a set of heuristics
that work sometimes, but not always. The lack of a rigorous theory has
contributed to many projects encountering delays, significant cost overruns, and
under-performance. It has been estimated that the resulting losses to the
Federal government, particularly via military and other major Federal
procurements, likely exceed $200 million per day. These losses are accompanied
by equivalent losses in the private sector. A theory of systems engineering will
serve as a test of the validity of systems engineering practices and posit a
theory for sound systems design and decision making, which hold considerable
promise of substantially reducing these losses. In addition, a rigorous theory
will provide a basis for sound systems engineering education and hold the
potential to revolutionize engineering education across the entire engineering
curriculum. For example, it will form the basis for teaching engineering design
decision making under uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is noted that a
comprehensive theory of systems engineering can be derived from the simple
preference statement, "I want the best system I can get," where the definition
of "best" is left entirely to the discretion of the project manager. The insight
upon which this effort is based observes that design and systems engineering are
decision-making processes, which rely on preferences that enable optimal system
decision making rather than physical principals that impose constraints on
design decisions. The approach in this project is a significant deviation from
previous efforts to the derivation of a theory of design and systems
engineering, and its implementation will demand the rigorous application and
integration of decision theory, preference theory, probability theory, game
theory and mechanism design. The merger of these branches of mathematics with
engineering will represent a transformative advance, providing a litmus test for
the validity of theories of and approaches to systems engineering. A goal of
this work will be the establishment of a set of rules that will define valid
methods, procedures and processes for the conduct of engineering design and
systems engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.