* 1923774
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: DroTerNet: Coexistence between Drone and Terrestrial Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Fred Daneshgaran, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 107,362.00

There is tremendous recent interest in drones with applications ranging from
public safety, first responders, surveillance, to package delivery. Drones are
also being considered as flying wireless nodes to augment the capabilities of
current terrestrial communication networks. Irrespective of the application,
drones need radio frequency (RF) spectrum to communicate with their ground
control stations as well as with other drones and terrestrial nodes. Since
transmissions from higher altitude have the potential of interfering with other
wireless services over a large area, it is currently being debated whether and
under what rules should drones share spectrum with existing networks or whether
it is better to operate them over specifically licensed frequencies. In order to
answer such important and timely questions, this project develops a new cross-
disciplinary approach to the design and analysis of coexisting drone and
terrestrial networks (DroTerNets) by blending ideas from multiple disciplines,
such as spectrum sharing, communication theory, propagation science, test-bed
development, machine learning, and stochastic network modeling. This research
will inform both industry and government on spectrum usage by providing a
scientific basis for the high-stakes ruling on spectrum for drones. Further
broader impacts will be through student training and wide dissemination of
results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
develop a holistic new approach to the spectral and energy efficiency analysis
of DroTerNets, yielding the following key innovations: (i) A new learning
framework based on the idea of determinantal point processes (DPPs) will be
developed to facilitate both simulation-based and analytical characterization of
the locations of simultaneously active nodes in a given frequency band for a
variety of coexistence schemes, (ii) Drawing on multi-label classification in
machine learning, a novel deep DPP-based channel assignment algorithm will be
developed by utilizing the structure of DPP kernels to limit the search space,
(iii) Non-linear receiver characteristics will be included in the learning
framework to both quantify their effect on the energy and spectral efficiency of
DroTerNets and to develop novel receiver-aware channel assignment schemes, (iv)
Mobility constraints and characteristics of drones that result from the
opportunistic access of the channel will be characterized and incorporated in
the analysis, (v) Measurements and models of air-to-ground (A2G) channels in a
variety of environments with particular emphasis on directional characteristics
that determine the effectiveness of multi-antenna receivers will be obtained,
and (vi) Experimental investigation and modeling of the correlation between
terrestrial and A2G links will be performed to provide a solid foundation for
coexistence margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.