* 1923509
* CS for Appalachia: A Research-Practice Partnership for Integrating Computer Science into East Tennessee Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Lynn Hodge, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 252,453.00

East Tennessee is a region in the heart of Appalachia marked by deep cultural
roots and persistent challenges to providing students with substantial computer
science (CS) learning experiences. Attention to opportunities for students to
engage with CS ideas and practices is urgent and timely in light of new CS
standards for the State of Tennessee being implemented in the Fall of 2019. To
address the needs of students in East Tennessee Appalachia, this project
provides professional development (PD) for teachers to plan for and teach CS
strategies that are responsive to students and their communities. This project
employs a research-practice partnership among researchers, teachers and
administrators to address challenges related to teaching CS, such as access to
high-quality professional learning for teachers and technical infrastructure.
This collaborative work brings together the University of Tennessee, three rural
East Tennessee school districts, and key community organizations. Building and
strengthening this partnership enhances learning and lifelong outcomes for
students by increasing their opportunities to engage with CS in the elementary
grades. For stakeholders as well as researchers, the project leads to an
enhanced understanding of how rural school districts create opportunities for
students to engage meaningfully with CS and to a strong partnership that will
enhance CS education in Appalachia in the years to come.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's overarching goal is to strengthen, broaden
and formalize existing collaborations through work sessions focused upon
community learning, foundational CS ideas, knowledge and practice around
culturally relevant pedagogy, and a shared vision. The project develops CS
standards-aligned professional development for K-5 teachers to (1) engage
students in activities that connect with Appalachian culture and lived
experiences and (2) cultivate students' interests in and understanding of CS and
issues beyond their immediate communities. Research activities involve exploring
teacher identity development related to CS and teaching CS, as well as studying
teacher learning as a product of their involvement in the PD. Evaluation focuses
on efforts to strengthen the research-practice partnership by providing
formative and summative feedback to the leadership group. Results are shared
with the CS education community across Tennessee and the nation through
presentations at conferences and workshops and publications. This collaboration
provides new insights for encouraging development of systematic approaches to
some of the most persistent STEM education issues faced by the most isolated
school districts. This project is funded by the CS for All
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.