* 1923732
* Voltage-Tunable High-Frequency Ferrite Devices based on Non-Linear Magnetoelectric Interactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gopalan Srinivasan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Hexagonal ferrites are magnetic materials of choice for use in high frequency
communication devices and radars due to low losses. The main drawback in such
devices, however, is the need for a source of magnetic field to tune the
operating frequency that requires very high power. Such tuning also makes them
bulky and not compatible for integration with semiconductor devices. This
project is aimed at a new generation of ferrite magnetic devices that are
tunable by applying a voltage, and therefore, can be miniaturized and integrated
with semiconductor electronics. The project is motivated by recent reports on
strong interaction between the magnetic ordering in the ferrite and electric
field generated by the applied voltage, resulting in voltage control of magnetic
parameters. Primary tasks of the proposed research are to grow high quality thin
films and single crystals of hexagonal ferrites, studies on the nature of
interaction between magnetic order and electric field, and design, fabrication
and characterization of ferrite filters and resonators for use in the frequency
bands of interest for consumer electronics and systems of importance for the
national defense. Broader impacts of the research include research training in
advanced materials synthesis and measurement techniques for undergraduate and
graduate students and research experience for high school students. High school
juniors and seniors, women and minorities in particular, will be recruited from
local schools to facilitate participation in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
research program is proposed on non-linear magnetoelectric (NLME) interactions
and electric field control of magnetism in M-type hexagonal ferrites. The
motivation is the recent discovery of the phenomenon in single crystals films of
strontium hexaferrite (SrM). Under a static electric field E, the ME
interactions in a thick film of SrM resulted variation in the magnetic order
parameters and manifested as tuning of ferromagnetic resonance (FMR). Studies
are planned on single crystal platelets and thin films of pure, and (Co, Ti) and
(Co,Sn) substituted Ba and Sr hexaferrites. These systems have uniaxial
anisotropy fields Ha = 4-20 kOe with FMR in the frequency range 10-50 GHz.
Single crystals are on hand and thin films will be grown by liquid phase epitaxy
(LPE) on a variety of substrates including MgO and sapphire. Studies on NLME
effects are to be done by observation and tuning of FMR under multi-domain and
single domain states for DC, sinusoidal and pulsed E-fields. Data on E-tuning of
FMR will be used to estimate variations in magnetic order parameters and NLME
coupling coefficients and their dependence on sample and input electrical
parameters. An important component of the proposed research is the design of
hexaferrite resonators and band-stop and band-pass filters for use at 10-50 GHz
and characterization in terms of E-tuning and device figures of merit. Avenues
for enhancing device tunability and figures of merit and reduction of electric
power requirements will be explored. Models will be developed for the non-linear
ME interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.