* 1923066
* I-Corps: High Resolution Probes for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Michael Lanagan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) technology with enhanced spatial resolution and reduced
scan time for investigating a comprehensive range of biological systems from
single cells to humans. Novel MRI probes with dielectric pads will have an
immediate impact on animal and human behavior studies where neuroscientists are
using MRI techniques to monitor brain activity and cognition. Entirely new
research and clinical tests become possible at increased resolution and reduced
scan time. High-resolution MRI is a powerful tool for understanding metabolic
activity in humans and animals. MRI will be a key diagnostic technique of the
neuroscience - linking chemical and spatial information with neurological and
brain disorders. In addition, researchers of Biological Anthropology, Fisheries
and Biology will benefit from new tools with shorter MRI scan times and higher
resolution. The I-Corps project will provide a commercial foundation for
translating breakthroughs in high-resolution MRI probes to the life science and
medical communities.

This I-Corps project addresses fundamental electromagnetic challenges of high-
resolution magnetic resonance imaging. Radio Frequency (RF) probes with
dielectric pads have been successfully tested in a research setting for
biological phantoms, animals and humans. The company will work with clinicians
and researchers to translate the new RF probes into commercial and research-
based MRI systems. The design flexibility of an RF probe with a dielectric pad
provides for customized volumes of uniform magnetic field and allows for MRI of
diverse samples including humans, mice, fish, and single cells. The proposed
program will bring together material scientists, electrical engineers,
biologists and radiologists to create a unique ecosystem for understanding the
value of novel MRI RF probes in biological research and medicine. Integration of
knowledge from different disciplines, combined with information from prospective
users will assure the creation of a comprehensive plan for commercialization of
RF probes in MRI scanners.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.