* 1923267
* Modeling the role of the rostrolateral prefrontal cortex in category learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Tyler Davis, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 508,155.00

Learning to use new categories and concepts is central to our intellectual
abilities as humans. Such learning is critical for our ability to teach in
educational settings, use public service announcements to inform the public
about health benefits and risks, and create new strategies for national defense.
Many new concepts are acquired without explicitly reasoning about how the
concept works; for example, we may learn to simply avoid behaviors that lead to
increased disease risk instead of actively making inferences and learning the
underlying causal structure of how such risks emerge. The present proposal
examines the cognitive and neurobiological processes that determine how and when
people will use such active inferential processes to learn about new categories
and concepts. By developing a better understanding of how inferential processes
are engaged in category and concept learning, the study has the potential to
help in any real-world settings in which such processes are used. For example,
these results may help to identify strategies to enhance active inferential
processing in education or public health communication, which can lead to better
learning and health behavior outcomes. Finally, the project will directly
support education of diverse students, who will be actively engaged in
collecting and disseminating the data collected as part of the study. Through
this learning opportunity, students will acquire valuable STEM skills related to
data collection, analysis, and computer programming. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Neurobiological theories of category learning suggest that we use
inferential processes such as rules and hypothesis testing to aid in acquiring
new categories, but once categories are learned, active reasoning likely gives
way to more general memory-based or associative strategies that have lower
cognitive demands. The present proposal aims to use functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI), cognitive tasks, and computational modeling to test
(1) how the brain integrates novelty and uncertainty signals in deploying
inferential reasoning processes during category learning and generalization, and
(2) how such processes may differ depending on the stimulus properties that
define a category - namely, whether rule-relevant features are easily
verbalizable. The working hypothesis for this project is that the rostrolateral
prefrontal cortex (rlPFC) works with brain regions supporting novelty detection
(medial temporal lobes) and decision making (lateral prefrontal cortex and
posterior parietal cortex) to determine when to engage inferential processes to
aid category learning. However, its ability to develop inferential strategies in
a given situation may also depend on a learner's ability to encode rule-relevant
stimulus features verbally using language. The overall goals of the study are as
follows: (1) Test how activation in rlPFC and its connectivity with other
regions involved in inferential processing track novelty and uncertainty during
early rule-based learning, and assess whether any region's involvement varies
based on feature verbalizability. (2) Test how rlPFC activation and connectivity
with other regions involved in inferential processing track novelty and
uncertainty during generalization of previously learned rules, and assess
whether any region's involvement varies based on verbalizability of stimulus
features. (3) Develop an encompassing computational model that accounts for
participants' behavior and rlPFC's activation and interactions with other brain
regions involved in inferential processing in the proposed learning and
generalization experiments. The proposed studies and model have the potential to
create a unified theory of inferential processing and rlPFC function in category
learning that will be easily extendable to other basic cognitive processes like
learning, memory, and decision-making that rely on similar underlying
computational and neural mechanisms. By working toward a computationally defined
mechanism for inferential processes in category learning, the present proposal
will create generalizable knowledge of how to enhance inferential processing
during category learning that may apply to real-world reasoning inside and
outside of the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.