* 1923687
* Collaborative Research:  Transparent exopolymer and phytoplankton vertical migration as sources for preformed nitrate anomalies in the subtropical N. Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Robert Letscher, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 491,322.00

The ocean is usually layered, with light and oxygen in the warmer surface and
nutrients at the cooler depths. Biological and physical processes determine this
distribution. Marine algae grow in the well-lit upper layers but need nutrients
to grow. However, in the subtropics, the ocean's largest biome, the relationship
between oxygen and nitrate (a key nutrient required for photosynthesis) is
different from expected. Two processes could explain this. Nutrients could be
transported upward by migrating giant single-celled algae (phytoplankton).
Another explanation is that the production of an organic material called
transparent exopolymer (TEP) takes up carbon without using nutrients or
exporting carbon to depth, as would occur in photosynthesis. While both
processes could be occurring, the relative contribution of migrating
phytoplankton versus TEP would tell us whether the observed oxygen pattern in
the upper ocean results from photosynthesis. This problem relates to the general
question of where and how nutrients reach the well-lit surface waters to enable
photosynthesis. These hypotheses are tested at the Hawaii Ocean Time-Series
using in-situ camera systems to image and quantify the giant phytoplankton and
direct water samples to measure the vertical distribution of TEP. The data are
entered into numerical models to calculate the nitrate to oxygen relationships
and add information about the carbon cycle. In addition to training of
undergraduate students and a postdoctoral fellow, the cruises provide an
opportunity to prepare a cadre of communication fellows who will develop
materials and media, including videos, to translate this highly complex
scientific concepts for the general public. The social media campaign #SaveOur70
provides a valuable venue to reach and engage with the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying nutrient transport, utilization, and its
relationship to carbon drawdown in the subtropical gyres is fundamental to our
understanding of the carbon cycle. Geochemical distributions from the well-
characterized time-series sites near Hawaii and Bermuda have long-served to
identify previously unknown links between subsurface nitrate fields, summertime
dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) drawdown, and net community production in the
absence of known nutrient sources. Two recently suggested processes rise to
prominence to explain anomalies in subtropical distributions of dissolved
carbon, oxygen, and nitrate in the upper ocean: 1) nutrient transport by giant
phytoplankton that vertically migrate, and 2) cycling of low N organic matter
between the mixed layer and the upper nutricline as transparent exopolymer
particles (TEP) or gel-like organic material (GLOM). While linked at a
fundamental level (phytoplankton are TEP producers), the outcome of the two
processes are distinct. Vertical migration of phytoplankton is an active
transport of nitrate, acquired in the nutricline, to the surface. There is an
implication of subsequent reduction, photosynthetic carbon fixation and eventual
export. TEP/GLOM cycling results in apparent DIC drawdown but there is no net
export out of the surface layer and no requirement for additional nutrient
sources in the mixed layer. This project collects the data to quantify the
contribution of these two processes to the observed anomalies in nitrate to
oxygen distribution at the time-series station at Hawaii (HOT). This is
accomplished by enumerating the vertically migrating, aflagellate flora (VMF),
implementing a 1-D model on vertical migration, and coupling these results with
a 1-D model of the contribution of N-poor carbon cycling patterns in the upper
water column derived from TEP and carbohydrate measurements. The combined VMF
and TEP/GLOM 1-D models are used to model the dissolved oxygen, carbon, and
nitrate budgets at HOT allowing for attribution of both hypothesized processes
to the observed preformed nitrate distribution, its formation rate, and
summertime inorganic carbon drawdown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.