* 1923633
* RUI:Empowering K-5 Teachers in Southern Oregon Through Computational Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Maggie Vanderberg, Southern Oregon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,998.00

The United States does not adequately prepare students underrepresented in
computing -- especially females; racial, ethnic, and linguistic minorities; and
low-income students -- to meet college requirements in computer science (CS).
Southern Oregon, in particular, has significant interest in offering CS
educational opportunities to its PK-12 students but is still currently
developing the infrastructure to support implementation, amidst a student
population becoming more diverse in terms of race, ethnicity, and languages
spoken. This project, focused on integrating computational thinking (CT) into
the K-5 instruction of general elementary and elementary bilingual teachers,
will grow the early collaboration efforts initially started in 2015 into a
formalized networked improvement community (NIC) in southern Oregon. This NIC
would include Southern Oregon University (SOU), Ashland School District,
Phoenix-Talent School District, and the American Institutes for Research (AIR).
Over two years, this project aims to do the following: (a) move from initial
collaboration to a fully-formed NIC that meets regularly and engages in three
cycles of improvement; (b) pilot a summer institute that supports its first
cohort of elementary teachers; (c) co-create lesson plans that integrate CT into
elementary subjects; (d) build prototype instructional materials that districts
can use to engage elementary teachers, whether they are early adopters of CT or
reticent to implement. This research presents an innovative approach to CT
instruction and PD that could influence the pathway to CS for elementary
students. The education division at SOU will sustain the NIC's work by
implementing CT training into the STEM methodology class that is required for
all elementary preservice teachers and including CT training in ongoing summer
institutes for inservice teachers. In addition, the project's broad
dissemination plan would reach practitioners and scholars throughout the nation
in computer science and elementary education, thus extending the study's
findings beyond southern Oregon. This project is supported by the Computer
Science for All: Researcher-Practitioner Partnerships program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research questions center around how systems,
structures, and professional development (PD) can be constructed to facilitate
elementary and bilingual elementary teachers' knowledge of and confidence in CT
instruction. The research will investigate how CT PD and CT instructional
activities can engage students from low-income, Latinx and linguistically
diverse groups, and enable teachers to be more willing to move from CT concepts
to integrating CS using technological devices. The research will examine how
incorporating language arts and math in CT instruction could increase the
ability and confidence of elementary teachers - general and bilingual - in both
CT and CS. Furthermore, the project will investigate how CT PD could support
teachers in actively engaging students from groups that are underrepresented in
computing. Using a mixed methods approach, the project will collect and analyze
data from surveys, observations, and interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.