* 1923286
* I-Corps: Infrared Laser Absorption Spectroscopy for Soil Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Richard Coffman, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the adoption
of a new standard for assessing the real-time condition of soil and
geomaterials. The occurrence of extreme weather fluctuations and natural
disasters have the potential to permanently disrupt modern society and
agricultural practices by increasing soil erosion and decreasing usable land,
soil fertility, and resistance to pests and disease. Growing populations will
place more demand on agricultural production despite constrained amounts of
available land. Technologies that assist with better nutrient management,
planting, and harvesting techniques will aid in sustainable food production.
Additionally, the need for better soil characterization and monitoring
techniques are required in light of prominent failures of mine tailings dams.
The safety of mining and large earth construction operations may be improved
with the adoption of real-time, remote measurements of geomaterials. Lastly,
more frequent and intense wildfires have led to more post-wildfire debris flows.
Dangers associated with the debris flow potential must be identified and
characterized. The optical, non-contact remote measurement technology that will
be explored in this project has the potential to impact society as well as
several markets and industries, ranging from precision agriculture to mining,
hazard mitigation, and construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
will explore the applications of optical infrared technology. The specific
technology that will be explored was developed at the bench and field scale to
remotely measure soil properties. The proposed innovation will advance
agricultural and geotechnical engineering practices by enabling remote
measurements of soil/crop condition and fertility, as well as static and dynamic
soil parameters. Prior to the development of this technology, no method existed
to remotely measure soil suction in the field. Because the measurements do not
require contact with the soil, nor the collection of soil or water samples, the
measurements are non-destructive. Furthermore, the rapidly collected
measurements obtained will include many data points over a large area, improving
spatial and temporal resolution over conventional point-wise data collection
methods. The need to install labor-intensive and cost-prohibitive in situ
instrumentation is then eliminated. The proposed technology also has the
potential to save time and costs associated with conventional laboratory
classification of soil properties and may also improve upon the poor
reproducibility of some conventional testing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.