* 1923377
* Collaborative Research: Plasma Heating and Energy Partition in Flares and Coronal Mass Ejections (CMEs)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Viacheslav Titov, Predictive Science Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 396,772.00

Solar eruptions, in the form of flares and coronal mass ejections (CMEs), are
violent explosions in the Sun's atmosphere that propel millions of tons of hot
plasma into interplanetary space. They are the largest energy-release events in
the solar system and the main driver of space weather disturbances at Earth.
When directed towards the Earth, they can adversely affect human endeavors such
as air traffic communications, power grids, and satellites, and be hazardous to
astronauts traveling in space. It is therefore important to understand the
physics behind these powerful events. It is widely accepted that the sudden and
violent reconfiguration of magnetic fields is the main process that enables the
release of energy in solar eruptions. However, the details of the conversion of
magnetic energy into heating and plasma motion are not well understood. In this
three-year project, state-of-the-art computer simulations together with
satellite observations will be employed to make progress on this important
problem, by modeling and systematically investigating energy transfer and plasma
heating in flares and CMEs. The project will support the dissertation research
of a PhD student and thus foster the educational goals of the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project will employ sophisticated
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) numerical simulations to model solar eruptions (for
both idealized and observed cases). The simulation results will be used to
identify the physical mechanisms responsible for energy conversion and plasma
heating during eruptions and to quantify their respective contributions. These
numerical investigations will be complemented with detailed analysis of high-
cadence and high-resolution observations from current spacecraft, using well-
developed analysis tools for deriving thermal information from observational
data. This project aims to answer several open questions about solar eruptions.
First of all, it will examine the physical mechanisms that heat plasma during
the impulsive phase of solar flares and quantify the energy partition in this
phase. Secondly, it will explore the physical mechanisms responsible for heating
plasma in the region of the current sheet in the late phase of solar flares.
Thirdly, it will investigate how the recently discovered "hot plasma channels"
are formed and heated to temperatures of more than 10 million degrees Kelvin in
the early stages of an eruption. Finally, it will examine how erupting plasma is
heated and evolves during its propagation within a CME. The research and EPO
agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.