* 1923810
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Conceptualization: Planning a Sustainable Ecosystem for Incorporating Parallel and Distributed Computing into Undergraduate Education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Ramachandran Vaidyanathan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2021
* USD 21,961.00

In this era of pervasive multicore machines, GPUs, cloud services, big data,
machine learning, and the Internet of Things, there is a critical need for an
institute to create a sustainable, discipline-wide ecosystem for incorporating
parallel and distributed computing (PDC) into undergraduate computing curricula.
Such an institute would support the community of educators, students, and other
stakeholders, with the goal of developing a workforce that is ready to meet the
challenges of working with current and future computing fabrics. The
investigators propose planning for such an institute (iPDC) that can help
eliminate the longstanding barrier of the sequential computing paradigm such
that, analogous to the establishment of the object oriented paradigm, the PDC
paradigm is naturally integrated into Computer Science (CS) and Computer
Engineering (CE) curricula across various institutions as recommended by the
2013 ACM/IEEE Computer Science Curricula and now by
ABET.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the network of funded and unfunded
collaborators, established contacts with instructors at institutions serving
underrepresented groups, and outreach efforts, the project will robustly engage
with stakeholder communities through four well-structured planning workshops,
weekly teleconferences, and feedback and dissemination activities to formulate
the key attributes of the institute.Broadening PDC education will further enable
advances in science and engineering, which depend increasingly on PDC systems,
by providing the next generation of practitioners and researchers with the
necessary skills and knowledge to effectively exploit them. The curriculum
standards, adoption, and dissemination activities will have synergistic
international components. Overall, this project will facilitate a rich exchange
of ideas within the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.