* 1923865
* Constraints from multiple low frequency data on the long wavelength density structure in the deep mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Barbara Romanowicz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 595,689.00

To understand the dynamics of the Earth on a global scale (e.g., how tectonic
plates move, resulting in destructive earthquakes and volcanic eruptions), we
must understand the nature of the mantle, 3000 km of solid rock that lies
beneath the Earth's surface. In particular, two enigmatic dome-shaped structures
called the "Large Shear Wave Velocity Provinces" (or LLSVPs) rise from the base
of the mantle to around 1000 km above, one beneath Africa and the other beneath
the Pacific Ocean. Seismic waves that emanate from earthquakes sometimes travel
through these LLSVPs and are slowed down when they enter these structures. It is
still unclear why this might be the case: LLSVPs could be hotter (and thus more
buoyant) than their surroundings, or they could be chemically distinct (and
likely denser) than their surroundings. Both suggest fundamental differences in
how the mantle flows over millions of years and therefore how it influences
tectonic plate motions and the related natural disasters. The PIs plan to, for
the first time, combine information from traditional seismic data sets but also
measurements from special types of seismic waves and earth tides to shed new
light on the buoyancy of these LLSVPs. The special type of seismic waves are
called Stoneley modes and are vibrations trapped along the core-mantle boundary
(CMB) and the earth tides are the twice-daily deformation of the solid Earth
under gravitational forces from the Sun and Moon. This award will support the
training of two graduate students at UC Berkeley and two female PIs, one of whom
is an early career scientist and new faculty member at UC Berkeley. The models
developed in this project will be made available as part of a webpage
specifically developed for this project, as well as through the Incorporated
Research Institution for Seismology (IRIS) facility. They will be used in
undergraduate workshops at UC Berkeley and at the interdisciplinary CIDER
workshop geared towards senior graduate students and early career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the last two years, independent studies
have presented seemingly contradictory results on the density structure of the
large low shear velocity provinces (LLSVPs) imaged by seismic tomography in the
earth's deep mantle. In particular, one study used a variety of seismological
data (normal mode splitting, seismic travel time and waveform data), and
another, semi-diurnal earth tide data, concluding that a significant part of the
LLSVPs represent regions of excess density pointing to the source of the LLSVP
anomalies being dominated by chemical heterogeneity. In contrast, a study
featuring measurements of Earth's Stoneley modes concluded the opposite,
implying that the source of LLSVP anomalies are in large part thermal. Both
conclusions paint a very different picture of mantle convection: the former
implies that the LLSVPs are potentially sluggish upwellings or stabilized piles,
while the latter implies a more energetic mode of mantle circulation. In this
project, the investigators will combine these different geodetic and seismic
datasets - which have different depth sensitivities to elastic and density
structure - to establish whether previous results can be reconciled under the
hypothesis that the excess density in LLSVPs may be confined to a thin layer
(~200 km or less) above the CMB. In doing so, they will investigate further
trade-offs with shear and compressional wave speed structure, anisotropy,
attenuation, as well as CMB topography and possible structure in the outermost
core. First, they will consider a combination of existing global seismic
waveform, tide and normal mode splitting data, including Stoneley mode data, and
perform inversions for structure in the deepest mantle, using the classical
first order mode perturbation formalism for modeling splitting data. They will
implement both an optimization and a trans-dimensional Monte Carlo inversion
method for this purpose. This, in large part, will act as a guide to prepare for
the more advanced inversions to be undertaken in the next stage, while yielding
interesting intermediate results. In the second stage, after completing their
own dataset of normal mode spectra, they will consider a more rigorous
theoretical approach and directly invert mode spectra, together with long period
waveform and tide data (complemented by newly acquired data) for density and
velocity structure in the vicinity of the CMB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.