* 1923312
* Improving Accuracy and Precision of Marine Inorganic Carbon Measurements
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Ryan Woosley, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 01/31/2024
* USD 444,514.00

Improving Accuracy and Precision of Marine Inorganic Carbon
Measurements&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oceans absorb about one third of the CO2
humans release into the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels and other
activities. While ocean uptake of CO2 slows its rate of increase in the
atmosphere, it comes with costs for the oceans and the organisms that live
there. Once in seawater, CO2 reacts with water to produce bicarbonate and
hydrogen ions. The increase in hydrogen ions lowers the pH in a process called
ocean acidification. Not all areas of the ocean are affected equally. The
solubility of CO2 is greater in the cold waters of the Arctic making them more
prone to ocean acidification. However, due to the low temperatures and low
salinities in the Arctic, the uncertainties in pH values are much larger there
than for the other oceans. This project evaluates pH at low temperatures and
salinities, and develops best practice recommendations to improve the ability to
compare measurements among laboratory groups and studies and reduce overall
uncertainty in the measurements. The project provides training for an
undergraduate student and promotes awareness of ocean acidification through
public outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having highly accurate and precise
measurements are important for monitoring changes to pH and CO2 uptake through
time and the effects on marine life. In order to improve pH measurements for
polar waters, several different experiments will be conducted. The temperature
dependence of pH will be determined from 30&amp;#730;C to near freezing for low
salinity waters. The results will be compared to current chemical models to
quantify offsets and biases. Recommendations will be made for the best physical
chemical model to use for low temperature and salinity seawater. Moreover, pH is
measured spectrophotometrically using an indicator dye. Preparation and
calibration of the indictor is important to standardize studies across space and
time and ensure comparability. Indicator quality is essential for detecting
ocean acidification, but its stability is currently unknown. If the dye degrades
after production, biases or artifacts in pH measurements may result as the dye
ages. Experiments will be undertaken using batches of dyes from weeks to over 10
years old to resolve its degradation characteristics. The experiments will
establish how long a batch of dye remains valid once it is prepared without
biasing the measurements. This is particularly important for long term studies
such as extended research expeditions and autonomous systems where a batch of
dye may be used over a year. Together, by both investigating the validity of
chemical models for seawater pH at low temperature and salinity and examining
the stability of the pH indicator dye, methodological uncertainties can be
reduced to permit better monitoring of changes in global ocean
pH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.