* 1923254
* Measurement of inter-scale molecular fluxes in supercritical reacting turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Adam Steinberg, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 315,845.00

Understanding how fluctuations at a specific length scale in a turbulent flow
affect the phenomena at other length scales is critical to accurately predict
flow properties by numerical simulation. In turbulent combustion, which is the
predominant mode of converting chemical energy to thermal energy for
transportation and power generation applications, additional challenges arise in
comparison to non-reacting turbulent flows because the fluctuating chemical
reaction rates occur at very small length scales that typically are not resolved
by simulations. This problem is exacerbated by the desire to operate combustion
systems at increasingly high pressures, often spanning in to the supercritical
pressure conditions. While increasing the pressure has important benefits for
efficiency and power density, it also concentrates fluctuations at increasingly
small scales and introduces strong variations in thermodynamic properties around
the critical point. To better understand this phenomenon, this project will use
a novel combination of laser diagnostic and data analysis techniques to measure
how fluctuations in molecular nitrogen density move between length scales in
premixed flames burning reactants at initially supercritical conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-resolved measurements of the spatially filtered
nitrogen number density and velocity fields will be made in crossed planes using
burst-mode spontaneous Raman scattering. The filtering effect of the observation
process will be determined and tuned through image deconvolution. Hence, the
resultant data will allow explicit determination of the flux of sub-filter
fluctuations through the filter scale based on the dynamics of the filtered
fields. This information will identify whether traditional modeling paradigms
hold for supercritical reacting turbulence and, where necessary, enable the
development of more physically accurate models. It also will provide a unique
data set against which to benchmark simulations of supercritical turbulent
combustion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.