* 1923789
* SpecEES: DISCOVER: Device Identification for Spectrum-optimization using COnVolutional nEural netwoRks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kaushik Chowdhury, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The research objective of this project, called DISCOVER, is to harness the power
of deep machine learning (ML) algorithms to communicate wirelessly with high
spectral efficiency and low power consumption. The techniques will result in
advanced networking protocols that consume minimal resources by securely
identifying the devices that are active in the surrounding environment without
(or with minimal) control signaling. Apart from learning channel usage and
device activity, DISCOVER will allow for rapidly deploying these algorithms in
hardware, so that real-time inferences can be made. Thus, DISCOVER is directly
aligned with the US President's executive order from February 2019 'Maintaining
American Leadership in Artificial Intelligence' that seeks to prioritize
research and development of America's artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities.
DISCOVER aims to bring together industry, academia and government stakeholders
through collaborative workshops towards identifying high priority challenges,
limitations of available data sources, and identify a list of candidate machine
learning solutions that will shape the next generation of wireless technologies.
The open source release of signal datasets and simulation code will foster new
interactions of wireless researchers with core machine learning domain
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DISCOVER has three goals for optimizing spectrum
utilization with overlapping interests of either energy saving or resilience to
identity spoofing through the use of deep learning architectures: &lt;br/&gt;1.
It aims to explore deep convolutional neural network (CNN) architectures that
will allow highly accurate device classification and demonstrate how to
eliminate identifier-related protocol fields. This approach of reducing packet
headers will achieve quantifiable spectrum utilization improvements, especially
for large-scale deployment of the Internet of Things (IoT). &lt;br/&gt;2. It
aims to demonstrate the first learning-in-the-loop radio frequency (RF) system
where spectrum-driven decisions are enabled through real-time deep learning
algorithms implemented directly on the device hardware. This will result in
significant energy savings for embedded IoT devices. &lt;br/&gt;3. The emulation
engine developed in the project will empower users to create custom-signals to
train ML algorithms. Furthermore, it will create community RF signal datasets
that will ensure means of standardized validation for the larger research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.