* 1923589
* EDGE CT: NSF-BSF: Developing Functional Genomics Tools for Emerging Extremophyte Models
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* John Schiefelbein, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

At a time when food security is challenged by diminishing freshwater resources
and other environmental stresses that threaten modern agriculture, developing
crops better adapted for stresses such as drought, cold, high heat, or saline-,
toxic- and nutrient-poor soils is imperative. Plants that grow in naturally
harsh environments present novel genetic resources for understanding their
adaptations to multiple environmental stresses. Recent advances in genomic
sciences enable the use of such wild species to identify unique gene functions
that can be introduced to elite crop cultivars to help meet global agricultural
needs. The goal of this project is to develop a molecular toolkit for two such
wild plants that can be premier models for investigating how plants tolerate
environmental stresses without significant yield losses, and how such traits can
be integrated successfully into current crops. Project aims include developing
methods to detect genes controlling these traits in the wild plants, targeting
specific gene products to uesful tissue or cell types, and effectively
monitoring gene function as an essential step to assessing the suitability of
transferring these gene functions from a wild plant to a crop. This project will
also provide training to graduate students and research scientists to use these
new tools, and aims to inspire the next generation of plant researchers from
K-12 through undergraduate students to look for genetic innovations yet to be
discovered in wild plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deducing genome to phenome
functional relationships is among the predominant goals of biological research,
yet a large gap exists in our understanding of how plants adapt to environmental
stress. Extremophytes are unique in their biology and exhibit many, naturally-
selected adaptations to stresses, thus showing great promise for understanding
genetic mechanisms to develop crops better adapted to varying environments. Two
emerging extremophyte models, Schrenkiella parvula and Eutrema salsugineum, grow
remarkably well under multiple environmental stresses compared to the model
plant, Arabidopsis thaliana and most crops. Despite the availability of high-
quality genomes for these extremophytes, their use in basic research is
constrained by a lack of functional genomic tools and inadequate analytical
infrastructure capable of integrating different data types. The goal is to
develop functional genomics tools to enable the wider use of extremophytes for
discovering genetic mechanisms for stress adaptation. Methods will be developed
to improve transformation efficiency and targeted manipulation of the
extremophyte genomes. The project will create tools to enable investigation of
cell-type specific gene functions via single cell transcriptomics and the
development of genetically encoded biosensors and provide a computational
platform to study extremophyte gene functions. The entire team of investigators
will be committed to a number of activities including workshops organized at
international and regional plant science meetings and production of detailed
online tutorials, to provide training and increase awareness of the resources
generated in this project. The work also includes timely dissemination of the
resources developed, as well as integrated educational outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Enabling
Discovery through GEnomic tools (EDGE) Program and the Plant Genome Research
Program (PGRP) in the Division of Integrated Organismal
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.