* 1923298
* AMPS: Online and Model-Free Optimization of Power and Energy Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Stephen Becker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 356,994.00

Power systems are undergoing a rapid change due to the proliferation of
renewable-based generation and distributed energy resources (DERs). Current
state-of-the-art methods for network monitoring and control need to adapt this
emerging setting, and in particular they must be able to cope with an increased
number of controllable points and faster network-level dynamics that can change
in less than a second. This project advances a program to design new algorithms
that will run faster, and therefore be able to optimize the power grid at fast
time scales, and that will also be able to handle uncertainty and errors in the
model. The algorithms will apply to other critical infrastructures beyond
energy, including transportation and industrial automation. The direct impact to
the power and energy sector, such as the AC power grid and the operation of wind
farms, will be a more efficient use of power and more reliable enforcement of
voltage and current constraints. An indirect impact of the project is the
training of a new generation of students through undergraduate student
involvement, graduate student mentoring and curriculum development, outreach
activities targeted at middle and high school Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) camps, broad dissemination activities, and industrial
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing approaches are not adequate for data-
processing and decision-making in complex power systems operating in highly
dynamic environments because of the following drawbacks: i) batch solution
approaches for optimization problems associated with monitoring and control
tasks may fail to provide solutions at a time scale that match variability of
distribution-level energy resources and non-controllable assets; ii) model-based
optimization approaches require accurate knowledge of the network; and, iii) a
naive online implementation of algorithms that are designed for a batch/static
solution may not provide optimality and convergence guarantees. The proposed
work in this project will significantly extend theory and application of
accelerated methods -- successfully applied in batch optimization -- to time-
varying optimization of networks and networked systems where costs, constraints
and problem inputs evolve during the execution of the algorithmic steps. The
project further investigates the development of online derivative-free
strategies to deal with unknown gradients of the cost function, which apply when
the network model is unknown or difficult to estimate accurately. Major efforts
are devoted to the challenging optimization settings that involve constraints
and non-differentiable terms in the time-varying objective. The proposed efforts
focus on rigorous convergence analysis; the aim is to derive results in terms of
error in the tracking of an optimal solution during the execution of the
algorithms (rather than asymptotic bounds), and enable linear convergence rates
in time-varying settings. Within the power systems area, the proposed research
revisits classical monitoring and optimization tasks -- state estimation, AC
optimal power flow, and yaw control in wind farms just to mention few -- under
dynamic operating conditions; the proposed theoretical approach enables a real-
time execution of these tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.