* 1923803
* Collaborative Research: Delay and Energy: Design Tradeoffs in Spectrally Efficient Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Zixiang Xiong, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Energy consumption has become of increasing importance by the transition in
communications to mobile devices with limited battery capacity. At the same
time, data transmission delay needs to be carefully controlled due to the need
to support the proliferation of time-sensitive services, such as video. Seen
from a user perspective, these are the main things that affect the mobile
experience: energy consumption (how long does the battery last), delay (how long
to wait for content). From a societal perspective, wireless communications
contribute significantly to global energy consumption and carbon dioxide
emissions. An estimate is that currently 0.5-1% of global carbon dioxide
emissions is due directly to wireless communications, comparable to that of air
traffic (2%). At the same time, the number of devices that share the wireless
medium is increasing dramatically. Yet, the desire for low delay and low energy
consumption in congested systems conflict. In order to design future
communication systems, it is therefore necessary to understand the fundamental
tradeoff between energy and delay in congested systems. The insights from this
fundamental analysis will be used to jointly design new communications software
and energy efficient communication hardware, which will be tested in a wireless
testbed. This hardware can be used as a basis for future wireless communication
devices. The project will involve underrepresented minorities, including native
Hawaiians, in undergraduate research experiences to encourage the participation
of these minorities in the STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
understand the factors that influence energy and delay such as the time
characteristics of data to be transmitted and the characteristics of the
channel. To obtain a fundamental understanding of these factors, it is necessary
to analyze the information theory underlying delay and energy, taking into
account realistic features of the systems, including networking and hardware.
The project builds on the recent line of work in information theory on finite
block length communications. Basically, if the block length is infinite, as in
traditional information theory, the delay is also infinite. Therefore, in order
to reach a more fundamental understanding of delay, finite block length analysis
is needed. However, block length is not a direct indicator of delay. Therefore,
finite block length theory has to be developed specifically for investigating
delay and energy. Preliminary results show that delay affects energy consumption
much more strongly than one would expect from bandwidth constraints alone. This
project studies the tradeoff between delay and energy in four steps. First it
develops the basic information theory relating delay and energy. It then applies
this to multiuser systems, where spectral efficiency is essential. In the next
step, it extends the models with realistic hardware constraints. In the final
step, the theory is tested on a hardware testbed with state-of-the-art
coding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.