* 1923692
* EAGER: CloudJoin: Migrating CISE Computing Research Infrastructure to the Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* John Brassil, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 291,995.00

Advances in large-scale data center computing and networking has accelerated
innovation across computer science during the past decade. Large-scale, data-
intensive systems experimentation is increasingly important to accelerating
science, as is developing a workforce capable of solving big data problems on
the large cloud-based application platforms that are increasingly central to the
US economy. To stay relevant in an age of at-scale computer systems research,
the systems research community has pressed operators of Computing Research
Infrastructures (CRI) such as CloudLab and Chameleon Cloud with growing demands
to support larger size experiments. But while commercial compute cloud platforms
have grown exponentially, research infrastructures have grown modestly.
Unfortunately, this `scale' gap seems likely to grow over time, threatening to
inhibit academic researchers from directly innovating in large-scale computing
systems research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cloudjoin project seeks to develop a
long-term, sustainable approach to shrink the scaling gap by creating hybrid
CRIs with elastic computing. The project will develop methods, tools, and best
practices for integration of cloud CRI and commercial compute clouds. Cloudjoin
promises to permit experiments to scale at low cost while maintaining experiment
reproducibility and preserving an intellectual `home' for computing systems
research experimenters. The project explores three cloud integration research
thrusts. In the first research thrust we ask "How should a CRI operator
architect and implement her infrastructure's connectivity to a public cloud?"
The second thrust asks: "How should an experimenter partition compute and
storage resources between CRI and the public cloud?" The final thrust addresses
the complexities of scaling experiments by exploring and embracing professional
quality, multi-cloud management platforms equipped with monitoring, logging,
alerting, error reporting and profiling capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.