* 1923882
* CNH2-S:  Impacts of Urban Rats and Rodent Control on Public Health and Urban Wildlife Conservation
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Seth Magle, Lincoln Park Zoo
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 12/31/2023
* USD 706,511.00

Human societies have lived in conflict with rats for thousands of years. Brown
rats (Rattus norvegicus) can carry several diseases shared with humans, known as
rat-associated zoonoses, such as leptospirosis, Seoul hantavirus, and bubonic
plague. Rats also cause billions of dollars in property damage annually. In
addition to physical health risks, chronic exposure to rats and their associated
property damage can act as a mental health stressor for residents. A better
understanding of what processes increase the risk of disease and mental health
impacts from living with rats will help improve public health in cities around
the world. While little is known about urban rats, the risks associated with rat
infestations are often disproportionately high for low-income communities,
likely due to fewer resources to maintain infrastructure and control rodent
populations. Income disparities between neighborhoods is especially pervasive in
Chicago, Illinois, the city with the most rat complaints per capita in the
United States. This combination of high rat encounter rates and income
disparities in Chicago likely creates further inequities in resident exposure to
rats and disease risk. Frequent negative experiences with rats may also
influence resident attitudes toward other species of urban wildlife. For
example, strong negative attitudes about rats may be associated with negative
attitudes about similar native species such as squirrels. Understanding the
relationships between human attitudes about rats and other wildlife will help to
mitigate any eroding effects of wildlife pests on public support for urban
nature conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this award is to understand
how to mitigate public health risks from rats and advance urban conservation by
studying the interactions between urban residents and brown rats (Rattus
norvegicus). The specific project goals are to: 1) quantify the impacts of rat
infestations on the physical and mental health, attitudes, and approaches to
pest control of socioeconomically diverse urban residents; and 2) quantify the
impacts of pest control initiatives on rat population dynamics, rat disease
ecology, and urban predator health. To achieve these objectives, the research
will integrate data on rats, predators (i.e. cats), and residents in Chicago
neighborhoods that vary in household income. Interviews and surveys will be used
to collect data on resident experiences with rats, mental and physical health,
and attitudes about rats and other urban wildlife species. In the same blocks,
citizen scientists will trap rats and collect fecal samples from free-living
cats. This data will be used to relate local rat abundance and rates of
infection with corresponding resident experiences and attitudes about rats.
Local rates of rat infection will be evaluated with respect to resident
experiences with zoonotic pathways such as being exposed to rat feces or urine.
Predictive models will be developed to identify the socio-ecological contexts in
which risk from rats is highest. To simultaneously quantify the impacts of
rodent control activities on wildlife population health, the research will test
whether rodent control through chemical rodenticides is associated with changes
in the genetic diversity of rats and higher infection risk for Escherichia coli
in both rats and free-living cats. The proposed project will be the first to
quantify the feedbacks between humans and rodent pests and will advance
ecological and public health knowledge applicable to cities around the world.
Further, the project will provide societal benefits by improving public health,
social justice, and support for urban nature conservation while providing
special education and training opportunities in field research for urban and
minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.