* 1923998
* Biogenic Calcium Carbonate Solubilities and Reaction Rates by Lab and Field Saturometry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Matthew Long, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 613,773.00

The ocean actively exchanges carbon dioxide with the atmosphere and is currently
absorbing about a third of the carbon dioxide humans emit through fossil fuel
burning. Because carbon dioxide is acidic, ocean pH drops as it takes up carbon
dioxide, a process known as "ocean acidification". Ocean acidification
negatively affects the health of marine ecosystems by making it harder for
organisms to grow their calcium carbonate shells. Yet, the dissolution of these
calcium carbonate shells in the deep ocean helps neutralize the carbon dioxide
we emit as humans. The extent to which this process takes place is a function of
the solubility of marine calcium carbonate. This project will evaluate the
temperature and pressure effects on the stability of biologically produced
calcium carbonate minerals. The results from this study will allow us to better
predict where, how much, and how fast, carbon dioxide will be neutralized and
stored in the world's ocean. We will also investigate the ways in which small
changes in the chemical composition of calcium carbonate shells - such as the
incorporation of magnesium - influence their stability. This project will also
conduct micro-computed tomography scans of microorganisms' shells to better
visualize them in 3-dimensional detail. We will print these 3-dimensional scans
for use as educational tools in the classroom and in the Woods Hole Visitor
Center. In addition, professional development workshops for high school teacher
on ocean acidification and the importance of marine calcification will be held
yearly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean is the ultimate repository for most of
anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions, which in turn is making ocean chemistry
less favorable for biogenic carbonate precipitation through the process of ocean
acidification. Ocean acidification decreases seawater pH but dissolution of
primarily biogenic carbonate minerals has the capacity to buffer this
acidification and over thousands of years push whole-ocean pH and atmospheric
carbon dioxide to their preindustrial values. Unfortunately, the relationship
between seawater chemistry, carbonate mineral solubility, and the kinetics that
govern carbonate dissolution and precipitation are not fully understood.
Currently, it is clear that relationships based solely on inorganic calcite are
insufficient to describe the cycling of biogenic calcites in the ocean. This
project will conduct a systematic determination of the solubilities and reaction
kinetics of the three most common biogenic carbonates (coccoliths, foraminifera,
and pteropods), both in the laboratory and in the field, using
spectrophotometric pH saturometry. The saturometer incubates calcium carbonate
with seawater in a closed system. During each run, the change in pH within the
saturometer traces the progression of calcium carbonate
dissolution/precipitation as the system approaches equilibrium. The saturometer
therefore has the potential to link mechanistic interpretations of mineral
dissolution/precipitation kinetics to measurements of solubility in a single
experiment. The spectrophotometric pH method uses well-calibrated indicator
dyes, allows solubility and data to be tied to modern pH calibrations and
reference materials, and can be used in the laboratory or deployed on a
hydrowire at sea. Field experiments will be conducted at multiple depths,
elucidating in-situ controls on solubility and kinetics, as well as the
sensitivity of biogenic calcite solubility to temperature and pressure.
Experiments will be conducted from both sides of equilibrium, allowing for
robust determinations of inorganic and biogenic
solubilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.