* 1923733
* SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Efficient and Secure Access to Spectrum up to THz
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Daniel Mittleman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 428,610.00

Since the days of Marconi, critics complained that wireless transmission lacked
security and was so slow that a boy on a pony would be a faster way to transmit
a message, as Lord Byron famously quipped in 1898. Over a century later,
terabit-per-second links in terahertz (THz) scale spectrum are around the corner
and highly directional beams have been decreed secure by design. However, even
THz links can become "too slow" if they suffer from outages while repeatedly re-
aligning beams for mobile clients. Likewise, while 60 gigahertz (GHz) bands have
been lauded for their improved security, unfortunately, even pencil-beam THz-
scale links can be vulnerable to agile eavesdroppers. Consequently, this project
targets to design, implement, and experimentally explore proof-of-concept
systems to realize a Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) architecture with
efficient and secure access to spectrum from 100 GHz up to 1 THz and WLAN-scale
range up to 120 meters. This project will build on fundamental new transmission
capabilities enabled by THz-scale devices and spectrum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first project thrust will realize Leaky
X-Agon, a first-of-its-kind multi-face leaky waveguide WLAN architecture. This
architecture couples frequency and steering angle to provide frequency-selective
adaptive beam steering enabling unprecedented spatial density of links.
Moreover, a new foundation for beam steering and frequency selection is realized
via transmission of a wideband "THz rainbow" on each face: by emitting different
frequencies at different angles, the receiver can identify all propagation paths
and their steering angles simultaneously, as opposed to time-consuming and
inefficient trial-and-error testing that is commonly employed today. The second
project thrust addresses security and provides experimental analysis and
counter-measures for securing spectrum access from 100 GHz to 1 THz. Under a
strong adversary threat model, this project thrust will develop methods using
THz backscatter and THz rainbow distortion to detect and avoid objects that an
eavesdropper may be using to aid interception of a transmission. Moreover, a
novel absorption tuning method is proposed to tune the transmission range so
that interception beyond the location of the intended receiver is not viable.
Using accurate empirical models, the method will tune the carrier frequency to
be close to that of a water vapor absorption resonance, yielding exquisite
control of the atmospheric propagation loss, and therefore of the transmission
range. All project components feature an extensive implementation and
experimental plan for over-the-air experiments and
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.