* 1923059
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 06/30/2020
* USD 639,395.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation for the R/V Roger
Revelle, a 273? general purpose Global vessel. The vessel is operated by Scripps
Institution of Oceanography as part of the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS) research fleet. R/V Roger Revelle is a Global vessel
owned by the Navy. She supports multidisciplinary oceanographic research in all
the world?s ocean basins. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2018, REVELLE completed 262
days, 181 (69%) of which were for NSF. In 2019, Revelle is currently scheduled
with 86 days, 72 (84%) of which are for NSF. The reason there are so few days is
that Revelle plans to spend most of the year in drydock undergoing a mid-life
refit. Much of the instrumentation proposed her would be installed during this
period. The prioritized Instrumentation request includes the
following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Portable Multi Channel Seismic System Components
$679,560&lt;br/&gt;1-meter MOCNESS Nets, shared-use infrastructure
$20,972&lt;br/&gt;Virtual Desktop Infrastructure (VDI) R/V Roger Revelle
$214,920&lt;br/&gt;Network Cabling Refurbishment R/V Roger Revelle
$284,014&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory Infrastructure Refurbishment R/V Roger Revelle
$87,136&lt;br/&gt;Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler Array Replacement
$53,158&lt;br/&gt;Mooring Release/Acoustic Modem $59,488&lt;br/&gt;
$1,399,248&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.