* 1923077
* RUI: Acid Signals and Bacterial Drug Efflux Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Joan Slonczewski, Kenyon College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 560,700.00

Plants produce aromatic acids related to aspirin that may limit or reverse
bacterial drug resistance within the soil environment and gut microbiome.
Exposure to salicylic acid selects for Escherichia coli strains that have lost
multidrug resistance. The mechanism of the increased fitness cost is unclear,
but may involve depletion of the bacterial cell's proton motive force, the
energy source that powers drug efflux pumps. In this project, undergraduate
researchers will dissect the mechanism of how organic acids reverse multidrug
resistance. The "First-years First" program will recruit eight incoming
undergraduate students annually (24 over three years) to conduct research, with
supervision by the principal investigator and a team of advanced undergraduates.
The recruitment program is designed to attract students from economically
limited backgrounds and encourage them to pursue research careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Competition assays by flow cytometry will reveal
which drug-efflux genes of E. coli incur fitness cost in the presence of
salicylate or jasmonate. The role of proton motive force will be tested by using
drug pump blockers, which may decrease the fitness cost of the proton-driven
pumps. The role of specific acid anions will be tested by comparing the effects
of salicylate and jasmonate with that of their methyl esters. The hypothesis of
drug resistance reversal will be extended beyond E. coli by salicylate-dependent
experimental evolution of bacterial species relevant to plant, soil and human
microbiomes, including the plant commensal Pseudomonas fluorescens, the soil
bacterium Bacillus subtilis, and the soil and gut fermenter Enterococcus
faecalis. FACS sorting of ethidium-labeled cells will identify mutants that lose
multidrug pumps. Genomes and transcriptomes of salicylate-evolved clones will
reveal the rewiring of regulatory pathways unique to each
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.