* 1923668
* CNH2-L:  Social, Ecological, and Institutional Dynamics of Human-Wildlife Relations
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Randall Boone, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,562,128.00

This research will advance an integrated socio-environmental framework to
examine the emergent challenges of overabundant wildlife, determine how social
and environmental processes shape human-wildlife interactions, and guide the
design of improved wildlife management strategies in suburban and urban
environments. As wildlife populations in urban and suburban areas grow, people
interact with animals in new ways. Individuals and communities must then decide
if and how to manage these populations. The acceptance, feasibility, and success
of different management approaches will be influenced by the social and
environmental conditions within these communities. Decisions about management
will in turn shape the social and ecological impacts of wildlife populations.
This project will analyze the socio-environmental dynamics that shape deer
populations and deer management strategies in urban and suburban areas of the
northeastern United States. The research will generate new knowledge regarding
the success of various deer management strategies in different socio-
environmental contexts and support the development of decision-making tools to
inform suburban and urban deer management. More broadly, this research will
inform new theory about why human behavior and policy changes in response to
some environmental challenges but not others. In addition, the project will
create interdisciplinary research and training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students and support the development of course materials that use a
case study of suburban deer management to understand the integrated socio-
environmental dynamics of wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concern over the
cascading impacts of increasing populations of certain species has raised
questions about the social and ecological impacts and management of overabundant
wildlife in urban and suburban areas. This research will advance an integrated
socio-environmental framework to examine the emergent challenges surrounding the
growth of white-tailed deer populations in suburban and urban areas of
Massachusetts and New York. This research addresses three linked questions about
the coupled dynamics of deer populations, landscape characteristics, and deer
management strategies: 1) How do changes in deer management institutions, hunter
behaviors, and landscape characteristics shape deer populations? 2) How and why
do particular social and environmental processes trigger changes in deer
management strategies in some circumstances but not others? 3) How does
collaboration (or a lack of collaboration) among land and wildlife managers at
multiple scales influence the human and environmental outcomes of deer
management programs? The investigators will undertake an integrated mixed
methods analysis combining aerial surveys of deer populations, vegetation
sampling, community surveys, in-depth interviews of key actors, and agent-based
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.