* 1923857
* GOALI: SpecEES: Collaborative Research: Lens Antenna Subarrays and 3D Hardware Integration for Energy Efficient and High-Data Rate Mm-Wave Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Stacy Johnson, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The increasing demand for wireless data has led to interest in wireless
communication at mm-wave frequency bands where a large amount of spectrum is
available, thus enabling high data rates for next generation wireless networks.
However, conventional mm-wave links require high power transmitters, making
transmitter efficiency critical. Additionally, these links must support multiple
users at the same time. This project will develop both energy and spectrum
efficient transmitters and receivers operating at mm-wave frequencies with
innovation at all layers of the wireless link from communication protocols to
transmitter/receiver integration circuits and antenna/lens design. In addition,
advanced 3D printing techniques for low-cost manufacturing of mm-wave arrays
will be studied. From the technology perspective, the proposed mm-wave network
architectures offering high bandwidth, low latency and low-cost communications
solutions will create more high-tech jobs and have major economic impact. The
educational impact of the project includes curriculum enhancement, graduate
course development, and research training for graduate students which also
includes an emphasis on professional development and research management. The
project will also expand research opportunities for high-school students and
students from underrepresented groups, creating and expanding the pipeline of
STEM students. A strong collaboration with industry partners will improve
dissemination of the technology advances along with important training
opportunities for students working on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massive
antenna arrays, with hundreds of elements, capable of high gain and multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO)/multi-beamforming are attractive for multi-user
wireless links at mm-wave frequencies. However, achieving such MIMO operation
through digital beamforming is prohibitive due to costly and power-hungry mm-
wave signal chains, analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog converters required
for each antenna element. As a solution, hybrid MIMO architectures with reduced
number of mm-wave signal chains have recently attracted interest for practical
realizations of multiple MIMO stream transmissions. However, these architectures
still exhibit drawbacks in terms of spectrum and energy efficiency and do not
address hardware complexity issues. This project aims to address fundamental
challenges in energy efficiency, spectrum efficiency, and hardware complexity in
large mm-wave arrays through a lens antenna subarray (LAS) approach. The
research plan is based on an end-to-end investigation that includes antenna
array designs within the LAS scheme, mm-wave transceivers that leverage LAS,
physical and media access control layer algorithms utilizing LAS, and low-cost
packaging with emerging additive manufacturing technology. The project is led by
the University of South Florida and Oregon State University, leveraging
industrial collaboration partnerships with Keysight Technologies for mm-wave
device, system, network characterization, and GlobalFoundries for silicon
integrated circuit design and fabrication. The main contribution of this project
is the LAS architecture: It outperforms traditional hybrid MIMO solutions by
reducing hardware complexity and power consumption with minimal impact on
wireless channel capacity per chain, resulting in significantly higher energy
efficiency measured by data rate per unit power. The second major advance is to
address system and hardware challenges in realizing scalable integrated mm-wave
LAS transceivers to achieve this superior energy efficiency. The third major
advance is addressing the cost effectiveness of mm-wave network deployment
within the mass-scale communications market through innovative packaging and
integration solutions using additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.