* 1923965
* Collaborative Research: Shifting the Hypoxia Paradigm - New Directions to Explore the Spread and Impacts of Ocean/Great Lakes Deoxygenation
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Karin Limburg, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 904,772.00

Ocean oxygen loss (deoxygenation) is increasing due to climate warming. This
warming, together with nutrient loading, is causing many marine and freshwater
systems to experience increasing episodes of hypoxia (low oxygen) of greater
duration and intensity. Impacts on fish and fisheries have been difficult to
quantify; direct observation has been challenged by a lack of long-term exposure
indicators. This team has successfully refined the use of fish chemical
biomarkers in fish otoliths (earstones) to directly assess lifetime hypoxia
exposure in fishes. This project will those findings to look for additional
biomarkers and models, to expand our understanding of how hypoxia affects fish
and their food webs, contaminant transfers, and ecosystem services including
economic impacts. The project includes a unique way of training students in
science communication, posing the question: What forms of media and "messaging
strategies" about deoxygenation are most effective at raising public awareness
and understanding? Students are developing entries for PlanetForward's
Storyfest, which is a contest to tell compelling stories to foster environmental
understanding and solutions. Students from historically underrepresented,
economically disadvantaged backgrounds are particularly sought out to
participate. The investigators will engage with regional, national, and
international management agencies and other relevant stakeholder groups to share
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses a novel, linked set
of interdisciplinary studies of food webs, and ecosystem services assessment.
The thematic questions explored in this project are: 1. How does hypoxia alter
habitat use for fishes? 2. How does hypoxia-altered habitat use and habitat
productivity change food webs? 3. How does hypoxia affect/enhance trophic
transfer of methylmercury? 4. How do hypoxia-induced changes in food webs affect
aquatic ecosystem services? The set of linked studies will employ chemical
analyses of otoliths and eye lenses, combined with chemical analyses of muscle
tissues (Questions 1 and 3), physiologically-structured food web modeling
informed by monitoring time-series (Questions 2 and 4), and a scoping workshop
to address ecosystem services (Question 4). The investigators are using a
"trans-basin" comparative approach to system-specific responses, studying fishes
in Lake Erie, the Baltic Sea, and a Gulf of Mexico estuary. They study three
species from each system that represent different degrees of benthic reliance,
to discern differential responses to the increasingly hypoxic environment. This
research provides novel insight about variable biotic responses to oxygen loss
and the impacts on ecosystem functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.