* 1923206
* Molecular mechanisms of chromosome repression and dosage compensation in C. elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Gyorgyi Csankovszki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 814,069.00

Molecular mechanisms of chromosome repression and dosage compensation in C.
elegans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phenomenon of "dosage compensation" in animals
is a chromosome-wide process that equalizes the expression of X chromosomes in
the different sexes. This project will investigate how the positions and
structure of X chromosomes in the nucleus influences how genes are repressed in
the model organism, C. elegans. The research will be performed by graduate and
undergraduate students, who will be trained in research methods, data analysis,
and scientific writing in preparation for future careers in science. In
addition, the Principle Investigator and students will partner with the
University of Michigan Museum of Natural History to be trained as Science
Communication Fellows. They will then share research results and insights with
museum visitors through Scientist Spotlight activities and Investigate Lab
Public Programs. The Principle Investigator will also participate in museum-led
outreach activities for underserved middle school students through the Science
for Tomorrow Program, and for lay adult audiences through the Science Cafe
Program. The Principle Investigator and students will also arrange more informal
scientific outreach visits to local K-12 schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate the impact of chromosome structure and organization on
development by studying the model system of dosage compensation in the nematode
C. elegans. In this organism, a complex resembling the mitotic chromosome
condensation machinery binds both X chromosomes of XX hermaphrodite to
downregulate gene expression two-fold and bring gene expression levels to that
seen in XO males. During this process, the X chromosomes are compacted and
tethered to the nuclear lamina to stabilize repression of genes. How this
nuclear reorganization takes place is not understood at the molecular level. The
project will investigate the contribution of a nuclear lamina-localized protein,
CEC-4, by investigating its chromosomal localization patterns, determining its
binding partners, and analyzing the contributions of each to chromosome and
nuclear organization. The project will also investigate the contribution of the
nuclear hormone receptor SEX-1. Genetic evidence indicates that SEX-1 mutations
partially disrupt dosage compensation making the process more sensitive to
further disruptions. The project will identify the chromosomal targets of SEX-1,
and will determine how these targets contribute to dosage compensation and how
SEX-1 and CEC-4 cooperate in these processes. The research will involve the use
gene editing technologies to generate tagged proteins and mutant versions,
genomics to obtain a high-resolution map of chromosomal association patterns and
gene expression effects, and superresolution microscopy to analyze the effects
on chromosome structure and nuclear organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.