* 1923221
* AMPS: Model Reduction for Analysis, Identification, and Optimal Design of Power Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Mark Embree, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 376,480.00

Power networks are a rich source of dynamical systems that play a critical role
in the infrastructure of modern society. Costly computer simulations are needed
to model the impact of virtually any planning, monitoring, control and stability
analysis task of the power grid, due to its scale and complexity. Such
simulations become only more complicated with the growth of renewable energy
generation such as solar and wind. To expedite dynamic simulation and to aid the
design and optimization of power grids, this project pursues a suite of new
model reduction algorithms tailored to the special considerations of power
network modeling. The proposed methods will take advantage of the large volume
of observation data that is available, moving toward algorithms for reliably
estimating the state of the grid. This project supports 2 graduate students each
year of the 3 year project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
analyze new approaches to model reduction that are specially adapted to the
needs of power grid operation and analysis. The project will pursue both
projection-based methods and data-driven algorithms, considering nonlinear power
network equations and their linearization. The resulting methods seek reliable,
high-fidelity, low-order models that preserve critical physics-based structural
features and parametric dependence germane to power grid dynamics. Data-driven
modeling frameworks will be refined to allow for rapid model updating using near
real-time observation streams from phasor measurement units. Reduced models will
also contribute to the development of cost-effective power grid optimization
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.