* 1923259
* EDGE CT: Enabling cell-specific functional genomics in a colonial animal
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Christine Schnitzler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,625,787.00

Public Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phylum Cnidaria is a group of
gelatinous, primarily marine animals that includes jellyfish, corals, and sea
anemones. Most cnidarians are structurally simple and have radial symmetry. One
reason that cnidarians are important is that they are the closest relatives of
all bilaterally symmetrical animals, a group that includes insects, worms, and
vertebrates. Because of this, studying the molecular or cellular basis of a
biological trait in a cnidarian allows biologists to infer how that trait might
have functioned in the ancestors of cnidarians and bilaterians. This, in turn,
can help scientists understand how the trait currently functions in more complex
animals, including humans. In this project, the research team will develop tools
to study how genes function in a cnidarian model organism called Hydractinia.
Hydractinia is an ideal model organism because it is inexpensive and easy to
maintain, and not restricted by ethical considerations. In addition, Hydractinia
is a model for many processes that are interesting to biologists studying more
complex organisms, including regeneration, stem cell maintenance, and the
rejection of transplanted tissues. The goal of this project is to allow
biologists to study any Hydractinia gene in any cell type at any spatial
location and at any timepoint during the animal's life. The tools developed in
this project will be paired with rapid dissemination efforts, including the
sharing of protocols and materials with the broader scientific community. In
addition, the principal investigators and their teams share a strong commitment
to education and outreach activities, and have planned creative methods to
engage people, including K-12 students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cnidarians are morphologically simple animals and
the closest relatives of bilaterians. As such, they are key to understanding the
evolutionary origin of many bilaterian features. Despite the availability of
some functional genomics tools in a few cnidarians, it is not currently possible
to control gene expression at the level of cell type or temporal/spatial
location. This is particularly problematic for the study of genes for which
overexpression or knockdown/knockout is embryonic lethal, and for studying
context-specific gene function. Moreover, due to the diversity of cnidarian
characters, it is either difficult or impossible to study many cnidarian traits,
including coloniality, morphological polymorphism, allorecognition, and stem
cell pluripotency in existing cnidarian model species that lack these features.
This project aims to develop cell type-specific functional genomics in the
hydrozoan Hydractinia symbiolongicarpus. Work in Aim 1 will focus on generating
an atlas of gene expression for all adult Hydractinia cell types, using single-
cell RNAseq data, followed by identifying and validating exclusive cell type
markers and generating transgenic reporter animals for as many cell types as
possible. Work in Aim 2 will develop a recombinase-based conditional gene
knockout system including strains that permit cell type-specific recombinases
and strains for conditional alleles in Hydractinia. A diverse set of activities
have been planned to rapidly disseminate the tools and techniques resulting from
this project to the broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.