* 1923707
* CNH2:  Socio-Ecological Feedbacks of Marine Protected Areas: Dynamics of Small-Scale Fishing Communities and Inshore Marine Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Fairchild, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 631,787.00

This project is jointly funded by Dynamics of Integrated Socio-Environmental
Systems (CNH2), and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine protected areas can help recover a
region's marine biodiversity and fisheries resources. However, establishing
effective protected areas remains a challenge both ecologically and socially. In
most marine systems, basic patterns and interactions between biological and
social variables remain poorly understood. This project develops a systems-based
model that spans multiple disciplines, including conservation biology,
sociology, and political science, to holistically evaluate marine protected area
effectiveness. Oriented towards building a framework to quantify and qualify
feedbacks within reef-based, marine, socio-ecological systems, this project
focuses on the reciprocal interactions between ecological dynamics, marine
conservation strategies, and fishing practices in coastal Madagascar, an island
in the process of tripling its marine protected area network. This research
examines differences in the marine species richness, abundance, and biomass of a
suite of marine organisms between protected areas and control sites. It also
draws on both qualitative and quantitative social data to evaluate harvest
practices, as well as fishers' perceptions of and participation in marine
protected area management. This project contributes broadly to the fields of
marine conservation and political ecology and, more specifically, to the
literature on protected areas as a fisheries management tool. It also addresses
community-based conservation and the role of gender in natural resource
management. Using a holistic analysis that is attentive to gender, class, and
race dynamics within a community, this research explores the relationship
between community engagement and the abundance and diversity of fish species
within each marine protected area. As a corollary, this research explores the
relationship between community engagement and the proportion of shorter-ranging
(vs. longer-ranging) marine species fished by a community. This will be the
first such study to examine these relationships in tandem. Broader impacts of
the work include development of a coupled socio-ecological model of how
different levels of community engagement, different marine harvest targets, and
modes of harvest influence the ecological effect of marine protected areas and
vice versa. It also includes international collaboration with institutions and
faculty and students at a university in Madagascar to cultivate relationships
between American and Malagasy students, researchers, and key US-based
international conservation organizations working to improve marine conservation
globally. It will also contribute to the growing body of applied scholarship
investigating the link between conservation management strategies and socio-
ecological outcomes. Due to its focus on local participation, specifically the
role of gendered participation in conservation, this research will illuminate
ways in which the application of resource-use rules and regulations, as well as
conservation strategies, can be more equitable. Other broader impacts include US
undergraduate student training in convergent research, and support of three
investigators, two of whom are early career and two who are from a gender
underrepresented in the sciences at three institutions in two EPSCoR states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine protected areas can help recover a region's marine
biodiversity and fisheries resources. This work will develop a systems-based
model that spans multiple disciplines, including conservation biology,
sociology, and political science, to holistically evaluate marine protected area
effectiveness. Oriented towards building a framework to quantify and qualify
feedbacks within reef-based, marine, socio-ecological systems, this work will
investigate the relationship between (a) ecosystem health (fish abundance,
diversity, and size); (b) fisheries targets (species and fishing intensity); and
(c) community engagement (the proportion and identity of individuals involved in
monitoring, enforcing, or decision-making). The work focuses on the reciprocal
interactions between the ecosystems, community engagement, and harvest practices
associated with small-scale fisheries of Madagascar, an island in the process of
tripling its marine protected area network. Drawing on data collected via
underwater surveys and quadrat sampling in three regions of the island,
including six present marine protected areas and four unprotected control areas,
this research compares differences in species richness, relative abundance, and
biomass between the two types of areas. The research draws on both qualitative
and quantitative social data through semi-structured interviews and randomized
surveys of individuals in coastal villages adjacent to each site concerning
harvest practices as well as fishers' perceptions of and participation in marine
protected area management. Using these data, this research parameterizes a
coupled socio-ecological model to explore how different levels of community
engagement, different harvest targets, and modes of harvest influence the
ecological effect of a marine protected area and vice versa. Due to its unique
characteristics, fishing communities in Madagascar form a robust pilot area
where there is tight coupling between social and ecological variables. Local
communities harvesting marine species are also engaged in marine protected area
management and harvest is spatially concentrated in the reef system adjacent to
each fishing village. Similarly, Madagascar is an ideal model system, given the
wide spectrum of community engagement in marine protected area management.
Results of the research will not only illuminate processes associated with
marine protected areas in Madagascar, but also the complex dynamics of coupled
marine fishery social-ecological systems in general. The project contributes
broadly to the fields of marine conservation and political ecology and, more
specifically, to the use of protected areas as a fisheries management tool,
community-based conservation, and gender and natural resource management. The
hypothesis that community engagement is positively correlated with an overall
abundance and diversity of fish species within each marine protected area will
be examined. In addition, the work will examine whether community engagement is
positively correlated with the proportion of shorter-ranging (vs. longer-
ranging) marine species fished by a community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.