* 1923542
* CS For All:RPP - Booting Up Computer Science in Wyoming
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Adam Myers, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2024
* USD 999,929.00

Wyoming recently mandated that computer science instruction be provided in K-12
schools by 2022, and there is an urgent need for designing instruction that can
integrate computer science into the teaching of other subjects. This project
assembles a network improvement community comprised of partners from the
University of Wyoming, community colleges, Wyoming school districts, the Wyoming
Library System, the Wyoming Department of Education, and local software
development firms. The community meets once monthly over the duration of the
project to collaborate stakeholder agendas for meeting the project goals. The
community enlists K-8 teachers from across the state to experience professional
development and collaborate on integrating computer science into their
instruction of STEM and social science topics. The project is producing units
for teachers, who are implementing these units with support from master teachers
and educational scholars. The community serves as a forum for teachers to
debrief and learn from each other about ways to improve their instruction and
design of the curricular units. Libraries in the state system act as partners
for dissemination to rural areas of the innovative instructional
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is preparing 150 K-8 teachers and
state librarians from all disciplines to integrate computer science into their
teaching. The project is reaching almost half of all K-8 students in Wyoming.
The research questions address how teachers use modeling practices as supports
for student understanding of algorithms and coding in a variety of ways. The
curricula involve cyber security as well as other topics relevant to measurement
in mathematics and social studies topics that involve social concerns like
voting. Data sources include teacher lesson plans and recordings of their
instructional implementation, scoring of each of these according to a rubric,
meeting notes of monthly meetings, and results from pre-post student
assessments. Evaluation focuses on the meeting of project goals and the quality
of the management of the network improvement community. This project is jointly
funded by CS for All and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.