* 1923552
* Exploring Computation Integrated into Technology and Engineering (ExCITE)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Janet Kolodner, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,567.00

The International Technology and Engineering Educators Association (ITEEA)
proposes a project--Exploring Computation Integrated into Technology and
Engineering (ExCITE)--to prepare high school technology and engineering
(T&amp;E) teachers to teach computer science (CS) and computational thinking
(CT) in their classrooms. The project will leverage the NSF-funded Beauty and
Joy of Computing (BJC), an Advanced Placement CS Principles course, enhancing it
with real-world, hands-on problem-solving challenges to increase student
engagement and better suit the design-based pedagogy employed by T&amp;E and
many Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) teachers. It will design
and implement a professional development (PD) program that prepares and supports
T&amp;E teachers in teaching this enhanced course. The course, BJC-T&amp;E, will
be offered as part of the ITEEA's flagship Engineering by Design (EbD) national
curriculum, which will significantly broaden participation in CS and CT for a
large cohort of students (and their teachers) and expand access to BJC-T&amp;E
to diverse populations nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ExCITE will employ a
Research Practitioner Partnership (RPP) that includes CS faculty from North
Carolina State University and Boston College, researchers and T&amp;E curriculum
experts from Hofstra University's Center for STEM Research, and state education
departments and local school districts in Maryland and Virginia. The RPP
framework ensures that all stakeholders have been fully engaged in the
development and implementation of the PD and research and evaluation program.
Through a full spectrum of PD workshops with follow-on support, ExCITE will
prepare 190 T&amp;E educators from geographically, socioeconomically, racially,
and ethnically diverse regions to effectively integrate CS and CT into high
school T&amp;E curricula. ExCITE's RPP will use a Design-Based Implementation
Research model, initially investigating two research questions: (RQ1) How can a
PD program be designed and optimized to support high school T&amp;E teachers in
learning and effectively teaching BJC-T&amp;E? and (RQ2) To what extent and
under what conditions does the integration of CS skills into T&amp;E using
design-based real-world problems broaden participation of districts, teachers,
and students, particularly those who do not normally adopt, teach or enroll in
CS courses? The project will also include an evaluation that will document and
assess the organization and functioning of the RPP, the PD implementation,
revisions to the PD model, classroom testing, and dissemination of outcomes and
research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.