* 1923363
* Additive Nanomanufacturing of Multifunctional Materials and Hybrid Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nima Shamsaei, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2023
* USD 398,925.00

This grant supports research to fill the scientific gap pertaining to additive
manufacturing of multifunctional materials and hybrid structures for
applications spanning from electronics and sensing to quantum materials and
devices. While a variety of additive manufacturing processes are capable of
creating complex macroscopic large-scale single-material objects, printing of
nano-scale multifunctional materials, e.g., piezoelectric, ferromagnetic,
composites, and hybrid devices is challenging due to limited source materials
and lack of suitable fabrication systems. This award supports fundamental
research to provide needed knowledge for creating a platform that is capable of
generating, delivering, and sintering a variety of metallic, semiconducting,
insulating as well as multifunctional nanoparticles on demand, to fabricate
durable and reliable hybrid structures and devices layer-by-layer. The unique
ability to generate such materials and devices directly on conformal surfaces
makes this approach an attractive solution for several applications in energy,
biomedical, automotive and aerospace industries, which ultimately benefits the
U.S. economy. This research creates synergy amongst several disciplines
including manufacturing, materials science, mechanics, and electronics. The
multi-disciplinary approach helps broaden the participation of a diverse group
of students in research and positively impacts engineering education and skilled
workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to establish the
experimental foundation underpinning additive nanomanufacturing (ANM),
overcoming the existing barriers in fabricating multifunctional hybrid
structures and devices with nanoscale features and capable of tolerating service
environments. The research employs nonequilibrium processes, pulsed laser
ablation (PLA) and laser sintering, to control the synthesis and assembly of
various multifunctional nanoparticle building-blocks into hybrid structures and
devices that possess complex functionalities. The research team aims to
understand the process of formation and identify the structures of functional
building-blocks manufactured by in-situ PLA process and explore their real-time
laser sintering/crystallization into larger structures in a layer-by-layer
fashion. Specifically, this research is designed to elucidate i) how
nanoparticles form in the gas-phase by atmospheric pressure PLA process, ii) how
these nanoparticles interact with each other, iii) how their phases and
structures evolve under the laser sintering conditions, and iv) what the
emerging process-structure-property relationships are that enable fabrication of
durable hybrid structures with enhanced performance. Upon establishing the
process window for ANM of barium titanate (BTO) and indium tin oxide (ITO),
their hybrid structures and devices are printed on a flexible substrate to
measure their mechanical, electrical, and piezoelectric properties and ensure
their functionality and structural integrity. This research unveils a new
manufacturing concept that enables the fabrication of multifunctional materials
and hybrid structures employing a 'design for application' approach to meet both
structural and functional requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.