* 1923495
* Collaborative Research:  SG:  Clonality and the scope for adaptation in heterogeneous environments
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Maria Orive, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 06/30/2024
* USD 162,324.00

All species exist in a variety of environments. How a species adapts across
those environments determines its survival in a particular location. This also
determines the species range over time. The type of reproduction shown by an
organism can have profound consequences for that adaptation across a varied
landscape. One key reproductive mode, partial clonality, which includes both
asexual reproduction and sexual reproduction, is found in many organisms. These
include species that influence many important ecosystems functions. Partial
clonality is also found in many pathogens, pests, and invasive species. This
research will develop mathematical models that explore how partial clonality and
local environmental variation interact to shape the evolution of such species.
The results of this research will help identify key aspects of populations that
make them especially vulnerable to changing environmental conditions, leading to
population decline and even extinction. Conversely, factors that allow
populations to more easily adapt to new environments will also be determined. An
important impact of this work is its applicability to our understanding of
invasive species and emerging infectious diseases. Broader impacts also include
increased mathematical literacy and a better understanding of the linkages
between the biological sciences, mathematics, and statistics for both graduate
and undergraduate students trained under this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study will explore the differences in the average selective regime experienced
by clonal verses sexual offspring and how that may influence realized patterns
of adaptation across a variable landscape. Of particular interest is the
influence on genomic diversity, and a population's ability to persist under
environmental change. Two complementary approaches will be utilized to address
these complexities: (1) analytical models combining stage-structured life
histories and phenotypic evolution and (2) individual-based forward-time
simulation models allowing for consideration of important aspects of
stochasticity in both evolution and demography will be applied. Together these
two modeling methods will clarify the integrated effect of reproductive mode and
variable selective environment in shaping the dynamics of
species&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.