* 1923094
* Adult neural stem cell self-regulation via soluble growth factor
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Elizabeth Kirby, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 07/31/2022
* USD 900,000.00

Brain stem cells have great potential for treating neurological disorders, but
this potential remains unrealized because of an incomplete understanding of how
these cells maintain their immature status. In the brain of adult mammals,
neural stem cells are found in a few, isolated places, including the
hippocampus, where they continue to create new neurons that contribute to
healthy memory function. Pilot data generated for this proposal found that adult
hippocampal neural stem cells express a biochemical growth factor (vascular
endothelial growth factor [VEGF]) that is essential for their long-term survival
and maintenance. VEGF may act on these cells in several possible ways, and the
proposed studies will determine which of these possible mechanisms VEGF uses to
maintain brain stem cells. The results of this research will have a major impact
on the design of stem cell-based therapies by revealing mechanisms that growth
factors use to support stem cells and enhance their survival. In addition, this
work will have an impact on the local community via a specialized program
promoting high school stem cell education, support for a new Brain Bee outreach
program, and general outreach that will educate the public about stem cell
biology and its potential role in medicine.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
persistence of neural stem cells (NSCs) in the adult mammalian hippocampus is
highly conserved across species, yet the molecular mechanisms that regulate
maintenance of these NSCs are unresolved. Numerous studies show that local
signals from neighboring cells help maintain NSCs, but less attention has been
given to how NSCs self-regulate. Our preliminary data show that adult
hippocampal NSCs and their progenitor progeny (NSPCs) self-maintain their own
stemness via expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). While
soluble proteins are classically conceptualized as signaling by binding to
receptors on the cell surface, they can also act through two alternative routes
that are less-frequently studied: 1) via intracrine activation of receptors in
endocytic vesicles, and 2) via transmission between cells in exosomes. Pilot
data show that VEGF exists in all of these cellular compartments, but which ones
are essential for VEGF maintenance of stemness is unknown. The proposed
experiments will use in-vitro and in-vivo murine models to determine which of
these methods of VEGF transmission (paracrine extracellular, intracrine and/or
paracrine exosomal) are active in NSPCs and essential for self-maintenance of
stemness. The proposed work will provide a major advance in understanding for
the largely uninvestigated field of non-canonical pathways for adult NSPC self-
maintenance via soluble signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.