* 1923173
* Age differences in when - not whether - sensory regions are recruited during memory retrieval
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Kensinger, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 635,528.00

With the population aging and older adults staying in the workforce longer, the
need to understand the memory changes that occur with aging is more urgent than
ever. Although multiple theories have been proposed to explain age-related
changes occurring in the lab, there is reason to believe that some laboratory
assessments of memory may overestimate age-related deficits. Such
overestimations can cause researchers and practitioners to propose and implement
ineffective support strategies and solutions for older adults. The proposed
research examines the possibility that researchers have been systematically
misinterpreting age-related changes in memory by not giving older adults enough
time to complete the task. The research looks at individual differences across
individuals, as well as at changes within an individual over time, to test
multiple competing theories that have been proposed to explain these changes.
The outcomes of this research will improve the likelihood of eventual
translational impact of laboratory studies, opening the possibility for new
types of strategies that older adults can be taught to maximize their chance of
memory success. This project will also encourage communication of a realistic
and positive portrayal of memory changes with aging to individuals who will
benefit the most from this knowledge - older adults and individuals in the
community who regularly engage with and teach older adults - using social media
and in-person events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Memory complaints are common among
older adults, and even healthy aging is associated with significant alterations
in memory performance across tasks and domains. A prevailing view in the
cognitive aging literature is that such changes in older adults are related to
ineffective recruitment of sensory regions due to a global sensory deficit. The
prominent piece of evidence in support of this theory from the cognitive
neuroscience literature has been the prevalence of age-related decreases in
posterior sensory recruitment across cognitive domains. Recent research has
drawn the generality of this conclusion into question by revealing that age
differences in sensory recruitment during memory tasks can reflect shifts in
when sensory processes are engaged during retrieval rather than in whether they
are engaged. In other words, aging may not strip away older adults' ability to
engage sensory processes in the service of memory; but it may prevent them from
engaging the processes in the same, fast manner as young adults. The proposed
research brings this new possibility into focus, honing in on mechanisms that
lead to temporal shifts in the recruitment of sensory regions and the behavioral
consequences of these shifts. This research examines possible alternatives to
the standard sensory deficit hypothesis, using cross-sectional and longitudinal
designs. To accomplish the research aims, this proposal brings together a team
of researchers who have a history of collaboration and complementary expertise
in the cognitive neuroscience of aging and memory, structural MRI analysis,
physiological age-related neural changes, and quantitative
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.