* 1923779
* The 36th Annual Interdisciplinary Plant Group Symposium:  Plant Signaling in Biotic and Abiotic Stress, May 29-31, 2019, Columbia, Missouri
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Scott Peck, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 13,800.00

Earth's climate is changing, and with it the growth conditions of the crops and
animals we depend upon change too. These changes affect many aspects of our
lives and threaten our food supply, necessitating both understanding and action.
Changes in weather conditions such as heat or cold waves, drought, or flooding
can directly impact the growth of crops, as well as alter the balance between
crop plants and the pathogens they encounter, potentially resulting in large-
scale outbreaks of diseases. In addition, some of these changes can occur
simultaneously, for example during a combination of a prolonged drought period
and a heat wave, resulting in devastating impacts on our agriculture and
economy. How to prepare for such changes and how to attempt to mitigate their
impact directly depends on the understanding of basic mechanisms underlying the
interaction of plants with different biotic and abiotic stresses, as well as
their combination. To address these challenges, as well as to enhance the
understanding of basic signaling mechanisms underlying the interaction of plants
with different biotic and abiotic stresses, a new addition is organized to the
Annual Interdisciplinary Plant Group (IPG) Symposium entitled: "Plant Signaling
in Biotic and Abiotic Stress".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference entitled:
"Plant Signaling in Biotic and Abiotic Stress" will provide a forum in which
faculty, students, and postdoctoral fellows, from diverse backgrounds, can
interact with prominent scholars in the plant biology community who are all
studying signal transduction mechanisms that control plant responses to biotic
and abiotic stresses, as well as their integration. The intent is to provide a
platform that promotes cross-disciplinary interactions, networking, and an
exchange of ideas. The expected outcomes of the meeting are: (a) enhanced
understanding of how different stresses integrate at the molecular level; (b)
enhanced understanding of how this information is communicated from one or more
local cells to the entire plant (systemic signaling); and (c) uncovering of key
signaling hubs that could be manipulated for enhancing the tolerance of plants
to their environment. The planned symposium includes a concerted effort to
broaden the participation of undergraduate students, and includes women,
minority and young scientists in a significant role as speakers. This award was
co-funded by the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the
Integrative Ecological Physiology Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.