* 1923387
* Following the Trail of Fukushima Tracers: Examining 7 Years of North Pacific Mode Water Evolution using Radionuclide Observations and High-Resolution Simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Alison Macdonald, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 743,092.00

An accident at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plants (FDNPP) in northern
Japan resulted in the release of large quantities of radio-isotopes in 2011. As
the water containing these tracers spreads across the Pacific Ocean, it presents
a unique opportunity to view the transformation and evolution of mode waters, a
thick layer of nearly homogenous properties within the typically layered
structure of the interior ocean. The collected radio-isotope measurements from
7-years of observation across the N Pacific basin will be combined with other
water properties either measured simultaneously with the isotope measurements or
by the Argo network of autonomous profiling floats and augmented with
simulations from a high-resolution numerical model to investigate the transport
pathways and 3-D distribution of the isotope-tagged water masses formed in 2011.
The study moves beyond the question of how far and fast various levels of
radioactivity have spread, to employing the knowledge this unique tracer can
provide about underlying physical processes and the role of North Pacific mode
waters in transporting, mixing and storing the characteristics they gain from
the atmosphere and surrounds at the time of formation. Conclusions drawn about
the patterns and timing of basin-scale upper-ocean mixing and advective
processes will be relevant to those seeking to understand ocean heat content,
nutrients, biological production, CO2 uptake and ocean acidification. The study
will have 4 science-related impacts: 1) improved understanding of ocean
transport processes in 4-D; 2) clarifying the role of mode waters in physical,
biological, chemical cycles, and ultimately, climate change; 3) assessing the
reliability of a high-resolution data-assimilating model; and 4) providing
insight for future radionuclide sampling in the North Pacific. This project will
continue to support three PIs who have formed a team combining their varied
expertise and backgrounds including theoretical, observational and model-based
oceanographic research. During the 2nd year of the project, a guest student will
be mentored and encouraged to participate in the physical analysis of cesium
observations and/or a simulation experiment. The group will continue, as in the
past, to offer potential projects and mentoring to WHOI Summer Student Fellows
and mentor science fair students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the
information provided by the one-time release of radio-isotopes (Cs 134, Cs 137,
and Sr 90 with ~2, ~30 and ~29 year half-lives, respectively), as measured
across the Pacific between 2011 and 2018 to investigate the evolution of North
Pacific mode waters (NPMW) from their formation in the west to their circulation
around the gyres. The goal is to carry out a targeted analysis of the now
7-year-long international basin-wide FDNPP observed record of radionuclides,
combined with other simultaneously observed water properties (e.g. temperature
(T), salinity (S), oxygen, other tracers, velocity etc. as well as T &amp; S
from profiling floats) and augmented with numerical simulations based on a
state-of-the-art high-resolution data assimilating model to investigate the
4-dimensional transport pathways and evolution of NPMW tagged with the FDNPP
radionuclide signal. In particular, the analysis will examine: a) the extent to
which these waters keep their key oceanographic properties, specifically their
potential density and potential vorticity, over the course of 7 years; b) the
extent to which the movement of NPMW are constrained by along-isopycnal
advection; c) the intensity of diapycnal mixing across a range of potential
densities from the surface to 1000 m; d) the origins, residence times, and fate
of the various varieties of mode waters; e) the importance of the timing of the
radionuclide discharge to the eventual basin scale patterns of the signal; and
f) the extent to which the high resolution model can be trusted to reproduce the
4-dimensional movement and evolution of these water masses on interannual to
decadal time scales in the Pacific Ocean. These scientific goals seek to extend
the findings from prior research that has employed the unique cesium signature
from the 2011 FDNPP accidental injection of radionuclides to the ocean to better
understand circulation pathways and mixing in the western and eastern North
Pacific. In this new study, the tools honed in previous efforts will be used to
expand the focus to include the full breadth of the North Pacific Basin wherever
FDNPP cesium observations are available and to press forward in time to 7 years
after the accident through the inclusion of the many data sets recently made
publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.