* 1923042
* Study of Convective Hazards under Anthropogenic Climate Change using innovative approaches
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Sonia Lasher-Trapp, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 625,498.00

It is difficult to assess how severe thunderstorms and tornadoes may change in a
warmer climate because various factors dictate the strength and frequency of
hail, severe winds, and tornadoes. Prior efforts to determine potential changes
in severe weather have been based on indirect and statistical measures of the
likelihood for severe weather. In this project, the research team will instead
investigate historical severe weather events and then modify their environments
to match outputs from climate model simulations. The result of the project will
be a better physical understanding of the potentials causes and frequency of
these hazards. An additional effort will use population and housing data to help
estimate the impacts of severe weather hazards in a warmer climate, thereby
addressing human vulnerability to these hazards. Graduate students would be
involved in the project, ensuring the professional development of the next
generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct a
numerical modeling study using the pseudo-global-warming (PGW) approach, wherein
a variety of historical convective-weather events will be simulated both in
their true 4D environment as well as in a 4D environment modified by a measure
of climate change. The research team argues that past work, including their own,
on the topic has been limited to the use of environmental parameters and dynamic
downscaling, both of which have significant drawbacks. The PGW technique
provides a flexible framework for experimentation and examination of cause and
effect in dynamical and microphysical processes and allows for the use of higher
resolutions and multiple realizations of a single case. The project will use the
WRF-ARW with input from several of the CMIP-5 and CMIP-6 models for the climate
change delta. Three hypotheses will be addressed: 1) Representative and
characteristic warm- (cool-) season tornadoes will be less (more) intense under
anthropogenic climate change (ACC), 2) Representative damaging straight-line
wind events will be more intense, but relatively shorter-lived, under ACC, and
3) Despite decreases in vertical wind shear and increases in the height of the
melting level, hailfall swath area and hailstone size at the ground will
generally increase under ACC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.