* 1923760
* CAREER:  Steerable Powered Ankle-foot Prostheses for Increased Mobility in Amputees
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Mo Rastgaar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 09/30/2020
* USD 112,688.00

1350154 Rastgaar

Overview: Mobility is a key factor to well-being, both emotionally (through
increased independence and decreased depression and anxiety) and physically
(through reduced disease risk, bone maintenance, muscle strength, and weight
control). Over a million US citizens are limb amputees, primarily lower leg
amputees. This CAREER program will 1) work to improve the mobility of lower
extremity amputees through research in design and control of powered ankle-foot
prostheses, which mimic the steering mechanism of human gait by having two
controllable degrees of freedom (DOF) and 2) integrate research with education
and outreach to inspire and equip a diverse next generation of engineers. To
work toward these long-term goals, this CAREER program will develop ? and use in
education and outreach - a lightweight, cable-driven, powered ankle-foot
prosthesis capable of steering and traversing slopes by learning from human
ankle impedance in the sagittal and frontal planes during gait. Intellectual
Merit: This project is based on the hypothesis that an ankle-foot prosthesis
capable of applying torques and impedance modulation in both the sagittal and
frontal planes, similar to the human ankle, will improve maneuverability and
increase mobility by lowering the metabolic cost of gait - both when walking
straight and turning. Advances in powered prostheses have shown the ability to
reduce metabolic cost and increase the preferred speed of gait for unilateral
transtibial amputees during straight walking by providing sufficient power
during push-off. Powered prostheses can also reduce asymmetrical gait patterns
and thus may lower risk of secondary complications. However, studies show that
turning steps account for 8-50% of steps, depending on activity, and thus may
account for 25% of daily steps. Modulation of ankle impedance in the sagittal
and frontal planes plays a major role in controlling lateral and propulsive
ground reaction forces. While a non-amputee relies on hip movement in the
coronal plane and the moment generated in the ankle joint, an amputee using a
passive prosthesis uses the hip extension in the sagittal plane as a gait
strategy [5-8]. The hypothesis is supported by the PI?s preliminary results
which show a large inversion of the ankle during the stance period of step
turns, indicating a significant deviation of ankle rotations from the straight-
step pattern. Understanding the role of the ankle in locomotion and developing a
platform for design and control of a new ankle-foot prostheses will allow
exploratory research and education. Research will include: Thrust 1: Estimate
ankle impedance in the sagittal and frontal planes during the stance period of
gait; Thrust 2: Develop a powered ankle-foot prosthesis with two controllable
DOF; Thrust 3: Evaluate the design and control of the prosthesis using an
evaluation platform and with below-knee amputees through collaboration with Mayo
Clinic; and Thrust 4: Education/Outreach: Utilize the steerable ankle-foot
prosthesis for education, outreach, and research experiences to impact diverse
K-12, community college, undergraduate, and graduate students. The work is
significant in that it will contribute 1) new knowledge about multivariable
impedance modulation of the human ankle during the stance period of gait, an
area not yet fully explored, and 2) a unique framework for developing and
evaluating powered ankle-foot prostheses. The steerable ankle-foot prosthesis is
innovative because it will enable amputees to walk with a more natural gait by
using the ankle joint, rather than merely the hip and knee. Development of this
novel platform will be a substantial step toward the PI?s long-term goal of
improving design and maneuverability in lower extremity assistive prostheses and
robots. Broader Impacts: Robotics is a high-impact way to attract the attention
of future engineers. This project will develop outreach activities that spark
and sustain STEM interest in pre-college students, especially underrepresented
minorities. Development of an inexpensive powered ankle-foot prosthesis will
improve well-being of Wounded Warriors and civilian amputees, while at the same
time inspiring and training the future STEM workforce. In addition, the PI has
designed and developed a low-cost EMG-controlled manipulator as educational
platform that will be used in outreach programs to teach fundamentals of
mechatronics, robotics, and biomechanics to K-12, community college,
undergraduate, and graduate students. The developed outreach programs will be
rigorously evaluated and then made publicly available to other researchers.