* 1923599
* A Research-Practice Partnership for Developing Computational Thinking through Linguistically and Culturally Relevant CS Curriculum in Middle School
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Katherine Mortimer, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,492.00

The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP), together with El Paso Independent
School District (EPISD), will develop a research-practice partnership (RPP) to
plan and pilot a linguistically and culturally relevant computer science
curriculum in middle school with the goal of broadening the participation of
emergent bilingual (or English learner) students and Latino/a students in
computer science (CS) education. The project will focus on the development of an
RPP that can effectively help teachers use bilingual and culturally relevant
tools to develop the computational thinking (CT) skills of middle school
students in EPISD. By bringing together the promise of culturally relevant CS
education and of dual language instruction, this project will seek an innovative
solution to the problem of underrepresentation of Latinas/os and emergent
bilingual students/English learners in CS education and careers. It does so
through a research-practice partnership that ensures responsiveness to the needs
of educational practitioners and facilitates the integration of prior NSF-funded
research with existing classroom curriculum and practice. The project, together
with future scaling work, potentially can serve as a model in at least two
existing large networks-the NSF-funded National CAHSI INCLUDES Alliance and the
New Tech Network-strengthening efforts in both to broaden participation and
engagement of underrepresented students, with particular focus on CS. Through
dissemination across the 60 CAHSI institutions, the proposed linguistically and
culturally relevant approach could potentially contribute to broadening Hispanic
and emergent bilingual participation much beyond the El Paso region. The
curriculum developed collaboratively by the RPP would also be disseminated
through the national New Tech Network repository of PBL curriculum, accessible
to other NTN schools across the country. The model of integrating culturally
responsive CT/CS instruction and linguistically responsive dual language
instruction has potential to significantly advance efforts to reach, support,
and engage more Hispanic youth in CS learning and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon research showing that
culturally relevant CS education is a promising approach to broadening
participation of minoritized students in CS and that dual language bilingual
education is a successful approach to improving participation and academic
achievement of emergent bilingual (or English learner) students by taking a
culturally and linguistically relevant approach to CT/CS instruction for
emergent bilingual and Latina/o students. Specifically, the project develops an
RPP to plan, co-design, pilot, and refine a curriculum module that is bilingual
(Spanish and English) and employs an existing NSF-funded culturally-relevant
game-based learning platform, Sol y Agua (Akbar, et al., 2018), that uses
locally familiar El Paso area geography and ecology to teach computational
thinking. The project will address the following research questions: (1) In what
ways and to what extent do teachers demonstrate understanding of computational
thinking principles and components and of dual language principles and
instructional strategies? (2) How do teachers implement a linguistically and
culturally relevant PBL module using Sol y Agua game-based learning platform?
And (3) In what ways and to what extent do students demonstrate learning of
computational thinking principles and components during and after participating
in a linguistically and culturally relevant PBL module using Sol Y Agua? The
project will deploy a range of data collection including pre-post testing of
teachers' knowledge and implementation of instruction, observation, video
recordings of classrooms, and student written assessments and language tracking
data from the software tool Sol y Agua. The research team will analyze the data
using qualitative data analysis techniques as well as data mining and
classification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.