* 1923019
* Oceanographic Instrumentation - 2019
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2020
* USD 45,385.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation on R/V Atlantis, a 274?
general purpose research vessel, and R/V Armstrong, a new 238? multidisciplinary
vessel. Both are operated by WHOI as part of the U.S. Academic Fleet which is
scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS).
Both are owned by the U.S. Navy, have state-of-the-art instrumentation and
support all disciplines of oceanographic research. The vessels work in all the
world?s oceans supporting science funded primarily by U.S government agencies.
R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching and servicing Alvin, the
human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of the National Deep
Submergence Facility (NDSF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2018, R/V Atlantis
completed 305 days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 78% of the total
sailing schedule (238 days). In 2019, Atlantis is scheduled for 283 days with
NSF accounting for 239 of those or 85%. R/V Armstrong sailed 252 total days in
2018 and 133 of these, 52%, were for NSF. Additionally, 67 days (27%) were for
NSF-OOI. The vessel is scheduled for 215 days in 2019, 21% of which (44 days)
are for NSF and 37% (78 days) are for NSF
OOI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in this
proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Hidex Liquid Scintillation Counters
$128,175 &lt;br/&gt;2) LAN Switches $45,385 &lt;br/&gt;3) McLane Pumps $122,475
&lt;br/&gt; $296,035 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.