* 1923771
* Targeted Infusion Project: Ensuring the Vitality and Sustainability of the Virginia Union University Physics and Pre-Engineering Program
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Shaheen Islam, Virginia Union University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,973.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
through Targeted Infusion Projects supports the development, implementation, and
study of evidence-based innovative models and approaches for improving the
preparation and success of HBCU undergraduate students so that they may pursue
STEM graduate programs and/or careers. Virginia Union University will implement
a comprehensive set of student-centered strategies to improve the learning
experience for physics and pre-engineering students and ensure the vitality of a
program that is well-poised to contribute to efforts to broaden the
participation of Black and African American students and low-income students in
physics and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase
the number of physics and engineering graduates and ensure they are well-
prepared to enter physics and engineering graduate programs and/or careers. The
project will also make a broad impact at VUU by revising a general education
physics course that serves all VUU students and provide project-based learning
workshops and other resources for implementing research-based instructional
strategies to all VUU STEM faculty. Finally, the project will contribute to the
community's understanding of the effectiveness of common high-impact teaching
practices within the context of small physics departments at teaching-focused
liberal arts institutions. A rigorous mixed-methods evaluation plan will examine
the impact of project activities on student performance and psychosocial
constructs typically associated with retention in STEM higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.