* 1923491
* Collaborative Research: Hydrologic Disturbance in Tropical Peatlands: Linking Drainage, Soil Moisture, Flammability, and Carbon Fluxes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Charles Harvey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 346,371.00

Peatlands are areas of wetlands with accumulated plant material that is
decomposing. Drainage of Southeast Asian peatlands causes serious environmental
damage. When peatlands are drained, such as when canals are built, the water
table drops, driving carbon dioxide emissions. Drained peat is more flammable
and smoke from peat fires covers the region in toxic haze during dry years.
Ultimately, with continued drainage, large areas will regularly flood as
peatlands subside towards sea level. Despite this dangerous chain of events, few
tools exist to manage the flow of water in tropical peatlands. The goal of this
project is to better understand the relationship between disturbance (such as
drainage or land cover change), changes to peatland hydrology, and future fire
risk. This is done using new satellite data and by building models based on
field measurements. The project investigates how changing precipitation patterns
and disturbance each effect future fire risk. Additional research goals include
the design of new types of canal networks that have less impact on fire risk and
carbon dioxide emissions. The implications of the work are communicated directly
to local policy makers. The project expands a climate change teacher education
program for middle and high school teachers in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last three decades, tropical peatlands in
Southeast Asia have been disrupted by land use change and associated peatland
drainage. This causes significant threats to human health (through increased
peat flammability, whose smoldering fires lead to large haze events that cover
the densely populated surrounding regions), infrastructure (through peat
subsidence) and climate (by enabling the emissions of large quantities of stored
carbon dioxide after drainage allows peat oxidation). However, the hydrology of
tropical peatlands, and its implications for carbon dioxide emissions and fire
risk remain poorly understood. This work builds new tools to map both peatland
and drainage canals using remote sensing. These tools are combined with new
hydrologic models to better understand the relationship between land use change,
peatland drainage and disturbance impacts including fire risk. Field
measurements are combined with remote sensing data and newly developed
hydrologic models to map carbon dioxide emissions across the region, to
disentangle the roles of climatic changes and land use changes on future fire
risk, and to develop new tools for drainage system designs that control flooding
but reduce fire risks. The results of this project are communicated directly to
government officials in Brunei and Singapore. The project creates a new
component of the Stanford Climate Change Education Program for middle and high
school teachers. This project is funded by the Prediction of and Resilience
against Extreme Events Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.