* 1923136
* Collaborative Network of Grades 3-5 Educators for Computational Thinking for English Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mark Warschauer, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,060,000.00

Though Hispanics and English learners constitute two of the fastest growing
segments of the K-12 student population, little is known about effective ways of
teaching computational thinking to students in these groups, especially at the
elementary school level. In the first stage of this project, the research team
developed an innovative curriculum that included standards matching, language
scaffolds, and culturally-relevant pedagogy to meet the needs of Hispanics and
English learners and piloted a wide range of measures to assess the impact on
learning processes and outcomes. Building on this successful Research-Practice
Partnership between the University of California, Irvine, and Santa Ana Unified
School District, the project will iteratively research and develop an approach
for teaching computational thinking to SAUSD's large numbers of students who are
Hispanic and English learners. The project will further develop the curriculum,
refine the related professional development, scale up the project to 40
additional fourth grade teachers in 10 SAUSD schools, and collect a wide range
of qualitative and quantitative data to iteratively improve the project and
evaluate its impact on learning processes and outcomes. The project is among the
first to examine the linguistic and sociocultural processes that underlie
English learners' success in mastering computational thinking, as well as the
role of computational thinking in an English language arts curriculum. Materials
developed are based on California computer science and English language arts
standards and will be actively disseminated to other districts in the state,
making them available for use in a state that has the largest amount of Hispanic
students (54%) and English learners (20%) in the nation. A team of graduate and
undergraduate student researchers in the project, all of whom are Hispanic
and/or female, will receive training in diverse research methods for CS
education. Information about the project will also be integrated into courses in
UC Irvine's Education Sciences Major, Master of Arts in Teaching, CalTeach, and
PhD in Education programs, which together serve more than 1000 students per
year, the majority of whom are underrepresented minorities and first-generation
college students, and the majority of whom continue on to become K-12 or college
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By further developing the curriculum and
professional development and implementing it in 40 additional classrooms, the
project team will carefully assess the most effective instructional practices in
aiding students' computational thinking, developing identity with the field of
computer science, and developing academic language proficiency. The curriculum
and professional development materials developed and refined through this
project will be tailored to the needs of Hispanics and English learners through
explicit teaching of CS language functions, inclusion of culturally relevant
stories to read and create, and instruction based on collaboration, conversation
and inquiry. The RPP team will address research questions focused on teaching
such as the challenges and use of the curriculum units and the implications for
the professional development; learning including the affects on students'
attitudes and knowledge development; and the partnership including describing
the ways to enhance the RPP to better address common goals and needs. Using
mixed methods, the project will document the scale-up efforts and the
development of new tools to support scaling up. Qualitative data will include
transcripts from observations and interviews and notes from the design group.
The team will analyze these data using grounded theory approaches. The team will
collect pre-post quantitative data on students' computational thinking, literacy
development, and identification and attitudes toward computer science. Because
the data will be both continuous and ordinal, the team will use a range of
analytic methods including paired t-tests, Mann-Whitney U tests, analyses of
covariance, regressions, and hierarchical linear models to address the research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.