* 1923483
* Teacher-Driven Development, Implementation, and Assessment of Integrated Computational Thinking in Grades 3-5
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Lori Pollock, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

While several efforts to improve access to computer science (CS) and
computational thinking (CT) competencies are currently underway at the middle
and high school level, changes must now be made across the entire education
system since it is during upper elementary grades that students make decisions
related to future engagement with computing. This project is a partnership
between the University of Delaware (UD) and the Delaware Department of Education
(DDOE) to build sustainable capacity towards the implementation of newly adopted
CS standards in grades K-12, starting at the elementary level. Specifically, the
partnership will focus on racially minoritized students, females, and those from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds. By providing elementary school students
with exposure to CS early on, the project seeks to increase the number and
diversity of students selecting a CS course or CS-related pathway during middle
and high-school. The partnership has four key goals: (a) adapt an already
promising professional development (PD) program to help teachers in grades 3-5
build knowledge of CT content and pedagogy; (b) address issues of equity by
focusing on culturally-responsive content and pedagogy as well as impacts of
computing on local communities; (c) build capacity in teachers for the
development and pilot testing of interdisciplinary CT-integrated literacy and
math modules and associated classroom assessments for grades 3-5; and (d)
establish a publicly accessible repository of culturally-responsive CT-
integrated modules and associated resources to facilitate modest scale up in
diverse contexts. The purposeful integration of CT into literacy and math using
research-based practices will put elementary students on a trajectory that
prepares them to use CT in middle school, high school, and beyond. Through these
efforts, the project expects to reach 60 teachers who will, in turn, reach
approximately 1,500 students. The curriculum development process, PD, materials,
and assessment tools will be disseminated through a summit, workshops,
publications, presentations, and a web-based searchable repository. This project
is jointly funded by the Computer Science for All program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be conducted in the context of a networked improvement community
(NIC) and will be grounded in design-based implementation research. Researchers
and practitioners will work together to collaboratively design, pilot, and study
PD and instructional approaches focusing on the implementation of the CS
standards in grades 3-5. Further researchers will study (a) the impact of the
adapted PD program on teacher learning; (b) the implementation of integrated CT
in different contexts and with diverse learners, particularly those
traditionally underrepresented in computing; (b) the impact of integrated CT on
students' CT learning, attitudes, and interest towards CT; and (c) the
opportunities and challenges associated with integrated CT across different
contexts. Data will be collected through multiple sources and will be analyzed
in ways that illuminate similarities and differences among various groups of
students in order to ensure the promise of CS for All.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.