* 1923099
* AMPS: Collaborative Research:  A Convex Geometry and Homotopy Approach for Power-Flow Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Tianran Chen, Auburn University at Montgomery
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 105,281.00

Power networks are critical infrastructures for generating, transferring, and
consuming electric energy, and they are of fundamental importance to every
aspect of modern life. Improving the efficiency, stability, and resilience of
power networks is therefore of great interest to our society. A single power
network can operate on many different modes --- some lead to efficient
operations while others lead to catastrophic failures. Understanding all such
operation modes and the possible transition among them for large and complex
power networks remains a difficult mathematical question that could have
important real-world consequences. This project aims to develop new methodology
and computational tools for solving this problem by utilizing recent discoveries
in mathematics. The project will provide training to graduate and undergraduate
students, and open source software to the larger community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the heart of power network analysis lies the
mathematical problem of solving power-flow equations: systems of nonlinear
equations that describe the intricate balancing conditions of electric power in
a power network. The solutions to power-flow equations describe the set of
theoretically possible operating modes for a power network, which are of crucial
importance in the rigorous analysis of power networks, especially in the problem
of assessing network stability. Despite many decades of active research, the
complete analysis of power-flow solutions is still a difficult and often
computationally impractical task. By leveraging new tools developed in convex
geometry, tropical geometry, and homotopy methods, this project aims to develop
a flexible divide-and-conquer approach for completely solving power-flow
equations and to create practical software implementations. The resulting
theoretical framework and software packages would allow researchers to conduct a
complete analysis of the full set of power-flow solutions and thus understand
the stability and resilience of power networks. Moreover, this project provides
opportunities for broadening our understanding of the role of convex polytopes
in the study of emergent phenomena in complex networks that may be of value in a
much broader context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.