* 1923445
* EDGE CT:  Tools to advance functional genomic studies in sea urchins
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Stephen Watts, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,284,949.00

Non-Technical Paragraph &lt;br/&gt;Everything in biology is connected. It is the
job of life scientists to reveal important biological properties in the most
impactful, efficient, and economical way. To do so they look for model organisms
that are particularly tractable for studying complex biological processes and
then apply what is learned to better understand other organisms. For more than a
century, sea urchins have provided a valuable research model that has
contributed significantly to understanding of many fundamental biological
processes such as fertilization, embryonic development and cell division. Sea
urchins have proven to be a valuable model due to their close genetic
relationship to vertebrate animals and many features that make experimentation
easier. The goal of this grant is to create the next generation of tools to
enhance the utility of sea urchins as research models that will enable new areas
of research and to make these tools widely available to the scientific
community. Areas of biological research to be enhanced by the tools created from
this grant include a better understanding of how eggs and sperm interact at
fertilization, understanding the rules of embryo development, how nerve cells
are made, how sex is determined, how animals protect themselves from
environmental insults and from infection, and how tissues and organs can
regenerate when they are damaged. An essential component of the grant is to
reach beyond scientists to the public, students and teachers and to make the sea
urchin a highly attractive and impactful research and education tool of the
twenty-first century.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Paragraph &lt;br/&gt;Sea
urchin researchers have long sought to leverage the experimental tractability of
the embryo and adult with genetic approaches but, to date, manipulations have
been limited largely to dependence on morpholinos or pharmacology. The
overarching goal of this EDGE grant is to build tools that overcome major
obstacles to testing gene functionality in echinoderms, opening up a new era of
discovery for diverse and integrated studies across all life history stages of
this valuable sister group to chordates. This goal will be realized by
prioritized Grand Challenges as follows: (1) Targeted DNA insertion for gene
tagging, conditional, and reversible gene control; (2) Rapid, standardized
protocols for larval culturing, metamorphosis, juvenile development, and adult
sexual maturation including nutritional and environmental optimization for each
stage; (3) Rapid, simple sexing protocols of animals to maximize resources; (4)
Simple and efficient protocols for culturing cells from the embryo and adult in
vitro with routine genetic manipulations; (5) Routine archiving/cryopreserving
genetically manipulated sperm, embryos and cells for long term sustainability.
These integrated new technologies with controlled and heritable genetic
manipulations and the ability to test gene function and regulation in in vitro
cell-based systems will enable new avenues of investigation that fully exploit
the important properties of echinoderms as a research organism. This grant will
focus on a single species of sea urchin, Lytechinus variegatus, but the
bottlenecks opened by tools developed herein will permeate the phylum enabling
significant advances across echinoderms. Rapid dissemination of results to the
larger community of sea urchin researchers is an integral part of the
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Developmental
Systems Cluster (DSC) in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems of the
Biological Sciences Directorate and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.