* 1923942
* RUI:  Integration of the Epithelial Innate Immune and Oxidative Stress Responses
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Powell, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,042.00

Animals interact with diverse microorganisms. Some microbes are pathogenic, and
cause disease. Other benign microbes, like the microbiome, are part of the
normal flora associated with the animal. The immune system must therefore use a
nuanced detection system that discriminates between pathogenic and benign
microbes. One way the immune system detects pathogenic microbes is by the
presence of host cell damage and stress. This project seeks to dissect the
molecular and genetic mechanism of infection that start with the conserved
G-protein Coupled Receptor FSHR-1 and how this receptor activation results in
oxidative stress. For broader impacts, a portion of the experiments will be
performed in the context of an undergraduate course-based research experience,
immersing approximately 100 undergraduate students in authentic research
projects. This research provides training for the next generation of scientists.
Students with substantial research will be co-authors on research-based
publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One type of stress associated with infection
is oxidative stress. However, a direct link between oxidative stress and
infection recognition has not been established. This is the goal of this
research project. The conserved G-protein Coupled Receptor FSHR-1 is a key
player in both innate immunity and the response to oxidative stress, and is a
primary candidate to coordinate these two critical processes in Caenorhabditis
elegans. The experiments will establish the relationship between FSHR-1 and
principal molecular components of the oxidative stress response in infected
animals using genetic epistasis (Aim 1). Multiple measures of the immune
response will assess whether oxidative stress is a necessary and/or sufficient
element of infection recognition (Aim 2). Finally, novel genes that connect
oxidative stress and immunity will be identified to construct a more complete
framework for the integration of these processes (Aim 3). This research project
has the potential to transform understanding of the molecular mechanisms by
which infection is detected using an experimentally tractable system. Insight
into the connection between immunity and oxidative stress, and FSHR-1's role
therein, will not only reveal a new means for differentiating pathogenic vs.
benign microbes, but will also provide valuable insights into the interaction
between animals and their natural microbial milieu. In addition, this research
provides a platform that allows undergraduate researchers to perform hypothesis-
based research as a means to train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.