* 1923033
* Designing and Processing Microstructurally Tailored Graphene Aerogels with An Understanding of Deformation and Failure Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Feifei Fan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 470,247.00

Graphene aerogel is one of the world's lightest materials. It consists of a
porous network of aggregated graphene sheets and features excellent mechanical,
electronic, and thermal conductivity properties. Graphene aerogel is promising
for wide applications in stretchable electronics, magnetic actuated elastomers,
electrochemical catalysis, thermal insulation, and ultra-efficient energy
absorber. The practical implementation of graphene aerogel is hindered by the
fact that the structural integrity and functionality are difficult to achieve
simultaneously. Understanding deformation mechanisms is of primary importance
for engineering design. Graphene aerogel displays distinguishable deformation
phenomena due to its porous structure that is different from most of the other
structural and functional materials. This award supports a fundamental study of
the distinct deformation in graphene aerogel under extreme compression. The
knowledge obtained from the research will provide insights for the design of
graphene aerogel-based lightweight materials. The effort will promote the
application of graphene aerogel and benefit the U.S. economy and society. The
research results will be integrated into the senior design classes for
undergraduate education with open-ended projects emphasizing the application of
lightweight materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major difference of graphene
aerogel from a conventional material is its unique microstructure that plays a
pivotal role in deformation. The overall objective of the research is to explore
how microstructure affects deformation mechanisms in graphene aerogel through
tailoring microstructure, coarse-grained modeling, repeated compression
experiments, and microscopic observations. A systematic study of microstructural
effect on deformation mechanisms will be conducted to understand how the
morphology, geometry, and alignment of individual building blocks affect the
effective strength and compressibility of graphene aerogel under repeated
extreme compression. Graphene aerogel with controlled thickness of its building
blocks, nanopetal reinforcements, and aligned orientations will be synthesized.
The evolution of morphologies with applied loading sequences will be studied by
using in situ and ex situ microscopic characterizations. Maps of dominant
deformation mechanisms and scaling laws for mechanical properties will be
constructed by performing coarse-grained simulations with a new potential. The
work will lead to a better understanding of microstructural effect on
deformation mechanisms in graphene aerogel and will advance modern design and
manufacturing of micro-architected materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.