* 1924678
* Collaborative Research: Developing and Exploring Mathematical Modeling Curricula for Preservice K-8 Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Megan Wickstrom, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 159,434.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this Exploration &amp; Design project
aims to serve the national interest by developing, implementing, and testing
creative approaches for adoption of education research into disciplinary
teaching. The project will develop curricula that bring recent advances in STEM
knowledge of mathematical modeling into undergraduate elementary teacher
education. Mathematical modeling is the process of using mathematics to make
sense of real-world, authentic problems and it provides powerful learning
opportunities for all students. Although modeling is of growing importance, few
preservice K-8 teachers have knowledge of what modeling is or have experienced
it firsthand. It is important for them to experience modeling as learners before
they can integrate modeling into teaching. This project aims to address this
need through the design, enactment, and refinement of mathematical modeling
modules for preservice teachers. The project will use design-theory methodology
to examine multiple facets of the teaching and learning of modeling beyond
content knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will involve
Montana State University and Marquette University, and various undergraduate
courses at each institution. The project will gather data from various sources,
including classroom video data, and preservice teachers' constructed models and
journals. The project team will use this data to document, through a Decision
Modeling Process, how preservice teachers move through the modeling cycle,
noting specific choices, actions, and dispositions. This information will then
be used to refine the developed instructional modules and provide written and
video annotations for these modules. Based on this analysis, the project seeks
to address: 1) how teacher educators can support preservice teachers'
understanding of the attributes of mathematical modeling; 2) how preservice
teachers' understanding of modeling develops across modules; and 3) factors that
support preservice teachers' motivation to engage in mathematical modeling and
its related practices. The modules and corresponding videos and annotations
developed by the project will be accessible online and will be shared with
mathematics teacher educators through outlets such as webinars and conferences.
Through dissemination of the modules, mathematics teacher educators will have
visible resources to aid in integrating mathematical modeling into a range of
existing courses, including undergraduate mathematical modeling courses,
preservice teacher methods courses, and undergraduate mathematics courses for
teachers. More broadly, this project has potential to benefit society by
improving the preparation of undergraduate students, who will become multi-
disciplinary teachers in a STEM field. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. This project is in the IUSE: EHR Engaged Student Learning
track, through which the funding program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.