* 1924730
* Collaborative Research: Antarctic Automatic Weather Station Program 2019-2022
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2025
* Matthew Lazzara, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,143,437.00

The Antarctic Automatic Weather Station network is the most extensive surficial
meteorological network in the Antarctic, approaching its 30th year at several of
its data stations. Its prime focus is also as a long term observational record,
to measure the near surface weather and climatology of the Antarctic atmosphere.
Antarctic Automatic Weather Stations measure air-temperature, pressure, wind
speed and direction at a nominal surface height of ~ 2-3m. Other parameters such
as relative humidity and snow accumulation may also be taken. The surface
observations from the Antarctic Automatic Weather Station network are also used
operationally, for forecast purposes, and in the planning of field work. Surface
observations made from the network have also been used to check the validity of
satellite and remote sensing observations. The proposed effort informs our
understanding of the Antarctic environment and its weather and climate trends
over the past few decades. The research has implications for potential future
operations and logistics for the US Antarctic Program during the winter season.
As a part of this endeavor, all project participants will engage in a
coordinated outreach effort to bring the famous Antarctic "cold" to public
seminars, K-12, undergraduate, and graduate classrooms, and senior citizen
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to use the surface
conditions observed by the Antarctic Automatic Weather Station (AWS) network to
determine how large-scale modes of climate variability impact Antarctic weather
and climate, how the surface observations from the AWS network are linked to
surface layer and boundary layer processes. Consideration will also be given to
low temperature physical environments such as may be encountered during
Antarctic winter, and the best ways to characterize these, and other ?cold pool?
phenomena. Observational data from the AWS are collected via Iridium network, or
DCS Argos aboard either NOAA or MetOp polar orbiting satellites and thus made
available in near real time to operational and synoptic weather forecasters over
the GTS (WMO Global Telecommunication System). Being able to support
improvements in numerical weather prediction and climate modeling will have
lasting impacts on Antarctic science and logistical
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.