* 1924451
* American Chemical Society Spring 2019 National Meeting Symposium: ?Structure-Property Correlations in Functional Inorganic Materials?
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Jennifer Aitken, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 5,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Advanced materials make modern life possible and
the future sustainable. Our handheld electronic devices, for example, are made
portable by the solid state components that can store energy. Many of the
materials in those components are inorganic solids, which can be defined as
solid materials that typically contain a wide range of elements including metals
combined with nonmetals such as oxygen or metalloids such as silicon. Materials
chemists constantly work to arrange the atoms of these solids to optimize their
functional properties. Researchers in this field study the fundamental
scientific problems that address the relationships between structure, or how
those atoms are arranged, and properties such as the ability to store energy. At
the 2019 Spring National Meeting of the American Chemical Society, leading
experts in the field will hold a symposium to better understand these
relationships in the solid state. Hosted by the ACS Division of Inorganic
Chemistry, the symposium titled 'Structure-Property Correlations in Functional
Inorganic Materials' consists of four half-day sessions that include a mixture
of invited and contributed oral presentations. For the invited talks, the
symposium brings in fresh, new ideas by inviting scientists early in their
career such as faculty at the Assistant Professor level. The symposium also
includes a poster session where PhD students and post-doctoral research
associates will present their work on these functional materials. Therefore,
this symposium, which is supported in part by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in NSF's Division of Materials Research, not only moves this
field forward by presenting the latest findings in inorganic solids but also
plays a large educational role by integrating young students and post-docs with
the larger research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental to designing and synthesizing new materials is the
elucidation of structure-property correlations and relationships in solid state
materials. To encourage the exchange of knowledge in this area of research, the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research supports the symposium titled 'Structure-Property Correlations in the
Functional Inorganic Materials' at the 2019 Spring National Meeting of the
American Society. The symposium includes four half-day oral presentation
sessions and one poster presentation session. The topics are divided around five
themes based on the invited speakers and contributed talks. These themes
include: 1) the synthesis and crystal structure elucidations of new
intermetallic phases; 2) chemical properties and structures of quantum materials
such as superconductors, magnetic materials, and topological insulators; 3)
luminescent and optical properties of novel semiconductors such as the halide-
based perovskites; 4) innovative approaches towards solid state synthesis and
crystal growth, such as use of the PARADIM user facility; and 5) investigating
how various length scales, from the local to average, affect bulk properties in
transition metal oxides. The session has a mixture of invited and contributed
talks. The majority of the invited talks is given by early-career scientists
rather than senior scientists. The former group includes post-doctoral research
associates and young faculty. The latter group includes faculty who are current
or past editors of relevant journals such as Chemistry of Materials and Science
Advances. The contributed only session features several mid-career (post-tenure)
scientists and the poster session graduate students in the field. Therefore, the
session promises to mix several generations of workers in this field and to
present diverse themes in materials and solid state
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.