* 1924282
* Mapping subduction-induced Mantle Flow Underneath North/Central America and Europe
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Hejun Zhu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 157,564.00

Mapping mantle flow induced by the descending oceanic lithosphere has important
implications for understanding subduction processes. Two fundamental types of
subduction-induced mantle flows have been suggested based on laboratory
experiments, mantle flow computer simulations and shear wave splitting
measurements. However, to date, the behaviors of these flow modes at different
depths in an actual subduction environment remain elusive. In this project, the
PI proposes to characterize mantle flow circulation patterns for five active
convergent margins in North/Central America and Europe: the Middle America,
Caribbean, Cascadia, Calabria and Hellenic. Analyzing these results will improve
our understanding of the thermal and chemical evolution of subduction systems.
In addition, Central America, Cascadia and the Mediterranean are among the most
seismologically active regions in the world. With the new 3-D tomographic
models, the team will numerically simulate Earth's responses associated with a
number of past and future large magnitude earthquakes in these regions, which
may provide valuable information about earthquake hazards in densely populated
regions. This project will advance the development of the University of Texas,
Dallas Seismic Imaging Laboratory by supporting an early career PI and one Ph.D.
graduate student. Results from this project will be disseminated via peer-
reviewed publications and presentations at national/international meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this project, the PI's team will use
full waveform inversion to constrain 3-D azimuthal anisotropy structures for
five subduction systems in North/Central America and Europe. This inversion
strategy offers a unified framework to simultaneously constrain multiple seismic
parameters, and enables the team to better extract quantitative information
about Earth materials by fitting recorded waveforms with full-wavefield modeling
results. The PI plans to combine three-component body and surface waves to
simultaneously constrain wavespeeds and azimuthal anisotropy from the crust down
to the transition zone. By examining correlations between wavespeed anomalies
and anisotropic fabrics, the PI wants to address the following three fundamental
questions: (1) How are the poloidal- and toroidal-mode mantle flows competing
and interfering with each other at different depths in the back-arc, fore-arc
and sub-slab regions? (2) What are the effects of slab detachment and tearing on
the circulation of mantle flows? (3) How do mantle flows respond as the slabs
penetrate the 660-km discontinuity or flatten within the transition zone?
Answering these questions will have implications for understanding subduction
processes in different disciplines of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.