* 1924140
* Collaborative Research: How to trace glacial meltwater in the ocean by shipboard hydrographic analysis of dissolved neon and krypton
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2024
* Brice Loose, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2024
* USD 344,154.00

This award will build a new instrument to measure meltwater from glaciers in the
ocean. Distinguishing glacier melt from sea ice, snow melt, and rain is a
difficult but important task because melting glaciers threaten significant and
acute consequences, including chronic flooding and sea level rise. The causes
and impacts of melting glaciers are a challenge to observe and predict, because
they unfold in complex and hard to reach places: beneath miles of ice, under
floating ice shelves, and during the coldest times of the year. The objective of
this instrument is to increase oceanographer's capacity to measure and map
glacier melt in the ocean by 300-400%, while reducing costs and providing near
real-time results. This increase in measurement capacity will permit comparison
of regional and seasonal changes in the glacier melt from the ice-covered land
masses of Antarctica and Greenland. The instrument will be field validated in
Rhode Island coastal waters, and then it will be used to measure glacier melt
near the US Palmer Station on the Antarctic Peninsula. The partnership between
the University of Rhode Island and SRI international presents an important
public-private partnership that will encourage the use of private-sector
technology for open access research, and recruit the future workforce in
environmental sensing technology by employing undergraduate ocean engineers,
supporting a Masters student in the completion of their degree, and through
exhibit models of glacial ice shelves and their interactions with the ocean.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award seeks to advance tracing of glacier melt in
the ocean by developing a ship-portable "meltwater mass spectrometer" that
measures 20Ne, 22Ne, and 184Kr dissolved in water and seawater. This advance is
possible thanks to developments in gas purification, but also thanks to a new
analytical capacity to measure the mass-to-charge spectrum of neon that we
predict will bring new precision to the analysis. Neon is an analyte that has
proven difficult to resolve in portable noble gas analyzers. It will
dramatically reduce cost and expand our existing sample capacity by eliminating
complicated sample storage and the lag time between sample collection in polar
regions and subsequent laboratory analysis at home. We further anticipate that
it will be straightforward to incorporate the MWMS technology into the SRI
International underwater mass spectrometer, enabling future AUV missions to
inaccessible regions, such as calving fronts and ice shelf cavities. We will
test and refine the MWMS prototype by leveraging RI State funding for ship time
on the R/V Endeavor and again during a full field trial in Marguerite Bay as
part of the annual Palmer LTER hydrographic expedition aboard the RVIB LM
Gould.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.