* 1924984
* NRI: FND: Robust Grasping by Integrating Machine Learning with Physical Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Robert Howe, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2023
* USD 749,998.00

This project aims to make robot grasping reliable, so that robots can pick up a
wide variety of objects with minimal risk of dropping them. Except for
carefully-controlled settings like factories, even the best current robotic
manipulation systems drop over 5% of the objects they attempt to grasp and lift.
Reliable grasping would open a vast range of practical applications in many
areas of society. For example, household assistance for the elderly and disabled
requires the ability to grasp and move objects, but robots that drop many
objects would not be useful for many users. In addition to personal assistance
functions, commercial applications that require reliable grasping range from
warehouses and flexible manufacturing to food service and cleaning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contact sensing is essential for reliable robotic grasping
in unstructured environments, but existing methods for using sensor signals have
not been effective. The two prior approaches to creating reliable grasping using
contact sensing were physics-based grasp analysis and black-box machine learning
algorithms, and neither has proved sufficient in terms of accuracy and
reliability. It is not clear whether the limitations were due to deficiencies in
the physical models, learning algorithms, or sensors. This project will provide
the first characterization of contact sensors in carefully-controlled grasping
experiments, with independent sensors providing a gold standard for comparison.
The project will use the data from those experiments to investigate merging the
physical modeling and machine learning approaches. By providing an improved
understanding of their properties in predicting grasp stability it will allow
the joining of both approaches in a way that maintains the best properties of
each: interpretability and generalizability from physical modeling and
flexibility and accuracy from machine learning. By pushing prediction accuracy
and reliability to its peak, the project will also characterize the limits on
sensor performance and define, for the first time, the needed sensor information
in terms of task requirements. The results will serve as the basis for grasping
and manipulation systems for unstructured environments and spell out the
tradeoffs among sensor hardware, model-based signal interpretation and control,
and data-driven signal interpretation and control. The successful integration of
model-based and data-driven approaches may serve as an exemplar for many other
fields where models are useful but incomplete.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.