* 1924168
* Collaborative Research: Fostering Innovation and Creativity: A National Design Competition in Rehabilitation and Assistive Devices
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Ted Conway, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 6,308.00

The objective of this project is to provide a unique opportunity for
undergraduate engineering design teams in the area of rehabilitation and
assistive devices to showcase their product innovations in a national design
competition. This objective will be accomplished through a three-year commitment
to support a national design competition hosted at the Summer Biomechanics,
Biotransport and Bioengineering Conference (SB3C) where undergraduate design
teams from across the country can submit their designs in the area of
rehabilitation and assistive devices. The abstracts are reviewed by faculty in
the area and the top six teams are invited to attend SB3C and present their work
in a special podium session. Each of the finalists will receive $3000 for travel
and prototype development. This competition has the potential to also be used as
a motivational component to foster innovation and creativity by other faculty
teaching design or product development courses. The stability of the competition
for the next three years allows the organizer to recruit earlier, and be able to
confirm with teams that funds are available for travel and prototyping in
advance of the submission deadlines. The SB3C competition will provide an
opportunity for faculty across the country to use it as a motivational component
in the process of fostering creativity. Undergraduate students attending the
conference through their involvement in the competition will learn about bio-
solid mechanics, bio-fluid mechanics, device design, rehabilitation, cellular
and molecular mechanics, functional tissue engineering, bio-heat and mass
transfer, and bioengineering education. Numerous podium sessions, poster
sessions, workshops and plenary talks are designed to engage and excite the
attendees including the session for the undergraduate design competition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The undergraduate design competition will broaden the
benefits of the component of motivation to other undergraduate students and
their faculty mentors across the country. Further, the materials developed as
part of this project will be shared with all faculty mentors involved in prior
and future competitions. This competition provides a national venue (with many
international attendees) for teams to showcase their innovations in the areas of
rehabilitation and assistive devices and compete with their peers. Undergraduate
students attending the conference will participate in a research-driven event
with technical sessions, workshops and presentations by faculty, clinicians and
industrial representatives who have expertise in device design, rehabilitation,
disabilities, and numerous other areas. Also, funding will make travel possible
for students who otherwise might not attend an academic conference. Attendance
at the conference provides valuable networking opportunities for the students,
including contacts for graduate school and employment. The inclusion of the
competition at the conference also exposes attendees to innovative solutions for
needs of individuals with disabilities, or those undergoing
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.