* 1924220
* Collaborative Research: Physical processes in formation and breakdown of hypoxia in a tropical bay
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rachel Collin, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 151,992.00

This project is to study hypoxia in a tropical embayment in Panama (Bahia del
Amirante) using a combination of ongoing monitoring data, new observations, and
a numerical model. The project will focus on physical processes unique to
tropical systems. Hypoxia, whereby marine waters become severely depleted in
oxygen content, is a widespread deleterious anthropogenic influence on estuarine
and coastal waters and is increasing in coastal regions globally. Hypoxia in
tropical marine systems is poorly understood and understudied, despite the
important implications for tropical ecosystems which sustain important fisheries
habitats and coastal biodiversity. The project will include a field campaign to
observe the physical and chemical parameters of the Bay as well as a modeling
component to simulate the dynamic and biogeochemical responses and interpret the
observational data. The project is expected to provide new understanding of the
dynamics that initiate and control hypoxia in tropical systems. The results of
this project will be disseminated through presentations at scientific meetings,
seminars at universities, public talks, websites, and peer-reviewed journal
articles. Communication of results to the broader scientific community will
include a workshop on "Understanding hypoxia in the Caribbean" to be held in
Panama in the third year of the grant. This workshop will bring together
researchers from throughout the Caribbean working on diverse hypoxic systems
with local Panamanian researchers and other
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes an observational
campaign and numerical simulations that will address the dynamics of hypoxia in
shallow tropical systems. Physical and chemical measurements are designed to
identify the important physical processes throughout the evolution of a seasonal
hypoxic event in the Bay. Bahia Almirante is a tropical embayment in the Bocas
del Toro region of Panama that has experienced repeated, seasonal hypoxia
resulting in widespread bleaching and mortality of corals and other
invertebrates. A fully-coupled physical biogeochemical model will be developed
for the bay to test the dynamical understanding. The project will also leverage
a historical record of weekly observations (temperature, salinity and oxygen) by
the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI) since 2010 to give historical
context to our observations and to provide validation for the simulations. The
physical processes regulating the ventilation of low-oxygen bottom waters in
temperature coastal regions include inflow of fresh water and atmospheric
fluxes, which affect density stratification, advection, and wind, wave, and
tidal-driven turbulent mixing. A better understanding of the physical mechanisms
and environmental conditions responsible for oxygen variability in tropical bays
will yield rich insight into benthic ecology, turbulent mixing, larval
connectivity, coastal hypoxia, ocean acidification and cross-shelf exchange of
nutrients, pollutants, hypoxic waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.