* 1924024
* Three Compliance Instruments for Axial Volcano to Observe Long Term Evolution of the Magma Chamber and in Support of OOI Observations
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Spahr Webb, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 627,800.00

Despite decades of observations, how magma migrates and is stored within
volcanoes remains poorly understood because there are few means to continuously
monitor changes within magma chambers beneath volcanoes. Such measurements are
needed to understand when and how the gradual emplacement of magma finally
triggers an eruption. The instrumentation developed will provide the potential
to monitor changes in the magma content continuously beneath undersea volcanoes
and thereby provide a better understanding of volcano processes that can also be
applied to volcanos on land that pose a major hazard to millions of
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axial Volcano, a large, very active undersea
volcano offshore the US West Coast is currently monitored using sensors that
transmit data through the NSF supported Ocean Observatories Initiative cable to
shore. Sensors on these cables measured changes in the compliance of seafloor
preceding and following an eruption in 2015 associated with changes in the magma
chamber, but the noise level of these sensors limited the sensitivity of the
observations and the observation period to the winter months when the compliance
signal was larger. New compliance sensors with better sensitivity and a lower
noise level will be constructed using more optimal sensors and placed on the
seafloor beneath large shields that protect the sensors from noise from ocean
currents. Compliance, a measure the deformation of the seafloor under the
loading of long period ocean waves, depends on the elastic properties of the
underlying Earth and thereby to the fraction of magma within the magma chamber.
The current shielding developed will also have applicability for reducing the
noise levels for the horizontal components of broadband seismometers installed
on the seafloor. Ocean bottom seismometers are critical to understanding many
Earth processes, but the high noise levels due to ocean floor currents limits
the types and quality of observations that can be
made.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.