* 1924117
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Collaborative Research: Easy-Med: Interdisciplinary Training in Security, Privacy-Assured Internet of Medical Things
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Premananda Indic, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 248,597.00

The combination of a network of physical devices embedded with electronics,
Internet connectivity, and other hardware, such as sensors, that can communicate
and interact with others over the Internet is known as the Internet of Things.
One familiar application of this technology is the "smart home" in which people
monitor and control their lights, thermostats and security systems remotely
using smart phones or smart speakers. An Internet of Things-based framework for
the healthcare industry is called the Internet of Medical Things. This
technology connects patients to their physicians and supports the transfer of
medical data over the Internet. Concerns about the privacy of data transmitted
over the Internet and network security are challenges facing all applications of
the Internet of Things concept, but they can be exacerbated by the knowledge gap
between the designers of the frameworks and the end users in the medical field.
As the healthcare industry grows to meet the needs of an aging population, the
workforce that designs Internet of Medical Things devices and the networks that
connect them must be ready to address these privacy and security concerns. The
project is addressing this gap, and thus serves the national interest, as stated
by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science; to advance the national
health, prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Easy-Med is a multi-
disciplinary training program designed to improve core literacy of cyber
infrastructure for students at the undergraduate level in northeast Texas. The
six-week-long mentored program provides immersive training to increase the
students' ability to develop and use secure, privacy-assured sensing healthcare
frameworks. A different training module is provided each week and each day of
the module includes four hours of lecture and three hours of hands-on lab
exercises. Training modules introduce the students to the different aspects
involved in designing devices and networks for the Internet of Medical Things.
The six training modules, components of which are also provided online, include:
1) types of biosensors and Internet of Medical Things components, 2) system-
level modeling of Internet of Medical Things networks, 3) signal and data
analytics used in healthcare, 4) security and privacy assurance in Internet of
Medical Things technology, 5) applications of biosensors in the healthcare
industry, and 6) use of and ethics involved in using the Internet of Medical
Things in the community setting. Students who participate in Easy-Med during the
summer are encouraged to further their knowledge and provide outreach about the
program by participating in a Build-a-Thon activity during the following fall
semester and a research symposium in the following spring
semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.