* 1924498
* Dispersal, connectivity and local adaptation along an extreme environmental gradient
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Adam Reitzel, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 848,562.00

Future increases in sea temperatures are expected to have far-reaching and
detrimental consequences for marine organisms. Organisms must either move to
more favorable environments, acclimate to maintain homeostasis, or adapt through
genomic changes to the new thermal regime, otherwise local extinction will
occur. For marine benthic organisms that are largely and completely sedentary,
their capacity to migrate is dependent on larval dispersal, which is
hypothesized to be limited under warming conditions. In this project, the
research team studies populations of four marine invertebrate species (coral,
sea urchin, oyster, ascidian) across the substantial thermal gradient along the
northeastern Arabian Peninsula as a natural system to quantify the effects of
elevated temperatures on dispersal, genetic connectivity and adaptation. The
team will use an integrative approach that consists of experimental larval
assays, biophysical modeling and high throughput sequencing technologies. This
study provides a comprehensive assessment of the potential impacts of climate
change on economically and ecologically important organisms, while enriching the
understanding of core ecological and evolutionary concepts. The success of this
project results from a synergistic international collaboration with New York
University at Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. This research project provides
mentoring and training for a postdoctoral scholar, a graduate student, and four
undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups who are interested
in pursuing graduate education. Each of these scholars is provided access to
cutting-edge science, international and collaborative research opportunities,
and experience disseminating their science to different audiences. Furthermore,
the broader impacts extend to the Charlotte community and wider public in this
region of North Carolina through the implementation of two outreach exhibits at
a local science museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the interplay between
dispersal, genetic connectivity and adaptation will be key to forecasting the
impacts on future sea temperature increases on marine benthic invertebrates.
This project uses the world's warmest reefs in the Persian/Arabian Gulf, that
currently experience temperatures not anticipated on reefs elsewhere within the
next century, as a model system to study the effects of elevated temperatures on
these ecologically and evolutionary important processes. Populations of four
invertebrate species from the Persian/Arabian Gulf are compared to populations
in the neighboring Gulf of Oman that experiences a more benign thermal
environment. The first aim characterizes the impact of elevated temperatures on
the survival, pelagic duration, and settlement responses of larvae from
different populations of the four focal species along the thermal gradient.
These results are additionally compared with potential shifts in egg investment
strategies by females from each location. The second aim uses these population-
specific responses gleaned from the larval experiments to parameterize models of
present day and future dispersal and compares them against existing patterns of
genetic connectivity. The final aim analyzes the genomic basis for thermal
adaptation in these populations through a combination of whole genome
comparisons and single-generation selection experiments, with the goal to
ascertain whether there is evidence for convergent/parallel evolution in the
taxonomically distinct invertebrate species. This project is expected to advance
our knowledge of adaptation to climate change by providing new insights into the
impacts of temperature on a key life cycle stage and elucidate the genomic
processes governing thermal adaptation in marine
invertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.