* 1924790
* NRI: FND: Efficient algorithms for safety guiding mobile robots through spaces populated by humans and mobile intelligent machines and robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Efstathios Bakolas, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The goal of this research effort is to contribute to recent efforts aimed at
promoting the safe and smooth integration of intelligent (autonomous or semi-
autonomous) machines and robots in different aspects of our everyday life.
Humans and different types of robots will have to co-exist and work together in
shared spaces including dense urban places (e.g., busy crossroads) and the
factory floors of big industrial facilities. For the harmonious symbiosis of
robots and humans, it is necessary that they can both effectively avoid
conflicts and physical collisions that may cause serious damage, significant
economic losses, injuries, or even loss of life. One of the key challenges of
this research effort has to do with the fact that robots will have to make
decisions in real-time under uncertainty when they are navigating through busy
spaces populated by other robots and humans. In particular, the ability of
mobile robots to safely navigate in densely populated spaces hinges upon their
knowledge of not only the whereabouts of the other mobile robots or humans in
their vicinity but also the intentions of the latter (i.e., which directions
they plan to move) which may be difficult to predict. The proposed research will
create new algorithmic methods that will allow robots to simultaneously 1) infer
the most likely future motion patterns of nearby humans and robots in real-time
and 2) safely guide them to their destination while avoiding collisions with
nearby robots and humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort is expected
to lead to the creation of scalable algorithms for decentralized intention-aware
local motion planning for autonomous robots in multi-agent environments. The
proposed approach explicitly accounts for the mobility characteristics and the
shape of the agents involved in a conflict event as well as the effects of
uncertainty on their decision making mechanisms due to (1) sensing / perception
limitations of the agents, and (2) lack of knowledge by the agent of interest
(ego-agent) of the intentions of its nearby agents regarding their future
motion. One of the backbones of our approach is an intention identification
algorithm that seeks to compute an approximation of the density function of the
probability distribution associated with the projected goal destination of each
agent involved in a conflict situation. The proposed algorithm relies on a class
of non-parametric statistical methods known as kernel density estimation
algorithms whose computational footprint and complexity are significantly
smaller than those of other approaches that rely on the solution of partially
observable Markov decision processed (POMDPs), which can be a very complex task.
Subsequently, we construct ellipsoidal tubes that contain with a certain
probability the anticipated trajectories that will transfer all the agents near
the ego-agent to their projected goal destinations. Next, we reduce the local
motion planning problem to a low-dimensional convex optimization problem whose
solution will be updated only when significant changes in the predictions of the
agents future trajectories have taken place. The proposed approach judiciously
characterizes the areas of high risk for collisions, thus allowing the agents to
plan collision-free trajectories even in densely crowded spaces. This is in
contrast with reachability-based approaches which often give false negative
answers to the question of feasibility in a collision avoidance problem, thus
declaring the latter problem to be infeasible despite the existence of feasible
collision-free trajectories. An array of interweaved research and educational
activities that will promote the participation of undergraduate and
underrepresented students in real world problems of robotics are also
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.