* 1924092
* HDR DSC: Collaborative Research: Transforming Data Science Education through a Portable and Sustainable Anthropocentric Data Analytics for Community Enrichment Program
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jiang Li, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 449,955.00

This project will focus on human-centric analytics, or anthropocentric data
analytics, to provide a common ground for beginning studies in data science and
to prepare students to address interdisciplinary problems. As one of the most
promising subareas of data science, human-centric data analytics either
considers humans as the research object or involves humans as the executors over
all stages of data analytics. The proposed Anthropocentric Data Analytics for
Community Enrichment (ADACE) project will form a three-institution partnership,
with University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC) as the coordinating
organization, and UTC, Chattanooga State Community College and Howard University
as implementing organizations. Together they will address the challenge of
developing a large, high-quality workforce skilled in data-related disciplines.
This is essential for the United States to maintain its competitiveness in the
21st century. The project aims to establish an interdisciplinary platform with a
curriculum that integrates real-world community research projects. In today's
increasingly globalized world, data science occupations are essential for
sustained social and economic development. Most U.S. colleges and universities
are witnessing an increased interest from students in these programs offered by
computer science and other related departments. However, a lack of training
programs and community engagement through real-life projects makes it difficult
to keep students engaged and interested. Limited access to internships can also
reduce students' success in data science and may even direct them away from
these fields. This project addresses the critical need to attract higher numbers
of talented students, to better stimulate students' interest, to increase the
retention rates, and to eventually meet the rising workforce demand.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project endeavors to promote undergraduate training in
data science. An interdisciplinary and multi-institutional collaboration will
strive to establish an infrastructure that accommodates 41 students and spans
the entire four years of their college career. The project aspires to enhance
current data science and related curricula of the participating institutions, as
two of them have data science programs for undergraduate and graduate students.
To attract students with a broad range of interests, ADACE will consist of four
core modules - mathematics foundation, computational foundation, data science,
and data science applications - and integrate multiple interdisciplinary and
human-centric community projects. Those projects will feature six areas: (1)
human-in-the-loop data integration, (2) visible neural network architecture, (3)
human-in-the-loop machine learning, (4) seamless interaction between users and
machines, (5) human-oriented topics investigating the behavior of individuals or
society, and (6) studies of ethics in terms of both AI scientists/engineers and
artificial agents. Participating institutions will have the opportunity to
leverage existing relationships with local for- and non-profit organizations to
expose students to real-world problems of data science and provide opportunities
for networking. Each concentration will be led by a co-principal investigator
with expertise in that area, building on their research findings and experience
with interdisciplinary collaboration to shape innovative curricula and research
projects. Students will have the opportunity to gain knowledge in data science,
problem-solving skills, hands-on experience, and rigorous research training
through this proposed program. All curricular materials will be designed to be
portable, sustainable, and easily disseminated to ensure their expanded impact.
They will also be evaluated for measurable outcomes and tailored to include non-
traditional students, who form a large portion of the potential data science
workforce in the regions surrounding the participating institutions. NSF's
Harnessing the Data Revolution Data Science Corps program focuses on building
capacity for harnessing the data revolution at the local, state, national, and
international levels to help unleash the power of data in the service of science
and society. Projects in this program are being jointly funded by the NSF's
Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea; the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering, Division of Information and Intelligent
Systems; the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of
Undergraduate Education; the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
Division of Mathematical Sciences; and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral
and Economic Sciences, Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and Division of
Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.