* 1924859
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Real-Time Network Pattern Change Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jie Yang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 57,751.00

The rapidly booming amounts of social networks data from the Internet offers a
lot of information to understand human behaviors. First, the networks data
contains sparse communication frequencies and some dense clusters, and the
clusters change over time, so that feature generation and selection are
essential. This research project addresses the statistical challenges for
detecting abrupt categories changes in networks. This is important for
quantifying human dynamics and accurately identifying unusual events and
forecast future threats indicated by those events. Graduate students will be
involved in some aspects of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to develop 1) for the static case: we will use zero-inflated or hurdle models to
characterize the class link probability. 2) for the dynamic case: the class
communication probability is a variable of time, we model the probability by a
self-exciting process. 3) we consider the cold-start problem in which the
predicted networks vary a lot from the training network, so that there are no
enough samples to train classification models. Instead, we will develop matrix-
variate clustering and classification models. This project includes several
important topics to improve modeling of the network users' categories and
identifying efficiently abrupt network pattern changes in real time as well as
reducing the influence of outliers. These methods are applicable to various
types of networks data such as social networks, biology signals, genome
sequences, and so on. The PIs will provide a publicly-available software
packages to implement the proposed methods. Additionally, corresponding
statistical theories and computational techniques can be extended to advance
further research and can be applied to other fields. This project topics cater
to the students with hands-on studies in new Big-Data analysis program at the
University of Central Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.