* 1924617
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: Hierarchical Safe, and Distributed Feedback Control of Multiagent Legged Robots for Cooperative Locomotion and Manipulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Kaveh Akbari Hamed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 374,823.00

The project aims to realize legged co-robots that cooperatively work with each
other or people to achieve a variety of tasks in complex environments. One of
the most challenging problems in deploying the next generation of ubiquitous co-
robots is mobility in complex environments. More than half of the Earth's
landmass is inaccessible to wheeled vehicles this motivates utilizing legged co-
robots to access these environments and thus bring robots into the real world.
Legged robots that are augmented with manipulators can form co-robot teams that
assist humans in different aspects of their life. Although important theoretical
and technological advances have enabled the development of distributed
controllers for complex robot systems, including multiagent systems composed of
collaborative robotic arms, multifingered robot hands, aerial vehicles, and
ground vehicles, understanding how to control cooperative legged agents is an
open problem. The challenges in achieving coordination in this domain stems from
the fact that legged robots are inherently unstable, and the evolution of legged
co-robot teams is represented by high-dimensional and complex hybrid dynamical
systems which complicate the design of distributed control algorithms for
control and coordination. There is a fundamental gap in knowledge of distributed
control algorithms for safety-critical control of these inherently unstable,
underactuated, and complex hybrid dynamical systems. The overarching goal of
this proposal is to create a formal foundation, based on hybrid systems theory,
scalable optimization, and robust and safety-critical control, to develop
distributed and hierarchical feedback control algorithms for cooperative legged
co-robots with manipulators to achieve a variety of tasks in complex
environments. The proposed research will have broad societal impact through the
formally principled and safety-critical deployment of ubiquitous collaborative
legged robots in scenarios where robots can assist humans, e.g., disaster
response. The integrated educational plan will have broad impact by designing a
new course based upon the results, utilizing robots for STEM-based outreach for
K-12 students, teachers, and under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop resilient and
versatile algorithms that address cooperative locomotion and manipulation of
high-dimensional hybrid models of legged co-robot teams in a safe, stable, and
reliable manner. These algorithms will further enable legged co-robot teams to
adapt to new tasks and environments with minimal modification to software. It
will advance knowledge in the largely unexplored field of distributed control of
large-scale hybrid system models of legged co-robots through specific objectives
and key innovations in Scalability and Customizability. Intelligent and
optimization-based motion planning algorithms will be created for hybrid models
of legged co-robots to adapt to a wide variety of complex environments and new
situations. Distributed and hierarchical control algorithms, based on nonlinear,
robust and predictive controllers, together with scalable convex optimization,
will be developed for coordination of multiagent legged robotic systems to
enable agile locomotion patterns while manipulating objects in a dexterous
manner. Finally, safety-critical control methods, based on set invariance and
convex optimization, will be integrated with the hierarchical and distributed
controllers for obstacle avoidance. To bridge the gap between theory and
implementation, the proposed research will transfer the theoretical innovations
into practice through experiments with a co-robot team consisting of multiple
quadruped robots and one humanoid robot working
collaboratively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.