* 1924718
* I-Corps: Lidar-based Technology to Track and Control Wind Turbine Wake Trajectory
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Suhas Pol, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enhance
wind farm output by increasing the annual energy production through advanced
turbine wake-control technologies. This will further enhance the benefits of
wind energy and provide guidance in overcoming its challenges. According to the
DOE's Wind Vision Report, wind power can be a cost-effective renewable energy
source. At the land-based utility-scale, wind is one of the lowest-priced energy
sources available today. It has employed 100,000 workers in 2016 and by 2050 it
is expected to employ 600,000 workers. Furthermore, researchers estimate that
wind power generation in 2013 reduced power-sector water consumption by 36.5
billion gallons. It has reduced the direct power sector carbon dioxide emission
by 115 million metric tons, sulfur dioxide emission by 157,000 metric tons, and
nitrogen oxides by 97,000 metric tons in 2013 alone. Searching the product-
market fit will improve the possibility of incorporating wake-control
technologies in the marketplace. Additional applications of this technology can
be found in naval defense, where submarine wakes should be concealed, as well as
airline traffic control, where airplane wakes need to be dispersed rapidly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project technology utilizes instantaneous
wake location as a feedback input to a closed-loop control algorithm that
manipulates available turbine parameters (such as pitch, speed, and power
control) to steer the wake to a desired location. Individual wind turbine wake
is a fundamental building block of the complex flow structure in a wind farm. It
has been observed that an upwind turbine wake reduces downwind turbine power
generation by 40%. As a result, wake control or manipulation provides an
unprecedented opportunity to improve wind farm output as a whole, in contrast to
the limited benefits of improving individual turbine efficiency. Texas Tech
University's wake control algorithm can be incorporated in existing wind farms
and can function by altering existing control parameters. This technology has
been tested at the wind-tunnel based Hyper Accelerated Wake Kinematics
Simulation (HAWKS) platform. The HAWKS platform is capable of emulating full-
scale wake detection and steering. Such wake steering would potentially increase
power generated by downwind turbines, increasing wind farm power generation as a
whole. This increase in power generation increases revenue potential, especially
in a grid-price bidding scenario for a low wind speed
forecast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.