* 1924094
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Institutional Cyberinfrastructure Training Center in a Box
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Mike Carpenter, DOANE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,997.00

Several challenges impact CyberInfrastructure (CI) workforce development that go
beyond significant increases in data generation and the need for
interdisciplinary research. There continues to be a general CI systems awareness
problem which limits the number of students entering college to learn about CI
systems or moving into computational fields later. The project establishes a
"coding center in a box," adoptable by other institutions, to support their own
CI Users and enable the establishment of centers capable of providing student-
led peer consultation and instruction to undergraduate students interested in
programming, computational and data-driven science, and advanced CI tools for
use in teaching and research. The project leverages Doane University's Center
for Computing in the Liberal Arts (CCLA), an entity modeled after collegiate
writing centers. Doane's CCLA targets CI Users, as well as students and faculty
unfamiliar with or unaware of CI tools and technologies, with the goal of
increasing technology adoption, specifically CI tools, in computational and
data-driven research projects. Students and faculty can come for peer review and
training on how to incorporate coding and other advanced CI tools into their own
research and projects. A workshop on advanced CI techniques (high-performance
and high-throughput computing on large datasets), targeted at undergraduate
students and faculty, enables institutions to quickly bring their community up
to speed on these techniques. Classroom modules, across a variety of
disciplines, allow advanced CI techniques to be easily incorporated into
existing classes, broadening the reach of CI knowledge. The Doane University
pilot project thus serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission - to
promote the progress of science and to serve the national health, prosperity,
and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This pilot project has the following specific
objectives: (1) Build a campus culture for computing using a comprehensive
marketing strategy; (2) Recruit, train, and manage a cohort of undergraduate
students to serve as Peer Consultants and develop training materials for
preparing Peer Consultants; (3) Create a comprehensive package of materials
related to the implementation of a Coding Center; (4) Develop and implement a
workshop in advanced CI techniques targeted at undergraduate students and
faculty; (5) Develop five classroom modules that feature advanced CI techniques;
and (6) compile and maintain a curated repository of large, open data sets
available in the cloud that undergraduate students and faculty can access and
study. The project tests whether a coding center model, in addition to CI course
modules and a CI workshop focused on parallel computation using large data sets,
can increase the adoption of CI techniques in underserved CI User communities,
namely, undergraduate students majoring in natural science, computer science,
mathematics, and engineering, and teaching faculty in those fields. The project
also determines if these interventions increase computing self-efficacy and
dispositions towards pursuing a career involving computation for undergraduate
CI Users. The CCIMS project offers several avenues by which other institutions
can support CI Users and advance computational and data-driven science and the
use of advanced CI tools in education and research. The CCIMS project increases
the number of undergraduate students engaged with CI, initially at Doane
University, and later at outside institutions. The CCIMS project results in
increased research productivity and competitiveness of students and faculty, and
enhanced collaboration with other academic partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.