* 1924545
* Collaborative Research: Highly Selective Photocatalysis on TiO2 with Atomically Dispersed Active Centers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* De-en Jiang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Catalysts accelerate chemical reactions toward preferred products with
significant savings in energy and capital costs. Photocatalysts - those that
rely on the sun's energy - offer a path to sustainable manufacturing of fuels
and chemicals, and also facilitate remediation of environmental pollutants. The
project will investigate novel photocatalyst designs for upgrading natural gas
to higher-value products and clean-up of nitric oxide from air pollutants. The
research will be supplemented by a broad range of educational and outreach
activities aimed primarily at K-12 and undergraduate students from
underrepresented backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enlists the
expertise of three investigators with skills in catalyst synthesis,
spectroscopic characterization techniques, and computational catalysis to
prepare and characterize structurally well-defined and atomically-dispersed
active sites on heterogeneous catalysts. The catalysts will be evaluated for
their ability to control the product selectivity of photo-driven reactions and
to elucidate the corresponding reaction mechanisms. This project responds to a
critical challenge in heterogeneous catalysis that traditional synthesis methods
often lead to a variety of catalytic sites that are structurally poorly defined.
This diversity of active sites leads to poor reaction selectivity and hinders
elucidation of reaction mechanisms. The researchers will address these
challenges by synthesizing atomically-dispersed active centers, mononuclear
metal sites and surface oxygen vacancies, on titanium dioxide, a prototypical
photocatalyst. The project focuses on two technologically important reactions,
the oxidation of methane to methanol and the reduction of NO to dinitrogen. The
effort involves characterization of the catalysts with advanced techniques, such
as HAADF-STEM and EXAFS. Operando infrared, Raman, and X-ray spectroscopies will
be employed to provide insights into the mechanism of the surface reactions. DFT
calculations will further complement the mechanistic information. The project is
expected to generate novel insights into the factors that govern the reaction
selectivity of heterogeneous catalytic reactions. The team will pursue a multi-
pronged approach to engage underrepresented minorities in this research at their
respective institutions and to educate the general public about photocatalysis.
Specific activities include participation in the NSF-sponsored Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Program, an innovative course for freshmen
undergraduate students whose primary declarations are not in the sciences,
engagement in outreach activities with local high schools, and a collaborative
effort with high-school teachers to introduce students to molecular
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.