* 1924855
* CCRI: ENS: Collaborative Research: Developing the Dialog Ecosystem to Support and Enhance Research in Spoken Dialog Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Maxine Eskenazi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,207,676.00

People are talking to dialog systems in everyday life. Siri, Alexa and others
have become household names. But as any user of these systems knows, they are
far from perfect. They are also currently limited in terms of the types of
things they can do. Usage data is essential to improve these systems using
machine learning and artificial intelligence techniques, but companies that
create dialogue systems often keep this data to themselves, making it harder for
researchers to create, improve, and evaluate such systems properly. DialPort was
created with the goal of gathering data from real users for dialog systems
around the world. Researchers can connect their systems to the Portal or request
the data that others have collected. Beyond this, for researchers who need help
creating a dialog system that they could use to run studies and collect data,
the DialPort DialogEcosystem provides them with access to tools for the creation
of their systems and tutorials on how to use them. For researchers who already
have systems and want to test them using human computation (often called
crowdsourcing), the DialPort DialogEcosystem provides easy task creation and
connection to major crowdsourcing sites. And to lower the barrier to entry to
the field, the DialPort DialogEcosystem helps train young students with its REAL
Challenge in which students can imagine ideal dialog systems and learn how to
create them. The results from this project will ultimately impact every person
who uses dialog systems in daily life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DialPort
project, previously funded by the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) Research Infrastructure Program, has given the Spoken Dialog
Community access to tools, data and users. Researchers who want to create a new
dialog system consult DialPort's website for access to the tools they need. When
a dialog system is up and running, they connect it to the Portal to get real
users to communicate with their systems. The DialPort DialogEcosystem will keep
up with the evolving needs of a growing community in several ways. More tools
and tutorials will be available. Real user data has started to flow to the
systems connected to the Portal and that flow will increase substantially in
order to produce the large amounts of data that are needed by state-of-the-art
systems. Many researchers test early versions of their systems with
crowdworkers, but they are not familiar with how to set up tasks and run quality
control and they need help. DialPort DialogEcosystem will respond to these
evolving needs with its DialCrowd tools. The field of researchers who are
creating dialog systems is expanding. The field of Question Answering is now
using chatbots as a means of testing their retrieval capabilities. In Machine
Learning, researchers are working on natural language generation and finding
that dialog systems are vehicles that can test their work. The DialogEcosystem
will reach out to everyone who works on dialog systems and offer a complete
framework that can serve their needs from creation to assessment. Beyond present
researchers, the DialPort DialogEcosystem will reach out to young students to
teach them about our field. The DialPort DialogEcosystem will: create a handheld
version of the Portal to address how real users and workers access the Portal;
greatly extend DialTools to include wrappers and tutorials for popular system
creation tools, extend DialCrowd to help researchers create, assess and analyze
results from Crowdwork tasks, create a new REAL Challenge to help high school
and undergraduate students become familiar with our
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.