* 1924679
* EAGER: Lift in the Vertical Shear of Southerly Winds: A Mechanism of Elevated Convection at Night in the United States Great Plains
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Qi Hu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 204,515.00

One of the unique features of warm season weather in the U.S. Great Plains is
that heavy precipitation takes place most frequently between midnight and early
morning. Such nocturnal heavy precipitation contributes to nearly 80% of daily
convective precipitation, critically affecting water resources availability, the
economy, and the safety of the communities in the region. This nocturnal heavy
precipitation is counterintuitive in the sense that the intensive convective
activity over the Great Plains occurs at late night when the lower-troposphere
is stably stratified, and the convective available potential energy is low. This
paradoxical situation challenges the traditional understanding of development of
severe convection yet also presents an opportunity for exploring new mechanisms
for severe nocturnal convection and rainfall in the U.S. Great Plains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to examine a mechanism that
initiates nocturnal convection in the absence of passage of fronts or convective
complex with a low level of convective available potential energy in the lower
troposphere. The significance of outcomes of this study is the exploring of a
new mechanism for warm season severe convection and rainfall in the Great Plains
at mid-night to early morning hours. The validation of the new mechanism will
fill the gap in the knowledge of initiation of nocturnal convection in the
absence of frontal boundaries and convective complex and will extend the
knowledge of nocturnal convection beyond the traditional thinking. The findings
will help improve model capabilities to predict the timing and intensity of
severe convection and rainfall in the U.S. Great Plains. The broader impacts of
this study also include its potential to improve the safety and wellbeing of the
communities across the U.S. Great Plains and, through education, expanding local
public schools' science education programs by engaging students in learning
fluid dynamics and appreciating the impacts of geosciences in improving people's
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis is that the nocturnal
intensification of the low-level southerly wind in the Great Plains is subject
to Coriolis deflection, which would in turn lead to the development of a vortex
rotating along the horizontal axis pointing to the north (the northern vortex).
Interactions of the northern vortex with the wind blows from the Rockies
generate a lift that can elevate air in the lower-troposphere high enough to
initiate convection, responsible for heavy precipitation in the hours between
mid-night and early morning in the Great Plains. The main research tasks are 1)
identifying processes leading to development of the northern vortex; 2)
quantifying the condition that creates the lift of the vortex; 3) quantifying
the roles of the atmospheric moisture in generating the lift; and 4) identifying
the missing or incorrectly described processes that have failed current models
in reproducing the elevated convection of this kind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.