* 1924978
* NRI: FND: Robust and Scalable Planning for Agile and Collaborative Robot Teammates in Complex Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Samuel Coogan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 763,709.00

Collaborative robot teams may one day become ubiquitous in our lives, accompany
humans in challenging environments, perform a wide range of task, and even
surpsass human capabilities where needed. This potential offers a significant
opportunity for co-robot teams to collaborate effectively and reliably with
humans for daily life and rescue tasks. However, it remains challenging to
design robotic decision-making and planning algorithms that are scalable to
complex real world scenarios and that provide formal safety assurances. Formal
decision-making methods are critical in reasoning about how robot teammates
collaborate in unstructured environments, e.g., how a ground robot coordinates
with aerial robots for search and rescue tasks, or how a humanoid robot
cooperates with humans to deliver supplies in confined space. This challenge
will be accentuated when robots are required to perform tasks at or beyond
human-level dexterity and proficiency. The overarching vision of this
interdisciplinary project is to achieve robust and scalable algorithms for
ubiquitous co-robots maneuvering in complex environments while effectively
collaborating with humans for various tasks. A wide range of applications will
be targeted, including home care applications and search and rescue tasks.
Although this project focuses on legged and aerial robots as design examples,
the approaches are targeting a broader range of robotic systems including
wheeled robots, manipulators, and fielding environments such as networked
control systems and transportation systems. This project also features an
integrated education plan involving the creation of a new graduate course on
formal control methods for robotic systems as well as STEM-based outreach
initiative for women and underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at advancing planning and
decision-making algorithms of heterogeneous and collaborative robotic systems to
achieve ubiquitous tasks in unstructured, human-in-the-scene, and dynamically
changing environments. This project will target the following three objectives:
devise robust, non-periodic motion planners based on kinodynamic planning and
control barrier certificates for versatile terrestrial and aerial maneuvering;
synthesize game-theoretic, reactive, and robust task planners in response to
diverse environmental events; and propose a novel multi-agent decision-making
approach decomposing the whole robot team into multiple sub-teams. This
integrated planning framework will adopt algorithmic methods at the interaction
of state-of-the-art formal methods, multi-agent systems, robust control, and
machine learning. The proposed planning theory will focus on robustness and
scalability reasoning which are of high importance, as they open up the
opportunity for achieving complex multi-robot maneuverability and cooperation
tasks while reasoning about formal guarantees including provable correctness and
assured safety. Under the hypothesis of sufficient computational resources, the
proposed framework will make task decisions and generate motion plans in real-
time satisfying the required specifications at both mission and task planning
levels. The deliverables from this project include decision-making and planning
theories envisioned for unified, heterogeneous legged and aerial robots with
open-sourced algorithms and experiment
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.