* 1924215
* NSFGEO-NERC: Quantifying the Modern and Glacial Ocean's Carbon Cycle Including Isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Andreas Schmittner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 431,527.00

The ocean"s carbon cycle is an important part of Earth's climate system because
it impacts the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), which is a
greenhouse gas. However, carbon cycling in the ocean is currently not well
understood in part because it is influenced by different complex physical,
chemical and biological processes. This complicates quantification of changes in
ocean carbon storage such as those between the contemporary ocean and that of
the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM, ~21,000 years ago) and hinders mechanistic
understanding of the reasons for such changes. Previous studies have suggested
several explanations for the lower atmospheric CO2 concentrations during the LGM
including, increased sea ice cover, more sluggish deep ocean circulation, cooler
temperatures and increased dust-borne iron fluxes that fertilized phytoplankton
growth. This project will provide a novel data-constrained quantification of
these processes, which will improve our mechanistic understanding of past
changes, and may improve understanding of possible future projections. A
graduate student will be trained in oceanography, biogeochemical and physical
modeling. The project will support underrepresented students through more than
25 afterschool Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics clubs in rural
Oregon middle and high schools. This will be achieved by working with teachers
to develop and implement a carbon cycle and climate science curriculum into
their programs. This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science
Foundation's Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment
Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead
Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be
submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest
proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with
its own country.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern observations and paleoclimate data
provide a wealth of information on changes to the carbon cycle. These data
including carbon and nitrogen isotopes from glacial sediments will be used to
constrain process-based models of the modern and LGM ocean. A newly developed
method will be applied that provides a precise and complete decomposition of
dissolved inorganic carbon storage into preformed and biologically-regenerated
components. Preformed carbon is further separated into saturation and
disequilibrium components, each of which has physical and biological
contributions. Perturbation experiments will be used in which one variable
(temperature, sea ice, circulation, soluble iron fluxes) is changed at a time
and the carbon decomposition is applied. Uncertainties in circulation, mixing,
and biogeochemistry will be considered. Protactinium Thorium ratios (Pa/Th) will
be implemented in the model and compared with modern and glacial sediment data,
which will provide additional constraints on ocean circulation. Effects of ocean
circulation changes on the different carbon components will be investigated. The
decomposition will be extended to dissolved oxygen and carbon isotopes (d13C).
Hypotheses regarding modern and glacial ocean carbon storage will be
tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.