* 1924378
* CNH2-S: Understanding the Coupling Between Climate Policy and Ecosystem Change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Frances Moore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 749,586.00

Environmental change has the potential to fundamentally alter the functioning of
ecosystems around the world with important implications for human wellbeing.
However, current scientific understanding of the ecological risks posed by
environmental change and their implication for society are not well represented
in models used to quantify the effects of increasing greenhouse gas
concentrations. This project will combine ecological modeling with economic
valuation of non-market goods to better incorporate two types of ecological
impacts of environmental change in such a model: 1) changes in the global
provision of ecosystem services caused by the altered composition, location, and
functioning of terrestrial ecosystems and 2) the lost existence value from
increasing risk of extinction for many plant and animal species. These new
estimates will be integrated into computational models of the climate and
economic systems to more accurately quantify the costs of increased greenhouse
gas concentrations. The model will lead to better understanding of the magnitude
and geographic distribution of ecological change impacts and will improve the
scientific basis of regulatory analysis of extant and proposed environmental and
energy policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to better understand
how increased concentrations of greenhouse gasses, via their effects on
ecological systems, affect human well-being and thus improve the scientific
basis for environmental policy decisions. The work integrates ecological
modeling with economic analysis to quantify two major pathways by which climate
change impacts on ecosystems affect human welfare: 1) changes in the value of
ecosystem service provision and 2) changes in the existence value of species
caused by increasing extinction risk. These impacts will be incorporated into
the damage functions used by integrated assessment models (IAMs) to determine
both the marginal damages of increased CO2 concentrations (i.e. the social cost
of carbon) and welfare-maximizing greenhouse gas concentration trajectories. The
project is divided into three components that will be fully integrated in order
to answer the overarching research question. The ecological component will apply
Bayesian modeling and mixed statistical-process modeling to global datasets on
plant functional trait distributions and biodiversity in order to estimate the
effect of climate change on ecosystem processes and species distributions, from
which species extinction risk can be derived. A parallel economic component will
investigate the economic costs of these changes. This component has two parts:
meta-analyses of ecosystem service valuations to estimate the ecological and
socio-economic determinants of the value of multiple ecosystem services; and a
social revealed preference approach using species-level spending under the
Endangered Species Act to place a lower-bound on the costs of extinction risk.
Findings from the ecological and economic components will be integrated to
produce country-level damage functions that will be introduced into cost-benefit
IAM models to determine implications for marginal climate damages that can serve
to inform environmental policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.