* 1924721
* NRI: FND: 3D Concrete Printing with Macro-Micro Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Ian Walker, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 812,663.00

The construction industry is a critical element of the US economy, but
construction remains one of the least automated and lowest productivity
industries in the world. Much construction activity is low-tech, injury-prone
and dependent on semi-skilled labor. Within the industry, the pouring of
concrete is a pervasive process. This award supports research in robotic systems
for pouring concrete. The research will generate the fundamental knowledge
required to design robots which can pour concrete with greater efficiency and
precision than current manual methods, while working intimately and safely with
human workers. The multidisciplinary research will be conducted by a diverse
group of graduate and undergraduate students that includes women and
underrepresented minority students. The resulting robot systems will be
lightweight, widely deployable, low-cost, and inherently safe. Therefore,
results from this research will improve work flow, enhance build quality,
support workers, and enhance the competitiveness of the US construction
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The concrete deployment robot system will be
based on a new cable-driven macro/micro design, featuring an under-actuated
cable robot as the macro unit, with a cable-driven continuum robot, integrated
with the concrete delivery hose, as the micro unit. The macro-micro system
represents a significant innovation in cable-actuated co-robots. Coordination of
the dual system presents new and challenging problems in the control of
interconnected dynamical systems subject to differential-algebraic constraints
and the research will generate the fundamental knowledge required to solve the
associated problems. The need for the robot to safely and robustly assist human
coworkers further motivates an innovative data-driven methodology for providing
situational awareness of the dynamic construction environment. The focus on
dexterous concrete pouring represents a quantum leap for civil engineering in
enabling additive 3D printing of concrete structures with enhanced
functionalities, and the related fundamental materials research will yield new
understanding of the most suitable concrete formulations for robotic
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.