* 1924154
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Advanced Cyber Infrastructure Training in Policy Informatics
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Giri Narasimhan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,016,000.00

The Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Training for Policy Informatics (ACIT-PI) is an
interdisciplinary program for Cyberinfrastructure training to policy scientists.
The project is important and significant because policy scientists seek data-
enabled scientific techniques, which requires training in advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (CI) methods. Policy scientists can harvest data from
different sources, analyze and interpret them, and arrive at evidence-based
decisions. Such a workforce is urgently required in minority and low-income
communities with low skills in data science. As stated by NSF's mission, the
project serves the national interest to promote the progress of science,
prosperity and welfare. The national interest is served by offering CI training
to two classes of policy scientists: (a) CI users: research analysts in
nonprofit and public agencies; and (b) CI contributors and professionals:
research scientists specializing in policy science (graduate students). CI users
are trained through training workshops, webinars, and self-paced online training
modules. CI contributors and CI professionals are trained through a novel
interdisciplinary certificate program on Policy Informatics. The ACIT-PI project
is jointly undertaken by Florida International University (FIU) Metropolitan
Center, Department of Public Policy and Administration, School of Computing and
Information Sciences, and Electrical and Computer Engineering. It uses the CI
facilities including High Performance Computing and Internet 2 resources
available with FIU's Division of Information
Technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Policy scientists include engineers and social
scientists (criminologists, geographers, planners, public administrators,
political scientists). The ACIT-PI project enhances researchers' abilities to
lead the development of new CI tools, public domain data, and analysis. The
materials and tools developed through the project are available for broader use
by other universities through a Policy Information Hub. The Hub includes a
Policy Informatics Data Repository of local government administrative data in
standardized formats for fostering data driven research. The ACIT-PI project is
both innovative and transformative for public policy and administration
education. First, the project trains frontline analysts in local governments
through annual workshops, which fosters a large pool (of about 120) of CI users.
Second, project develops self-paced online training modules for broader CI
adoption by the public administration and policy schools. Third, it offers a
novel Policy Informatics certificate program for CI contributors/professionals
(over 100 students), which includes curriculum innovations infused with CI tools
and methods. Students take courses on policy science, computational methods
(including HPC clusters use and CI tools), machine learning, IoT, and
cybersecurity tools. PhD students are also trained to become CI experts in
policy science. The project fosters a robust community of CI users,
contributors, and professionals in policy informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.