* 1924241
* HBCU-RISE:  Enhancement of Research Infrastructure for Advanced Functional Materials for Biotechnology Applications
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Richard Mu, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 10/31/2023
* USD 999,999.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) program supports the development of research
capability at Historically Black Colleges and Universities that offer doctoral
degrees in science and engineering disciplines. Supported projects have a
unifying research focus in one of the research areas supported by the National
Science Foundation, a direct connection to the long-term plans of the host
department, institutional strategic plan and mission, and plans for expanding
institutional research capacity, as well as increasing the production of
doctoral students, especially those underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. With National Science Foundation support, Tennessee
State University will conduct a project entitled "Enhancement of Research
Infrastructure for Advanced Functional Materials for Biotechnology
Applications". The vision of this project is to position Tennessee State
University as a leader in the multidisciplinary field of advanced functional
materials for biotechnology applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advanced
materials fabricated from natural products have the potential for providing
novel solutions pertaining to biocompatibility, biodegradability, and
environmental issues, such as food protection, time-controlled release drugs,
targeted pesticide delivery, bio-inspired soil improvements, and self-sealing
structures. Further, with the combination of traditional synthetic polymers,
such as ferroelectric and biodegradable polymers, new and unique functional
materials by design can be realized for sensory and device development. The
research component of this project consists of five multidisciplinary thrusts:
(a) fabrication and characterization of the functionality of electrospun single
polymer fibers and assembled 2D and 3D meso-structures; (b) development of
piezoelectric polyvinylidene fluoride nanomaterial-based acoustic mass sensing
devices; (c) enhancement of functional materials using natural polymer based
electrospraying; (d) production of polyhydroxybutyrate polymers from
agricultural byproducts; and (e) development of bio-inspired smart
infrastructure materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages existing
resources to provide new pathways for Tennessee State University students to
participate in high impact research. The project will broaden the scope of
existing doctoral programs, making them accessible to students from a wider
range of disciplines, and transform the program into a more comprehensive
multidisciplinary research program that will prepare students for an
increasingly competitive domestic and international research
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.