* 1924016
* CNH2-L:  Solving Grand Challenges in Coupled Natural Human Systems: Predicting Effective Governance Strategies for Managing Invasive Species
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Mitchel McClaran, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,580,012.00

Ecological systems face novel, unexpected threats from invasive species- plants
or animals that are introduced to a place where they did not originate. Examples
of well-known invasive species in the United States include European starlings,
zebra mussels, and buffelgrass. Invasive species can increase the risk of
wildfires, diminish agricultural yields, and destroy valued natural ecosystems.
These problems are particularly vexing for policy makers, who are responsible
for avoiding harms from new environmental threats whose causes and consequences
are not yet well-understood. This award will explore the spread of invasive
buffelgrass in Southern Arizona. The research will focus on buffelgrass response
to ecological conditions, land-use patterns, and eradication techniques used by
landowners. The results of the study will be used to predict the long-term
effects of policies to address invasive species. The results will provide
natural resource managers and policy makers with new approaches and tools to
develop management systems that respond effectively to emerging threats. The
project will also provide diverse students with interdisciplinary STEM
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;External threats associated with environmental
change, biological invasions, human migration, and changing land use threaten
the stability and resiliency of integrated socio-environmental (CNH2) systems
globally. Policy makers' ability to address these threats is limited by
incomplete knowledge of how integrated socio-environmental systems will respond
to emergent threats, particularly knowledge of how ecological factors, land-use
practices, social attitudes and behaviors, and policy responses can jointly
affect ecological systems. Using buffelgrass invasion in southern Arizona as a
model system, the award will address how do CNH system dynamics change in
response to emergent threats, and what policy and governance changes will prompt
land managers to take effective, proactive, and sustained actions to address
these emergent threats. New methods and theory will be developed to predict how
integrated socio-environmental systems respond to change by: 1) developing the
spatial-human-ecology model, an agent-based model to predict interactions
between natural and human systems; 2) conducting surveys, interviews, and plant
demographics studies to empirically parameterize and run the model; 3) working
with stakeholders and practitioners to co-produce knowledge about policy options
whose effects can be predicted in the model; and 4) interrogating the results of
iterative model runs to develop generalizable theory about the conditions that
enable effective anticipatory governance in integrated socio-environmental
systems. This research addresses a critical need for development of predictive
methods to model dynamic interactions between ecological, social, and policy
systems and develops the scientific knowledge needed to provide resource
managers with the necessary knowledge and tools to enable proactive management
of emergent threats to CNH systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.