* 1924884
* I-Corps: Hybrid Solid State Electrolytes
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Stephanie Wunder, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potentials of this I-Corps project is the
advancement of safe, next generation lithium batteries that can power electric
vehicles with driving ranges in excess of 300 miles, and store intermittent
energy generated by wind and solar sources. Replacement of volatile, flammable
liquid electrolytes now used in lithium ion batteries with safe solid
electrolytes is the goal of many existing and future battery technologies. The
development of such a solid electrolyte separator has broad applications in many
economic sectors and to companies developing lithium ion, lithium metal, lithium
sulfur (LiS) and lithium air batteries. The technology can be applicable to many
lithium ion conducting ceramics, protecting them from contact with lithium metal
and water, and enabling them to be bonded with polymer electrolytes, so that
composites can be formed that are processible and compatible with existing
manufacturing processes or technologies to make batteries.

This I-Corps project addresses several critical problems that hinder the
development of all solid state lithium batteries. It is a technology that merges
the beneficial characteristics of both lithium ion conducting ceramics and
organic polymer electrolytes. Lithium ion conducting ceramics can have high
conductivity, wide electrochemical stability windows and moduli that in
principle suppress the growth of dendrites, but are brittle and not easily
incorporated into full cells. Polymer electrolytes have good processibility, can
be easily incorporated into battery cells and have better compatibility with
electrodes, but have low ionic conductivity. The technology merges these two
materials using silica "glue" that adheres well to the ceramic and can be
functionalized to be compatible with the polymer component. This has been
demonstrated using the sandwich geometry of polymer/ceramic/polymer, showing
that there is low interfacial resistance between the two components. When
nanometer layers are applied to ceramic particles, composites with polymers or
polymer gels can be formed with the desirable properties of both components.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.