* 1924205
* HDR DSC: Collaborative Research: Central Coast Data Science Partnership: Training a New Generation of Data Scientists
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Sang-Yun Oh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 970,104.00

Due to the societal and technological advances made possible by data-driven
science, there is a strong demand for professionals versed in the tools and
techniques needed for manipulating and understanding data. This project will
develop an undergraduate curriculum in data science that spans and connects the
three main public higher education systems in California: the research-driven
University of California system, the practical and career-oriented California
State University system, and the two-year California Community Colleges. The
collaborative program will establish pathways for data science training through
coursework and real-world projects. This project will impact students from
diverse social, ethnic, cultural, and economic backgrounds and will improve the
feeder pipelines from two-year colleges to four-year universities. This multi-
campus approach to building a data science training program will foster
collaborations for training a diverse workforce in data science. The resulting
course materials and project outcomes will be made available so that other
institutions can adopt best practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership
consists of four academic institutions on the West Coast: University of
California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), California Polytechnic State University, San
Luis Obispo (Cal Poly), Santa Barbara City College (SBCC), and California State
University, San Bernardino (CSUSB). The alliance will expand training at UCSB
and Cal Poly by building on existing strengths through a sequence of new
capstone courses, as well as lay the groundwork for data science curriculum
development at SBCC and CSUSB, whose students will participate in a summer
internship program at UCSB. Over 100 undergraduate students will be supported by
stipends during the course of the project. The developed courses will emphasize
programming and data inference within the context of application domains that is
critical to training in data science. Students will be taught the underlying
principles of data science, including data-generating processes and the role of
measurement, ethics and privacy, information-processing tools for harnessing the
power of big data, and the oral and written communication skills necessary for
pursuing effective professional careers in the field. The program will culminate
in a year-long capstone course for seniors, who will synthesize and apply
previously learned data science tools and techniques in a large-scale project in
a chosen domain area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution
Data Science Corps program focuses on building capacity for harnessing the data
revolution at the local, state, national, and international levels to help
unleash the power of data in the service of science and society. Projects in
this program are being jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the Data
Revolution Big Idea; the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, Division of Information and Intelligent Systems; the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education; the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Division of Mathematical
Sciences; and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences,
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.