* 1924599
* The genetic legacy of an Asian oyster introduction and its disease-causing parasite
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Allan Strand, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 466,141.00

During the 20th century, the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas was deliberately
introduced from its native range of coastal Asia to the estuaries of six
continents. While the introduced Pacific oysters are widely aquacultured and
thus can generate local economic wealth, they sometimes outcompete native
oysters, and can carry microbial, animal and plant hitchhikers that negatively
impact local economies and the ecological functioning of local estuaries. This
study comprehensively assesses the pathways and sources of Pacific oyster
introductions using a worldwide, population genetic survey. Simultaneously, the
study also assesses the pathways and source of one hitchhiking protist
(Haplosporidium nelsoni) that causes the disease MSX (multinucleated sphere X)
in the Virginia oyster (Crassostrea virginica) along the eastern seaboard of the
United States. One goal of this research is to generate management strategies
that combat the negative impacts of the Pacific oyster and its associated
invaders, and minimize future invasions. A second goal is to minimize some
uncertainty about the population biology of the devastating Haplosporidium
parasite, and thus, increase confidence of policy makers who are managing
shellfish health, restoration and commerce. By quantifying the pathways and
sources of C. gigas, this project may inform strategies to combat negative
impacts of C. gigas and its associated invaders, as well as minimize future
invasions. Moreover, quantifying dispersal within and among populations of H.
nelsoni along the US East Coast will provide perspective on the effectiveness of
regional biosecurity measures in preventing the ongoing dispersal of this
destructive pathogen via aquaculture. In addition, the project lends itself well
to programs that foster critical thinking and research experience among both
undergraduate and K-12 students. The project provides opportunities for 6-9
undergraduates to perform research, includes a 2-day workshop on bioinformatics
for the wider undergraduate community, and facilitates ongoing opportunities for
K-12 students to participate in citizen-science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a wealth of information on the source,
pathways and vectors of C. gigas based largely on historical documents but no
study has comprehensively tested whether these historical accounts are correct
using a worldwide, population genetic survey. Using &gt;14K single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from 41 populations across five continents a high level of
spatial genetic differentiation was found within the native range and
differences in source populations among non-native regions. Preliminary genetic
data indicated that the parasitic protist, Haplosporidium nelsoni arrived with
C. gigas imports to the US Atlantic coastline and then infected the native C.
virginica, however the native source populations, the pathways and vector from
which H. nelsoni arrived remain unknown. This project couples high-throughput
sequencing technologies and Approximate Bayesian Computing (ABC)-based models to
answer the following: What are the population genomic patterns among C. gigas
from native and non-native regions? What are the population genomic patterns of
Haplosporidium nelsoni among Asian and North American Crassostrea gigas and
eastern North American C. virginica? What were the source populations and
invasion pathways of C. gigas and H. nelsoni? Identifying source locations,
pathways and vectors of introduction of C. gigas will provide researchers with a
null-model of invasion history for dozens of other non-native species that were
transported with C. gigas. Currently, there are no verified ?vector maps? for
historical shipments of C. gigas that are similar to those generated from
modern-day or historical shipping records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.