* 1924033
* Student Travel Support for 2019 ACM Special Interest Group on Management of Data (ACM SIGMOD)
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Parth Nagarkar, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/29/2020
* USD 20,480.00

This award enables about 16 US students to participate in the 2019 Association
of Computing Machinery International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD-2019) held in Amsterdam, Netherlands, June 30 - July 5, 2019. The aim is
to support a diverse group of students, including students from under-
represented groups and make it possible for them to attend the conference and
discuss and disseminate their work. The conference also provides an opportunity
for them to interact with future national and international scientific
collaborators. The students will gain important training in data management
research and this will contribute to the development of a new generation of
researchers, educator and practitioners.

The SIGMOD conference, which was established in 1975, has a dynamic and
comprehensive program for publication, education, and interaction, including
research papers, tutorials, panels, industrial papers, technical demonstrations,
and undergraduate research papers. The program includes publications relating to
all aspects of data management defined broadly, and particularly encourages
publications on topics of emerging interest in the research and development
communities. The program also includes workshops that demand dedicated coverage
due to their relevance to the current data management research and development,
industrial exhibits, and keynote talks by leaders in academia and industry. All
these activities provide a unique opportunity for students to share their
knowledge, experience, and research work with internationally recognized
researchers from both academia and industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.