* 1924527
* Collaborative Research: Combining single-cell and community 'omics' to test hypotheses about diversity and function of planktonic ciliates
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* George McManus, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 570,208.00

Planktonic ciliates are key members of marine food webs where they serve diverse
roles, including as food chain links between smaller microbes and larger
plankton. Due to their small size and difficulties in identifying and
cultivating them, we know less about ciliate diversity and distributions in the
ocean than we do about larger organisms such as fish and invertebrates. Previous
work from this team measured ciliate diversity in coastal waters and found that
distinct genetic variants were separated in time and space in a way that could
be related to factors such as ocean temperature, salinity, and depth gradients.
Many questions remained unanswered, and it is important to understand the
environmental factors that control the diversity and distribution of plankton
such as ciliates to predict how these organisms may respond to a changing
enviroment in the coming decades. This project focuses on: 1) how ciliate
species are delineated using single-cell genomics and transcriptomics; 2) DNA-
based studies of all ciliates and other planktonic members of the SAR clade
(Stramenopila, Alveolata, Rhizaria), which will provide ecological context; 3)
in situ gene expression by single-cell and meta- transcriptomics; and 4)
laboratory studies of gene expression in cultivated ciliate species. This
project involves training of postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and
undergraduates. The researchers are committed to creating diverse and inclusive
research labs; recruitment of participants will be done through partnership with
appropriate groups on our campuses. The project integrates with summer Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) activities at both Smith College and UCONN
(including the UCONN/Mystic Aquarium joint REU), which are especially focused on
underrepresented students. This project also enhances efforts to broaden
understanding of biodiversity in partnership with the UCONN Noyce Scholars
Program, which facilitates career-changing STEM professionals to become teachers
in underserved secondary schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will assess
distributions of reproductively-isolated species, determined using a new method
to characterize regions of the ciliate germline genome. Furthermore, it will use
phylogenomic methods to identify clade-specific transcripts (e.g. those of
spirotrich ciliates) within metatranscriptomes from the shelf environment and to
expand knowledge of ciliate function with single-cell transcriptomics of field-
collected cells. These approaches will be a substantial improvement over the
culture-based methods that are potentially biased towards "weedy" species in the
ocean. The combination of definitive species identification with assessment of
function via single-cell and meta- transcriptomics promises to provide
significant advances in marine plankton ecology. The research focuses on two
broad questions: 1) does the observed high diversity in phylogenetically-
informative genes reflect reproductive isolation and functional differentiation
in planktonic ciliates? and 2) do different co-occurring species of planktonic
ciliates show substantial functional differences that correspond to different
niches in the ocean? The project assesses species boundaries (i.e. reproductive
isolation) through analyses of patterns in the germline micronuclei of
planktonic ciliate morphospecies; characterizes transitions of closely-related
ciliates across ecological gradients in the ocean; and examines functional
differences within and between species, and in communities, through analyses of
transcriptomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.