* 1924466
* Collaborative Research: Design of a Novel Photo-Thermo-Catalyst for Enhanced Activity and Stability of Dry Reforming of Methane
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ying Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 334,029.00

Waste gases containing methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) are produced from
sources such as shale oil recovery, landfills, poultry and livestock farms, and
other biogas sources. One way to upgrade those gases is to react them in the
presence of catalysts to transform them into simple gases such as carbon
monoxide (CO) and hydrogen (H2) that can be further processed to a wide range of
chemicals and fuels. The catalyzed reaction between methane and carbon dioxide
requires extremely high temperatures which makes it unattractive from an energy
consumption standpoint. An alternative approach is to utilize a combination of
direct sunlight irradiation and heat generated via solar energy collectors to
react the gases via simultaneous photocatalysis and thermal catalysis in a
sustainable process driven solely by the sun's energy. The project explores that
concept using a novel approach known as thermo-photo-catalytic dry reforming of
methane (DRM). Specifically, the project will focus on catalyst designs that
combine direct photocatalysis with thermal catalysis to achieve stable, highly-
efficient DRM at temperatures much lower than those based on conventional
fossil-fuel thermal catalysis alone. The technology can potentially play a
significant role in sustainably meeting our nation's future energy needs while
simultaneously transforming the greenhouse gases - CH4 and CO2 - to useful fuels
and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate several novel
aspects of thermo-photo-catalytic DRM, including: (1) fabricating novel and
stable catalysts that promote synergy between the photo- and thermo-catalytic
effects via integration of a photocatalytically active support, inexpensive
metal nanocatalysts dispersed on the support, and promoters to enhance catalytic
activity and stability; (2) designing innovative nanostructures, i.e. an
ultrathin porous overcoat on the catalyst via atomic layer deposition (ALD) to
mitigate metal sintering and prevent coke formation; (3) understanding the
fundamental mechanism of photo-thermo-catalysis at elevated temperatures through
a combination of in situ DRIFTS (diffuse reflectance FTIR) spectroscopy, GC/MS
measurement of the catalyst activity, and experiments using isotopically labeled
CO2 and CH4 molecules; and (4) elucidating catalyst structure-activity-stability
relationships through operando studies of metal valence, nanoparticle size, and
overcoat pore structure changes, carried out utilizing in situ X-ray scattering,
X-ray diffraction, and X-ray absorption spectroscopy at the Advanced Photon
Source of Argonne National Laboratory. This research will advance fundamental
understanding in the interdisciplinary areas of heterogeneous catalysis, surface
chemistry, nanoscience, and spectroscopy. In addition to the technical component
of the research, the project will be supported by several programs at both
institutions aimed at providing both high-school students and their teachers
opportunities to develop research skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.