* 1924256
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Modeling Excited State Dynamics in Solar Energy Materials
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alexey Akimov, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,621.00

Conversion of solar energy into electricity and fuels has the potential to
revolutionize environmentally-friendly and sustainable energy production. The
widespread adoption of solar panels is partially limited by the relatively low
efficiencies and relatively high costs of the underlying solar-harvesting
materials. The design and discovery of new efficient and inexpensive solar
energy conversion materials can be accelerated by computational modeling of
excited states dynamics in these systems. Studies of excited states dynamics can
reveal unwanted energy loss and charge transfer in these systems, and suggest
ways to control them. These modeling strategies require scientists to master
advanced theories, specialized software and cyberinfrastructure for modeling
excited states. Nonetheless, training in this area remains relatively scarce;
the community is often unaware of the available cyberinfrastructure, lacks the
best practice guidelines, and may experience entry barriers to employing these
advanced tools. This pilot project fills the above gaps by providing targeted
training to young scientists in the proficient use of advanced
cyberinfrastructure for modeling excited states dynamics in solar energy
materials, raising new workforce capable to pursue work that expressly promotes
energy security. In this way, the project directly serves the national
interests, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science; to
advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure the national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages and combines existing
cyberinfrastructure to produce a versatile platform for advanced training: the
general-purpose Libra code library, for modeling excited states dynamics; and
the Virtual Infrastructure for Data Intensive Analysis (VIDIA) platform, for
web-based data analysis and visualization. The resulting cyberinfrastructure
tightly integrates these two components into a gateway to host training in
modeling excited states dynamics of solar energy materials. Using this gateway,
intensive training for 50 graduate students from across the United States is
provided in two two-week summer school sessions. Building on the capabilities
and resources of Libra/VIDIA, the summer school covers the fundamentals of
nonadiabatic and quantum dynamics theories; best practices for scientific code
development; and practical hands-on sessions that focus on a variety of existing
tools for excited states dynamics. Experts in the fields of nonadiabatic
dynamics and solar energy materials modeling provide instruction on special
topics. The Libra/VIDIA software ecosystem also serves as a scientific gateway
that enables online education, interactive classroom teaching, and the broader
participation of the community in a variety of educational and research projects
covering the theory of quantum dynamics and material science. Both the software
platform and the training sessions provided by this project facilitate the
adoption of advanced methods and tools for modeling nonadiabatic and excited
states dynamics developed by the scientific community. The Divisions of
Chemistry and Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate and the Office of Cyberinfrastructure in the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Directorate contribute funds to this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.