* 1924309
* CNH2-L:  Linkages and Interactions Between Urban Food Security and Rural Agricultural Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Tom Evans, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,599,627.00

This research investigates the linkages and interactions between urban food
security and rural agricultural production. Specifically, the project evaluates
the impacts of environmental variability on rural agricultural production and
how this affects urban food security, and, in turn, how urban population growth
affects the demand for local and regional agricultural production, as measured
through food trade and other flows. Future challenges lie ahead in terms of
meeting urban food demand due to population growth, the changing nature of food
consumption patterns, and the vulnerability of both local and regional food
production to environmental variability. Globalization and international flows
and trade of food and commodities are key aspects of how urban areas will meet
future food demand. But urban areas exhibit different levels of connectivity to
international, regional, and local food systems. Given complex patterns of
urbanization and their differential engagement with global, regional, and local
food supply chains, new research is needed to understand what types of urban
places are most vulnerable to impacts of local and regional crop production, and
what type of urban agglomerations can mitigate those impacts through food
imports from distant areas. This project produces a new and transformative
understanding of the challenges of maintaining future urban food security and
how local, regional, and global food flows affect urban food security under
different socio-environmental conditions. This has implications for national
security issues and is of concern for economic development. The project includes
educational and stakeholder engagement and disseminates academic and policy
relevant materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a novel spatial
network approach to model the flow of food within regions and across
international borders by analyzing rural food production under recent and
projected urban food demand scenarios. This spatial analysis is linked to
household survey data collected in urban areas of different sizes and within
different geographic contexts to understand how shocks in rural agricultural
production affect urban food flows. Household level information is linked to
food demand and production information, as well as pricing information. While
there has been a considerable amount of research focusing on the drivers and
outcomes of rural food insecurity, less work has been done to understand the
drivers of urban food insecurity. Additionally, most urban food security
research has focused on large metropolitan areas, mostly primate cities, despite
the reality that significant numbers of urban residents live in small to
moderate sized urban places. This project will make important theoretical
advancements in integrated socio-environmental systems research and will make
methodological contributions by modelling urban-rural feedbacks and integration
and by developing ways of understanding the increasingly important small-to-
moderate urban dimension of food security. The research will be conducted in a
variety of settings, but the application of the findings is relevant to many
urban areas undergoing socio-environmental change, and how this impacts urban
food security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.