* 1924412
* Biomolecular Mechanisms of Interaction between 2D Chalcogenide Materials and Environmentally-Relevant Biosystems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Cheng-Yu Lai, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,648.00

Two-dimensional materials consist of atomically thin layers with defined crystal
structure and large lateral dimensions. This project focuses on two-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenides. These materials emerged in the past decade due
to their unique optoelectronic properties, which are suitable for a wide range
of applications in modern computing, biosensing, and communications, and the
Internet of Things. Although these 2-dimensional materials have promise in
affordable technologies, very little is known concerning their behavior at the
interface with environmentally-relevant biological systems. This project will
investigate the behavior of two-dimensional nanomaterials interacting with
mammalian cells, focusing on three distinct aspects: the mechanism of cellular
uptake; the potential structural transformations of the nanomaterial in the
mammalian cells; and the reactivity in the cellular environment, especially to
understand any potential inflammatory effects. The results of this project will
be widely disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations. Environmental stewardship is critical when using nanomaterials
and the project will benefit society by providing data to guide regulation of
new materials. Florida International University is a Hispanic Serving
Institution with a very diverse student population and this project will engage
students from underrepresented minority groups in science and engineering.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be engaged in learning materials
science and engineering, biology and environmental science, toward a convergent
science and engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this project is to uncover fundamental modes of interaction between two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides that have potential applications
for environmentally-relevant biological systems. Focusing on materials in their
pristine form (non-functionalized) will facilitate assessment of the primary
type of exposure expected during processing and handling of materials.
Representative transition metal dichalcogenide materials applicable for future
technologies were selected: molybdenum disulfide, a major component of
electronic applications, and titanium disulfide, a potential photoacoustic
therapeutic reagent. Skin exposure will be simulated by studying the materials
interaction with Human Skin Fibroblast cells, and inhalation with A549 lung
cancer cells. In addition, for these materials all of the known synthetic
methods confer variable size and surface properties, intrinsic to the synthetic
route, including ligands, defects, and adsorbed species. 2-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenides also exhibit polytypism which might be altered
in the cellular environment. The investigator hypothesizes that the properties
of the transition metal dichalcogenides are strongly correlated with certain
phenomena: i). Physical interactions, involving the mechanism of cellular
uptake; ii). In vitro phase transformations, referring to material phase changes
in the cell; and iii). Chemical interactions, that could occur at the interface
of the material with the cellular environment. The two selected materials,
molybdenum disulfide and titanium disulfide, will be synthesized through all
known 2-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide synthetic methods and used
in their pristine form to interact with lung cancer cells and skin cells,
respectively. The project has the following objectives: establish the
correlation between the synthetic method of the 2-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenide nanosheets and their cellular uptake in pristine form; elucidate
the structural transformations of 2-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide
polytypes within the cellular environment by in situ Raman spectroscopy; and
establish the correlation between 2-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenide
properties and potential inflammatory effects in living cells. This project will
contribute to a general understanding of the 2-dimensional transition metal
dichalcogenide entry mechanism in the selected cells, the potential impacts of
cellular environment on polytypes, and the potential inflammatory responses of
exposed cells, as a function of nanosheet surface chemistry. Florida
International University is a Hispanic Serving Institution with a very diverse
student population and this project will engage students from underrepresented
minority groups in science and engineering. Undergraduate and graduate students
will be engaged in learning materials science and engineering, biology and
environmental science, toward a convergent science and engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.