* 1924214
* Development of a simple, low-cost device for sample collection and on-site preservation using a common oceanographic deployment platform
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Peter Girguis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 368,828.00

Over the past two decades, advanced genetic analysis techniques have accelerated
society's understanding of marine microorganisms and the roles they play in
ocean chemistry. This includes the discovery of new biological capacities and
the recognition of their role in previously unknown chemical processes.
Particularly, research on low-oxygen marine environments - including oxygen
minimum zones, deep-sea hot springs, and other chemically-similar habitats - has
revealed the critical influence they have on ocean health (for better and for
worse). However, when sampling from such environments, researchers face biases
that may arise due to biological changes or chemical degradation resulting from
current means of sample collection and transport prior to analysis. This is a
particular challenge for genetic materials that can degrade rapidly between
sample collection and preservation. The technology development proposed here is
aimed squarely at this challenge, with a secondary objective of providing the
broader community with access to this technology. The development of a sampler
that is compatible with a wide variety of water sampling platforms - at a very
competitive price point - democratizes ocean science, bringing sampling tools to
local, state, and federal coastal resource managers, non-profit organizations,
teaching-focused institutions, and any investigator with a modest equipment
budget. Further, this research will provide opportunities for engaging high
school students in cutting edge research and engineering. While students are
often exposed to microbiology and chemistry in the classroom, they are rarely
afforded the opportunity to study the relationships among living organisms and
their geochemical environment. The data from this research will contribute to
student projects in an existing partnership between the researchers at Harvard
University at the Cambridge Rindge and Latin School, a diverse public high
school. Finally, in collaboration with the Harvard Museum of Natural History and
CRLS, the researchers will conduct a Junior "XPRIZE" style competition. The
participating students will build a water sampler to collect and preserve
microbes at sea, and their devices will be tested alongside the researchers?
prototype during the sea surface control experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ocean is chemically and ecologically heterogeneous. For example, chemically
reduced environments like those found at hydrothermal vents and hydrocarbon
seeps are prominent features in the ocean. These locations host expansive
microbial communities that play critical roles in processes from plankton health
to planetary temperature. This is also true for the ocean's oxygen minimum zones
(OMZs). There is a growing awareness of the biogeochemical connections that
exist among the upper ocean and other well-oxygenated habitats, and those
regions of the ocean that are depleted in or devoid of oxygen. Advancing the
understanding of these relationships requires that researchers continue
investigating A) the microbial diversity, distribution, and metabolic activity
within these chemically-reducing environments; and B) the corresponding
geochemical composition. To accomplish this, analysis of microbial gene
expression products (e.g., RNA, proteins) and metabolites is essential. However,
in sampling biomolecules from such environments, researchers are challenged to
avoid biases that may arise due to changes in gene expression or chemical
degradation during sample collection. This is especially challenging for
molecules such as messenger RNA (mRNA) that can degrade rapidly between sample
collection and preservation. This research aims to design, develop, and validate
a low-cost, mRNA/protein/geochemical preservation system that will be "plug-n-
play" with the Niskin rosettes that are found on most oceanographic research
vessels. Broadly speaking, we propose an in situ sampler that can be mounted in
lieu of a single Niskin bottle on a CTD rosette. Most importantly, it will be
actuated via lanyard, like a standard Niskin bottle, thus eliminating the need
for electrical interfacing. Once deployed to the appropriate depth and its
lanyard is released, the system will begin its pre-programmed routine of
collecting water samples and conducting the appropriate preservative steps. The
device will also be capable of time-delayed sampling events, which will allow
the user to re-position the CTD rosette to another depth and collect another
sample. Deployment and operations testing will be conducted along a depth
gradient at an off-shelf site in the major anoxic OMZ of the Eastern Tropical
North Pacific. The sampler will be mounted onto a standard rosette and tested
for successful firing, injection of preservative, and sample mixing at three
depths spanning the anoxic nitrite maximum (~100-130 m), anoxic OMZ core
(~300-700 m), and sub-OMZ (~1500 m). These three zones are known to support
ecologically and taxonomically distinct microbial communities. In addition to
system validation, effective analysis of microbial and chemical changes across
this gradient will provide important information how microbes respond to changes
in dissolved oxygen. Further, this will help to accurately delimit the
boundaries of processes in OMZs and other redox-stratified
habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.