* 1924145
* Multi-omic bases of coral disease resistance
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Steven Vollmer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,116,350.00

Coral disease outbreaks have radically altered the structure and function of
tropical coral reefs worldwide. As progress has been made towards understanding
the basic cause of many coral diseases, significant gaps remain in our knowledge
of how corals respond to and resist disease infection, even as calls are being
made for science to assist in coral evolution by selecting thermal or disease
tolerant coral species or genotypes - often called "super corals". This project
uses the endangered Caribbean staghorn coral Acropora cervicornis and White Band
Disease (WBD) as a host-pathogen system to study the genetics of coral disease
resistance. WBD epidemics decimated this key shallow-water Caribbean coral and
led to its endangered listing. While the recovery of staghorn corals has been
slow, data indicate that up to 15% or more of staghorn corals are highly disease
resistant. This project uses modern genomic tools to identify genetic markers
for staghorn coral disease resistance. The identification of genetic markers for
disease resistance (i) provides needed information on the efficacy of "assisted
evolution" for coral resiliency (ii) helps predict how well staghorn coral can
resist future disease outbreaks, (iii) assists conservation efforts aimed at
identifying and selecting corals with high disease resistance, and (iv) spurs
the development of molecular assays for coral disease resistance. This research
provides graduate and undergraduate training in the STEM fields of microbiology,
genetics, and computational biology. The project is as a platform to develop
outreach curricula to teach students about coral diseases and reef health, which
are disseminated via Northeastern University's K-12 outreach program and the
Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute's outreach program in Panama. This
project is co-funded by the Biological Oceanography Program in the Division of
Ocean Sciences and the Symbiosis, Defense, and Self-recognition Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
increasingly becoming clear that the future of coral reefs depends on the
resilience of reef-building corals to adapt or acclimate to their changing
environment, which in turn requires that key traits like thermal tolerance and
disease resistance are genetically heritable, identifiable, and quantifiable.
Using staghorn corals and WBD as a model host-pathogen system, this project
identifies the genetic underpinnings of disease resistance in Caribbean staghorn
corals using state-of-the-art, multi-omic approaches linking patterns of
variation across the staghorn coral genome, transcriptome and proteome. For Aim
1, genome-wide SNP variation from 200 staghorn coral genotypes from two
populations [100 Florida; 100 Panama] is used to identify genomic regions
associated with disease resistance using genome-wide association (GWA) analyses.
For Aim 2, tank-based transmission experiments are used to profile key
differences in the transcriptomic (mRNA and miRNA) and proteomic response of
resistant versus susceptible staghorn corals during disease exposure. Mulit-omic
data are analyzed using: (1) eQTL to link SNPs to mRNA expression, (2) miRNA-
mRNA interactions and correlation networks to test for post-transcriptional gene
regulation, and (3) network-based approaches. For Aim 3, 16s rDNA amplicon
sequencing are used to identify changes in the staghorn coral microbiome due to
disease resistance and exposure using microbial DNA from the resistant and
susceptible corals used in the tank-based experiment (Aim 2). In addition to
identify genetic markers associated with coral disease resistance, this study
produces (1) the most complete multi-omic analysis of coral immunity and disease
resistance to date, and (2) the first functional analyses of miRNA post-
translational gene regulation in a cnidarian host-pathogen system. Data on the
genetics of coral disease resistance provide valuable information on the
efficacy of "assisted evolution" for coral resiliency. By using nursery raised
staghorn corals from Florida, this project directly identifies highly disease
resistant corals that can be used in the large-scale out planting
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.