* 1924694
* CCRI: ENS: Collaborative Research: Supporting and Sustaining Apache AsterixDB for the CISE Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Vassilis Tsotras, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 860,000.00

Mass quantities of digital information are being generated today on a daily
basis through social networks, blogs, online communities, news sources, and
mobile applications as well as our increasingly sensed surroundings. Tremendous
insight can be gained by storing and making such big data available for
exploration in a wide variety of domains. Beneficiaries include business, social
sciences, public health, national security, political science, public safety,
medicine, and government policy. Researchers exploring these benefits need
software to store, index, manage, and analyze big data, while researchers
investigating new technical approaches for managing and analyzing big data can
benefit tremendously from the availability of shared building blocks to use as a
foundation for their efforts. Over the past ten years the Apache AsterixDB
scalable big data management system has been developed to address this need.
Apache AsterixDB provides a repository for semi-structured data that cannot be
organized in tables. In contrast to most other systems in its space, it supports
a user-friendly query language which is more powerful than traditional database
systems. In contrast to big data analytics offerings, it manages data and
exploits knowledge of data layouts and indexes to process queries efficiently.
AsterixDB is enjoying use for teaching and research on big data platforms, semi-
structured data, and social data analytics. Based on user feedback, this project
will enhance AsterixDB to better meet community needs, including improved text
handling, numerous query processing improvements, additional standard-based
geospatial data support, user-defined functions for user-provided logic, and a
variety of storage-level improvements to increase the system's storage,
indexing, data ingestion, and integration with other systems. The planned
improvements will benefit the broader public by providing a general purpose
foundation for extracting high-value insights from high-volume, low-value big
data in areas such as public safety and health. In addition to enabling computer
and information science and engineering research on big data management, Apache
AsterixDB will train students nationwide in big data management and analysis;
such training is crucial to addressing the information explosion due to social
media, the mobile Web, and Internet of Things (IoT).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Apache AsterixDB is a highly scalable big data Management
System (BDMS) that stores, indexes, and manages semi-structured data, e.g., much
like MongoDB, but it supports a full query language with the expressiveness of
SQL and more. Unlike analytics engines such as Apache Hive or Spark, it stores
and manages data, so it can use knowledge of data partitioning and index
availability to avoid scanning data sets to process queries. Core features of
the system include: a NoSQL-style data model based on extending JavaScript
Object Notation (JSON); a declarative query language (SQL++) for semi-structured
data; a query execution engine, Apache Hyracks, for partitioned-parallel query
execution; partitioned data storage and indexing for efficient ingestion of new
data; support for querying external data as well as data stored in AsterixDB; a
rich set of data types, including spatial, temporal, and textual data; indexing
via B+trees, R-trees, and inverted keyword indexes; and, transactional support
akin to that of other NoSQL stores. AsterixDB began in 2009 as a large research
project to combine the best ideas from the parallel database world, the Apache
Hadoop world, and the semi-structured data world to create a next-generation
BDMS; it was accepted into the Apache Software Foundation's incubator in
February 2015, and it became a top-level Apache project in April 2016. AsterixDB
has enjoyed use for teaching and research on big data platforms, semi-structured
data, and social data analytics. Based on user feedback, we propose to enhance
AsterixDB to better meet community needs by adding: (1) Improved text handling,
including multiple tokenizers, stemming, and stop words. (2) Query optimization
improvements, including statistics and cost-based decisions (e.g., join methods
and index selection). (3) Query processing improvements, including dynamic range
partitioning, fully parallel sorts, merge joins, and skew-handling. (4)
Enriched, standardized spatial data support based on GeoJSON. (5) Support for
user-defined functions in more languages, especially Python. (6) Support for
parameterized queries and prepared statements. (7) Support for indexes on multi-
valued fields. (8) Storage efficiency improvements. (9) Data ingestion
improvements. (10) Additional formats for external data sets, including Parquet
from Spark/Hive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.