* 1924505
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Combined spatial and temporal analyses of population connectivity during a northern range expansion
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Mark Christie, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 410,896.00

Where do young marine fish and shellfish come from? This project aims to improve
our understanding of how coastal marine populations are connected in space and
time. Coastal populations are replenished through the arrival of minuscule
larvae that have been dispersed for weeks to months in the open ocean after
spawning at remote sites. The combination of the long dispersal period of marine
fish and shellfish larvae and the varying ocean currents results in complex
patterns of "connectivity" among populations near and far. Identifying these
patterns of connectivity is fundamental to marine science and critical for
effective fisheries management and conservation, yet it remains an unresolved
component of marine ecology. The study species is currently expanding its
biogeographic range up the U.S. west coast. By genetically analyzing individuals
from across the species' range, including offspring spawned in the laboratory by
experimentally-crossed individuals collected in the field from throughout the
species historical and expanded range, certain genes can serve to differentiate
populations along the coast. The team leverages the statistical power of these
geographically-informative genes to assign thousands of young collected in the
field to the source populations that spawned them (across the species' range and
over multiple years). The team then quantifies patterns of connectivity over
multiple years, and tests fundamental hypotheses on the spatial scale, temporal
variability, biogeographic patterns, and biophysical drivers of population
connectivity. The project trains approximately two dozen U.S. university
students in molecular ecology and marine science, as well as creating
intellectual linkages among Ph.D.-granting and non-Ph.D.-granting universities.
The project also supports further development of a K-12 education program that
uses SCUBA diving and videography to teach elementary school students Next
Generation Science Standards and train them for careers in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a kelp forest gastropod
and fisheries species (Kellet's whelk, Kelletia kelletii), this project combines
genome-wide Restriction site Associated DNA (RAD) loci with transcriptomic loci
identified from common-garden laboratory crosses of individuals from the
species' historical and expanded range to identify geographically-informative
loci that maximize power for individual assignment testing. Leveraging the
combined power of these loci, genetic assignment of approximately three thousand
recruit samples to 20 putative source populations allows the team to construct
three independent years of connectivity matrices and test some of the most
fundamental questions in marine ecology, including: 1) Are marine populations
open or closed and at what scales? 2) To what degree is the evolutionary pattern
of gene flow represented by single versus multiple generations of connectivity
events? And, 3) How spatially heterogeneous and temporally variable is
population connectivity? Can one year of connectivity data predict anything
about the next? Additionally, by focusing on a range-expanding species with
common life history traits, the team addresses a number of questions with broad
applicability and significant ecological and societal implications: 4) How much
is population connectivity influenced by post-recruitment demographic and
evolutionary processes? 5) How well-connected are historic- and expanded-range
populations? And, of particular relevance to climate change, 6) Are El Nino
oceanographic conditions, which are predicted to increase in frequency and
intensity this century, driving the poleward range expansion of this coastal
marine species? By coupling common-garden experimental crosses to identify
maximally-informative transcriptomic loci with genomic RAD analysis of field
samples, this project aims to accurately and precisely quantify marine
population connectivity in high gene flow species with large population
sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.