* 1924337
* HDR DSC: Earth Data Science Corps - Fulfilling Workforce Demand at the Intersection of Environmental Science and Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Balch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,180,445.00

This project aims to develop an open, scalable, and adaptable model for data
science education to address the growing demand for a 21st-century data-capable
workforce in Earth and Environmental Sciences. The model will be structured
around an online educational framework for Earth Data Science (DS). The Earth
Data Science Corps (EDSC) framework includes modular courses, an interactive
open textbook, internships, and workshops for faculty and instructors from
partner colleges. University of Colorado at Boulder as the coordinating
organization will work closely with United Tribes Technical College, Oglala
Lakota College, Front Range Community College, Metropolitan State University of
Denver as implementing institutions. This project serves underrepresented
students in the sciences including Hispanic, Tribal, community college, and non-
traditional students. The EDSC plans to provide the community with two open
tools. The first will make grading student coding assignments easier. The second
will make analyzing evaluation survey data more efficient. A public, online
discussion forum will provide students across implementing institutions with
community support. Further, it will facilitate discussions between faculty on
challenges and opportunities associated with teaching data science to diverse
groups. This effort will encourage diversity and equitable opportunity in the
national 21st-century data-literate workforce, contributing to bridging the
data-to-knowledge gap in environmental science. If successful, it has the
potential to reveal answers to some of society's most pressing environmental
challenges.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are two-fold.
Students will gain knowledge in data science, problem-solving skills, hands-on
experience, and rigorous research training. Instructors to have access to the
training that will enable them to build data science capacity in the context of
their own institutions. EDSC will be structured around five activities: 1) a
modular Earth Data Science course supported by online computer processing power
(cloud computing), a companion interactive, free online textbook, and an
autograding platform; 2) data skills and career workshops for teachers and
students; 3) paid hands-on undergraduate student internships; 4) faculty
instructor training; and 5) program-wide evaluation. If successful, these
activities will allow five diverse higher education institutions to adopt
different elements depending on their current capacity. The project builds on
existing efforts of the University of Colorado Earth Lab Education Initiative.
Curricular materials will be designed for portability, sustainability, and easy
dissemination to ensure their expanded impact. They will be evaluated for
measurable outcomes and tailored to support non-traditional students, who form a
large portion of the potential data science workforce in the regions surrounding
the participating institutions. Course curriculum, including career development
webinars, Introduction to Earth Data Science course modules, and instructor
training, will be published on the EDS Learning Portal, leveraging the existing
and rapidly growing user base. The EDSC plans to directly support 75
undergraduate students, train 15 faculty in data-intensive teaching, and provide
data skill and career-development training to 400 or more participants across
the five institutions. NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Data Science Corps
program focuses on building capacity for harnessing the data revolution at the
local, state, national, and international levels to help unleash the power of
data in the service of science and society. Projects in this program are being
jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Idea; the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering, Division of
Information and Intelligent Systems; the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education; the Directorate for Mathematical
and Physical Sciences, Division of Mathematical Sciences; and the Directorate
for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities and Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.