* 1924772
* I-Corps: Seating Solution for Improved Blood Flow
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Mihyun Kang, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
potentially provide a solution that will enable the furniture industry to
address the issue of blood flow associated with prolonged sitting. The
commercialization of the technology will potentially impact the lives of
individuals who sit for prolonged periods of time, especially in the office work
environment. This technology will steer the industry in a new direction using
science and technology to address an important issue -- venous blood flow issue
resulting from prolonged sitting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
further develops a seating solution to address the issue of blood flow
associated with prolonged sitting. Millions of individuals work in office and
administrative support occupations. Most of these individuals spend majority of
their working time sitting. With prolonged sitting there is immobility in the
lower extremities which could result in venous blood flow issues and in some
cases pulmonary embolism. The innovation is a seating solution with a seat that
is split so there are two parts on the bottom that could move separately by
pushing down on a lever and individuals could move their legs up and down. This
proposed technology is valuable to any organization where individuals sit and
work because of improved blood flow and perceived comfort which lead to greater
satisfaction and increased productivity in work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.