* 1924534
* Engineering the Metal Sulfide Interface in All Solid State Batteries through Operando Study
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Hongli Zhu, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 479,718.00

There is a critical need for improved energy storage technologies for electric
vehicles and large-scale integration of renewable electricity grid storage to
improve domestic energy security. Currently, state-of-the-art energy storage
technologies such as lithium ion batteries are insufficient in providing the
performance requirements needed such as cost and energy density to enable broad
use. Battery chemistries using high energy density electrodes and solid-state
electrolytes could provide an avenue towards gains in energy density and
durability for these applications. This project is a fundamental research study
of solid-state electrolytes, a key component that enables these high energy
density battery chemistries along with safety and durability benefits. Sulfide
composites are promising as solid electrolytes in all solid-state batteries due
to their high ionic conductivity and favorable mechanical strength features.
However, sulfide solid electrolytes still face challenges that limit their use.
This project will result in fundamental understanding of the mechanisms and
material interactions of metal sulfides in all solid-state batteries. The
research will guide improvements to material design, improved electrolytes and
electrodes, and eventually lead to improved designs for high energy, solid-state
batteries. Society will also benefit from the training of highly qualified
researchers who will be able to continue technology improvements in creating
large-scale energy solutions from science, technology, engineering, and math
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objective of this research is to
improve metal sulfide stability in solid-state electrolytes for the application
of all solid-state lithium batteries. In pursuit of this objective, the
fundamental mechanisms of metal sulfide ion conduction and interface reactivity
will be interrogated by operando characterization carried out on realistic,
fully operational battery cells. This will reveal the critical materials
evolution processes occurring at buried interfaces within sealed devices during
cycling. The findings will be used to modify the metal sulfide chemistry through
elementary doping and to stabilize the interface through interface engineering.
This will be accomplished by the convergent effort of two research groups, one
with expertise in synthesis and materials engineering, interface stabilization,
and cell modification, and one skilled in operando characterization and modeling
of batteries. The methodology in this work ? combining materials synthesis and
evaluation, operando device characterization, and computation ? will lead to an
in-depth understanding of the thermodynamic, kinetic, electrochemical,
chemomechanical, and structural stability of metal sulfide all solid-state
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.