* 1924565
* AWARE: Cultivating the Diversity of the Health Care Innovation Ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Linda Fleisher, Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 11/30/2019
* USD 105,084.00

The broader impact of this Accelerating Women and Under-Represented
Entrepreneurs (AWARE) project is to enhance success for women- and minority-
owned businesses in obtaining NSF Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR)/Small Business Technology Transfer Research (STTR) funding, thereby
leading to a diverse and responsive innovation ecosystem connecting minority
entrepreneurs with existing sources of support that ultimately improves the
health of Americans, especially disadvantaged populations. Health care is a
highly regulated environment that requires a level of scientific and clinical
rigor that challenges many entrepreneurs. Academic researchers, on the other
hand, are well-versed in issues regarding access to appropriate patient
populations, clinical accuracy and relevance, human subjects' protection in
research studies. This project will build mutually-beneficial collaborations and
training among underrepresented entrepreneurs and academic researchers to
determine best practices for diversifying the pool of principal investigators
receiving SBIR funding. Training will focus on NSF SBIR/STTR program
requirements while mentorship by experts will support entrepreneurs in the
development, review and refinement of key proposal elements and implementation,
research and commercialization plans. This model will bring all of these
resources and expertise into one immersive training for underrepresented
entrepreneurs who already have potentially high risk-high reward technology with
evidence for commercial potential.

The proposed project will develop and test the AWARE Immersion Program to
increase both the quality and quantity of SBIR/STTR proposals submitted by
startup companies that traditionally have been disadvantaged and
underrepresented in the program. Through mixed qualitative and quantitative
methods, the barriers and facilitators to SBIR submission for successful women
and minority early entrepreneurs (graduated from a top accelerator program) will
be determined. The program will be based on this extensive needs assessment with
minority and women entrepreneurs and key leaders of incubators and innovation
programs. The findings will guide the development of the specific elements of
the immersion program. The first group of entrepreneurs will be recruited
through the existing network of incubators and through our established community
and entrepreneurial networks. Those recruited will be matched to health care
researchers and clinicians with experience in SBIR/STTR funding as well as
business and commercial professionals. The program will consist of a number of
webinars, in-person trainings, planning meetings and writing sessions. Each
entrepreneur will develop a plan of action with their mentor/advisory team at
the start of the program which will be monitored to ensure that clear objectives
met, culminating in the submission of an SBIR/STTR proposal.