* 1924467
* A new instrument for tracking suspended particles in the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Nadeau, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 281,367.00

This research focuses on the design and testing of a new aquatic instrument, the
Pelagic Laser Tomographer (PLT). The PLT is a miniature, high-resolution optical
instrument that combines the latest in high-resolution optical imaging with the
latest high-performance image processing, analysis, and 3D volume visualization
software to provide a new way to quickly scan the water column, then analyze and
visualize data showing the distribution in space of suspended particles in the
open ocean and lakes. These particles play a critical role in structuring
aquatic ecosystems. They influence the transmission of light, control
animal/plant interactions, and mediate the transport of nutrients. In addition,
they are a key factor in moving organic matter (importantly carbon) from near
surface waters into the deep sea and to the seafloor. Consequently,
understanding the abundance, composition, and distribution of particles is
essential to understanding the biogeochemical cycling and physical transport of
elements through aquatic systems. This research will create new tools for
understanding particle dynamics that will aid research in aquatic ecology,
biology, geochemistry and geology and allow the tracking of man-made pollutants
(i.e. plastics) in the water. The new instrument will initiate the creation of a
new generation of small, inexpensive sensors easily replicable by other
scientists and will be shared with the scientific community through publication
and presentation, and with the public through work at the Birch Aquarium, the
public exploration center at Scripps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PLT instrument,
is designed to be a small, light-weight (&lt;5 kg), and inexpensive tool for
aquatic scientists investigating both marine and freshwater environments. It
makes use of recently developed optomechanical and electronic components and the
latest high-performance computing algorithms for data analysis and 3D
visualization. The PLT will provide a tool for pelagic research that has
previously been limited by high cost, data storage, low resolution, small sample
volume and mechanical constraints, all necessitating bulky instrumentation and
subsequently rare deployment from a large research vessel. This new instrument
will allow aquatic scientists to study the distribution of pelagic particulates
with unprecedented spatial resolution in a routine manner from vessels (from
small boats to autonomous vehicles and large ships) and in locations previously
unreachable (like the shallow nearshore or under the ice). The PLT will be
capable of withstanding the rigors of oceanographic field deployments, within a
small inexpensive package that is capable of being duplicated by other
researchers and deployed both as a stand-alone instrument and as part of a suite
of standard scientific instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.