* 1924394
* Collaborative Research: Novel constraints on air-sea gas exchange and deep ocean ventilation from high-precision noble gas isotope measurements in seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Severinghaus, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 369,920.00

The proposed work brings together the fields of chemical oceanography, ocean
modeling, and solid Earth geochemistry to develop the stable isotope composition
of heavy noble gases dissolved in seawater as novel physical tracers of air-sea
gas exchange. Noble gases represent ideal tools for quantifying physical
processes due to the fact that they are chemically inert. Because argon (Ar),
krypton (Kr), and xenon (Xe) isotope ratios have distinct solubility and
diffusivity ratios, as recently quantified in laboratory experiments, they
complement existing bulk noble gas measurements in seawater by adding new
constraints with unique sensitivities. Precise constraints on air-sea exchange
of inert gases are paramount to properly quantifying production, consumption,
and physical transport of biogeochemically important gases (such as carbon
dioxide and oxygen) as well as ventilation age tracers (such as sulfur
hexafluoride and CFCs). Additionally, global circulation models (GCMs) routinely
underestimate deep-ocean ventilation compared to noble gas observations.
Introducing these new isotopic constraints into model simulations will help
identify physical processes related to deep-water formation that require
improvement in future GCM development. Because the overturning circulation is
closely tied to projections of future climate, by both the transports of
radiative gases and heat into the deep ocean, there is broad international
interest in improving future model projections. Therefore, adding high-precision
noble gas isotope measurements to the existing body of research on inert gases
in seawater will provide valuable new constraints for both the marine
biogeochemistry and physical oceanography communities. Education and training of
a graduate student and postdoctoral scholar will contribute to the human
resource base of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will
develop high-precision Ar, Kr, and Xe stable isotope ratios in seawater as new
oceanographic tracers. Along with a 2018 pilot study, the proposed measurements
represent the first high- precision Kr and Xe isotope ratio analyses in
seawater. A key goal of this project is to test two specific hypotheses for the
observed undersaturation of Ar, Kr, and Xe throughout the deep ocean: (1) rapid
cooling-induced gas uptake by the surface ocean during deep-water formation with
insufficient time for equilibration before sinking, or (2) subsurface cooling
caused by melting of glacial ice, leading to the dissolution of air bubbles
trapped in ice. Whereas both of these non-mutually exclusive processes produce
similar patterns of heavy noble gas undersaturation, the isotope ratios of these
gases are well suited to distinguish the relative importance of each process.
Specifically, theoretical predictions suggest a decrease in heavy-to-light
isotope ratios from the kinetic fractionation associated with rapid surface
ocean gas uptake, but an increase in these ratios from the input of
gravitationally enriched glacial meltwater. Other goals include: (a) comparing
observations to model simulations to identify successes and shortcomings of GCM
representations of deep-water formation processes, and (b) a year-long time
series of surface-ocean observations from the SIO pier to test models of
isotopic fractionation associated with bubble injection and upwelling, with
implications for the saturation of biogeochemically important gases. This work
will improve upon a recent method for dissolved noble gas isotopic analysis by
increasing sample sizes and refining purification techniques to achieve a
&gt;60% improvement in precision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.