* 1924288
* CNH2-L:  Toward a Theory of Urban Trees as Living Infrastructure
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Stephanie Pincetl, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 09/30/2022
* USD 436,224.00

Trees are now ubiquitous components of urban landscapes in the United States.
Increasingly urban trees are called upon as a form of living (i.e., green)
infrastructure that is used to meet a variety of municipal goals to provide
ecosystem services and combat the effects of climate change that, for many
cities in the US and abroad, is causing an increase in the urban heat island
effect. However, using trees as a form of infrastructure raises new challenges
compared to traditional gray infrastructure typically managed by cities. This
research addresses major knowledge gaps in our understanding of the
effectiveness and capacity of urban trees to provide the services expected
within the structure of municipal tree planting, stewardship and decision making
and community interaction. Living infrastructure is a socio-environmental-
technological system of feedbacks between organisms, the environment, societal
desires, and governance capacity. In the case of urban trees, their capacity to
meet municipal goals is uncertain and likely varies among cities. Part of this
uncertainty exists because the ability to adequately model the effect of urban
trees on their local environment suffers from a lack of quantitative information
and scientific study. At the same time, the capacity of institutional managers
to successfully steward urban trees is also unclear. Taken together, cities may
have goals for tree-derived functions that are disconnected from both the
biophysical realities of what trees can do and realities and limitations of
community management practices. Broader impacts of the work include student and
postdoc training in convergent research, providing data and findings to inform
municipal decision making, and informing the public and other stakeholders of
the role of living infrastructure in cities via social media and other outreach
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a pilot project with an overarching
goal to understand the intellectual and institutional factors that have driven
the movement to use urban trees as living infrastructure to produce ecosystem
services. Project activities will evaluate the capacity of municipal
institutions to implement and manage urban trees as living urban infrastructure
to achieve climate goals. The project addresses key uncertainties in the socio-
environmental system that considers urban trees as living infrastructure. It
will examine how existing municipal forestry goals and plans vary throughout the
United States, and how municipalities currently frame the role of living
infrastructure in climate mitigation and adaptation. It also examines how
current scientific understanding aligns with these goals and what information is
needed for monitoring, modeling, and validation of these processes. the project
includes the evaluation of existing municipal urban forestry plans from 20
cities throughout the United States. Data will be evaluated from the different
disciplinary perspectives: i.e., ecosystem science, community ecology,
ecohydrology, cultural geography, engineering, and landscape architecture. These
data will be complemented with additional data collection and stakeholder
interviews at three focal research cities: Los Angeles, California; Phoenix,
Arizona; and Baltimore, Maryland. Work packages include a whole-team 1- to 2-day
synthesis meeting in each of the three focal cities where existing data will be
examined and discussed by the group. This will be followed by a half day
workshop that engages local stakeholders. Meetings will focus on addressing
research questions and further elaborating the coupled socio-environmental
theory of living infrastructure. A Technical Advisory Committee will be
constituted and their input on stakeholder decision making will be incorporated
into the work plan. This effort will substantially contribute to a more
comprehensive theory of living infrastructure as an interface between social,
environmental, and technological systems and as a key component of novel urban
ecosystems that can vary dramatically at national scales. Societal benefits of
the project include the direct dissemination of our research findings to urban
land management and forestry professionals, and new interdisciplinary training
opportunities for postdoctoral and undergraduate trainees. Project results will
directly address the needs of municipalities and their tree planting programs,
which often seek to expand urban cover and diversity at great expense, but with
a paucity of available scientific information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.