* 1924691
* 2019 International Gap Junction Conference (IGJC), July 27-31, 2019; Victoria, B.C., Canada
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Paul Lampe, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 05/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

This proposal will support attendance of young faculty, under-represented
minority scientists, along with graduate students and post-docs at the 2019
International Gap Junction conference (IGJC) held July 27-31, 2019 at the
Victoria Conference Center in Victoria, BC, Canada. The meeting will consist of
4 plenary talks, a large number of short talks, poster sessions, communal
dining, and conversations that will provide ample opportunity for sharing latest
research results and for exploring collaborative possibilities similarly to the
setting of Gordon Research Conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IGJC has been
held every 2 years since 1974, alternating mostly between North America and
Europe, and really is the only meeting that brings together a diverse
international community of basic science researchers that focus on connexins and
pannexins, the proteins that comprise the gap junction and pannexin membrane
channel, respectively. The topic is highly important as direct cell-to-cell
communication is crucial to cells of multi-cellular organisms for all aspects of
development, differentiation, and homeostasis. A better understanding of the
complex biology of this important cell-cell channel will be needed to better
understand cellular behavior in both, physiology and pathology. Typically, the
meeting draws approximately 200 participants with about 80-100 from the US split
about one-third PI and two-thirds trainees. Requested funds will be used to
waive all or part of the registration fees for US-based graduate students,
postdocs, junior scientists and three US-based keynote speakers. Financial
assistance to assist under-represented minorities -several of which have
attended these meetings in the past- is specifically requested. NSF funding will
be announced on the conference web site and by list-server email and will allow
more young scientists, e.g. female and self-declared minorities to attend.
Drawing a consistent stream of young investigators to this conference is
important as to support a continuous interest in this important research field
in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.