* 1924060
* Interdisciplinary Antarctic Earth Science Meeting 2019 plus Deep Field Planning Workshop; October 2019; Julian, CA
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Kathy Licht, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2020
* USD 49,866.00

The award supports the biennial Interdisciplinary Antarctic Earth Sciences
Conference (IAES) and the Antarctic Deep Field Camp Planning Workshop. IAES
brings together U.S. researchers including biologists, glaciologists,
geologists, and atmospheric scientists to present recent findings and data that
apply to Antarctic earth sciences questions. IAES promotes a productive,
interdisciplinary approach highlighting connections between research topics.
IAES provides valuable development for early career scientists. Early career
scientists will be invited speakers and members of the organizational committee.
The field camp workshop aims at identifying the highest priority questions that
are driving Antarctic science and what sectors within the continent are suited
best to address the outstanding questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide partial subsistence support for ~ 70 participants. The project
support travel costs for up to 20 participants to attend IAES and the Field Camp
Planning Workshop. Travel funds are provided for invited speakers and the
organizing committee members. IAES is a unique opportunity for Antarctic
scientists to present their work address fundamental Antarctic earth science
questions from an interdisciplinary perspective. The Deep Field Camp Planning
Workshop will deliver a ranking of field sites and scientific questions to be
addressed at each site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.