* 1924710
* Perturbations of Earth Surface Dynamics Caused by Extreme Events
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Sean Gallen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Toscano
* 12/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award will enable eight U.S.-based scientists to attend an international
EGU Galileo conference in Nepal on October 13th-19th, 2019. This scientific
conference is being held at the site of the catastrophic 2015 Mw 7.8 Gorkha
Earthquake. It will bring together experts from various scientific fields to
present and discuss research and new directions for studies of extreme events on
earth surface dynamics, biogeochemical cycles, and ecosystems on a range of
timescales. It will be topically focused, consist of 50-80 participants and
include 3.5 days of talks, poster presentations, and breakout sessions and a
1.5-day field trip to a catchment heavily impacted by the Gorkha earthquake and
a 2016 glacial lake outburst flood. The meeting will provide the basis for an
upcoming special issue in the journal Earth Surface Dynamics focused on the
response of near-surface systems to extreme events. Organizers of the meeting
will draft a public document defining grand challenges and research needs in
"extreme event science" with input from participants gathered during planned
breakout sessions. Participation of U.S. scientists in this meeting will foster
international collaboration. Selection of U.S. participants will occur through
an application process vetted by the Principal Investigator and co-organizers of
the meeting. They will select applicants based on need and give preference to
minorities and other underrepresented groups in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme events, such as large earthquakes,
high magnitude precipitation events, floods, wildfires, and volcanic eruptions,
perturb earth surface dynamics instantaneously, have cascading effects, and are
likely important in dictating system behavior on short and long timescales. The
immediate impact of these events often grabs global attention and response due
to the associated natural hazards. Recent advances in monitoring techniques,
such as ground-based instrumentation and remotely sensed satellite data, has
allowed quantification of the landscape, biogeochemical and hydrologic response
to such events with unprecedented accuracy and precision. Such studies document
the initial catastrophic consequences and ensuing process cascades. Modeling
efforts have shed light on the potential long-term consequences of extreme
perturbations, and suggest that in many cases these rare high-magnitude events
are more important than slow and steady "background" processes when integrated
over time. Scientific interest in improving understanding of extreme events on
landscape dynamics on short to long timescales has grown in the past decade.
However, despite recent progress, significant knowledge gaps exist, particularly
with respect to the complex response to perturbations and potential feedbacks
between various systems that operate in the Earth's near-surface environment. In
addition to bringing together a wide range of scientists with the aim of
identifying knowledge gaps and future research directions in the role of extreme
events on earth surface dynamics, this conference will set forth guidelines for
how to best approach such studies in the aftermath of an
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.