* 1924824
* FSML:  Expanding the Biological/Physical Sampling at Rutgers Marine Field Station at Tuckerton
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Kenneth Able, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 149,679.00

Understanding the movements of fish and marine life in and out of coastal
estuaries is a challenge for scientists and critical to understanding their
ecology. Solving this problem is a critical issue as observations collected over
the last 30 years suggests that the fisheries in the Mid- Atlantic is changing.
Observations suggest the number and type of fish have been showing significant
changes. The implications and reasons for the changes will require quantitative
information that can resolve the dynamics of fish in nature. Traditional
sampling techniques will not be able to resolve these dynamics, and as a result
scientists will not be able to understand why these changes are occurring. This
project will develop network that will continuously track zooplankton, fish, and
marine mammals in the Mullica River-Great Bay estuary right at the interface of
the ocean. This effort will collect a continuous record in time allowing us to
for the first time track the animal movement in and out of the estuary. An
advantage studying this estuary is one of the cleanest estuary-coastal inlets in
the northeast United States allowing us to resolve dynamics in a pristine
estuary. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rutgers University Marine Field Station
(RUMFS) (http://marine.rutgers.edu/rumfs/) is located in the Mullica
River&amp;#8722;Great Bay (MRGB) estuary which is part of the Jacques Cousteau
National Estuarine Research Reserve (JCNERR) in New Jersey.. The buildings,
causeway, and grounds of RUMFS occupy seven acres on a peninsula close to Little
Egg Inlet in southern New Jersey. Water is exchanged between the ocean and the
estuary mainly through a narrow but deep (15 m) Little Egg Inlet that is
directly adjacent (meters) to the RUMFS facility. Unlike most estuaries in the
northeastern U.S., the surrounding area, including most of the Pine Barrens
watershed, is protected from large-scale human disturbance. As a result, the
MRGB estuary is probably the cleanest estuary-coastal inlets on the east coast.
This makes RUMFS a unique natural laboratory. Existing RUMFS efforts have been
centered around long-term fish time series sampling. These surveys have provided
invaluable information about the diversity, ecology, and life histories of
fishes in the region; however, the sampling is sparse in space and time relative
to ecological dynamics of these systems. Although there is some information
about individual species movements in and out of the estuary through
tagging/passive acoustic techniques, the available information is limited on the
diversity and abundance of fish moving into and out of Great Bay with sufficient
resolution to link the physical conditions to the fish ecology. We propose to
fill this crucial data gap by acquiring an integrated system that combines a
multi-frequency combining a BioSonic multi-frequency array with a SubSea
hydrophone. The system will be deployed adjacent to the field station. RUMFS
sits adjacent (1.5 meters) to a deep channel (~12 meters depth) that is the
major ocean entrance to JC NERR. We propose to deploy the acoustic system in the
channel to track the movement of organisms in and out of the estuary. The
integrated multi-frequency active/passive acoustics array will complement the
one-of-a-kind plankton sampling RUMFS has been conducting on a weekly basis for
30 years. The addition of the proposed acoustic array will strengthen ongoing
and newly formed graduate and undergraduate efforts by providing information
that is relevant on both the local and global levels in real-time back to
campus. The data will be served to a wide range of courses both at Rutgers as
well as two community colleges through open access data and visualization
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.