* 1924292
* HDR DSC: Collaborative Research: Connecting the Dots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Bina Ramamurthy, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 747,947.00

There is significant demand for a workforce that is proficient in data science
and analytics. Employers seek graduates with an ability to (1) understand,
interpret, and analyze data, (2) effectively communicate results that stem from
the analysis of data, (3) practice the ethical use of data, and (4) apply data
science concepts to solve practical problems with real-world relevance. Data
from job search sites indicate that the demand in New York State is particularly
acute. A 2018 report from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine entitled "Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and Options"
calls for institutions to advance the so-called "data acumen" of graduates.
While the dissemination of data science competencies has been emphasized in some
disciplines (e.g., computer science), the broad delivery of these skills to
college graduates has been slow to evolve. The aim of this project is to develop
and implement a scalable, innovative program, termed "Connecting the Dots", for
delivery of data science competencies to students pursuing an undergraduate
engineering degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connecting the Dots (CTD) is a highly
collaborative project between the flagships schools in the State University of
New York (SUNY) system, the largest higher education system in the nation, and
the City University of New York (CUNY) system. CTD teams the University at
Buffalo (UB) with the City College of New York (CCNY) with the goals to (a)
strengthen the ability to understand and use data effectively to inform
decisions among diverse undergraduate students from across the engineering
disciplines, while (b) simultaneously increasing the capacity of regional
community partners to incorporate data analytical methods into their business or
strategic planning objectives. The signature academic data science track to be
created by the CTD project team is an undergraduate certificate program, the New
York Data Science Scholars program, that is readily integrated with any
engineering major and that complements existing computer science majors at both
the undergraduate and graduate level. A broad range of community partners are
served via novel Data Science Community Labs, which act as "pop-up" summer
facilities on the UB and CCNY campuses wherein students perform internship
projects for community partners who have challenging data science problems for
students to work on, but are not well-positioned to host a conventional intern.
The team's ultimate scaling objective is to develop a program that is easily
adopted by other SUNY and CCNY campuses that host 4-year engineering programs
and by campuses outside of New York State with similar degree program
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Data
Science Corps program focuses on building capacity for harnessing the data
revolution at the local, state, national, and international levels to help
unleash the power of data in the service of science and society. Projects in
this program are being jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the Data
Revolution Big Idea; the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, Division of Information and Intelligent Systems; the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education; the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Division of Mathematical
Sciences; and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences,
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.