* 1924331
* Collaborative Research: A state-of-the-art marine heat flow probe to Advance Interdisciplinary Research by the U.S. Academic Community
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Robert Harris, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 895,407.00

This project is to develop a state-of-the-art, multi-penetration heat flow
measurement system, to be used in both the deep sea and in shallow water (like
lakes and coastal areas), including mechanical, electronic, software, and
documentation. The system will be built to be flexible and compatible with use
on U.S. academic research vessels. Accurate determinations of geothermal heat
flow is essential for understanding a variety of planetary processes including:
regional and global mass and energy flows across and within the seafloor;
volcanic and tectonic processes in rift and subduction settings; gas hydrate
formation, occurrence, and stability; the mobility and stability of ice sheets;
solute and reactive transport within volcanic rocks and sediments; and the
development and maintenance of a vast subseafloor biosphere. This project will
help to advance interdisciplinary exploration and discovery these and numerous
aligned fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage existing
technology that has proven robust and effective, incorporate knowledge gained
from running dozens of heat flow surveys, adapt and advance new technical
developments, and integrate these elements to improve efficiency and ease of
use. The new probe will take advantage of recent advances in electronics and
computing capabilities. thereby improving the quality of acquired data and their
interpretations. The new probe will be adjustable in physical configuration for
use on academic research ships at oceanographic depths and small boats in lakes.
The project will take a new approach for the probe sensor string to send digital
data over a communication bus back to the data logger. Advantages of this design
include 1) allowing for a greater and more flexible number of sensors to be
used, based on the science objectives, 2) reducing the number of conductors and
simplifying the connection to the logger, and 3) making the thermal response of
the sensor assembly more consistent along its length. The new instrument will
integrate ultra-short baseline navigation and acoustic telemetry through the
water column between the probe and ship; these components will improve system
positioning and will relay data to the surface so that real-time decisions about
measurements and probe performance can be made. Building a new, more capable and
flexible measurement system will ensure that the U.S. research community is able
to obtain important thermal measurements for decades into the future. A graduate
student will collaborate on the system development, emphasizing processing
software, and will coauthor associated documentation, presentations, and papers.
Testing of the system at sea will be completed with students as a training
exercise, and an open call for participation by researchers who would like
hands-on experience with the new technology. The project will document and post
mechanical drawings, electronics specifications, processing software, and other
information so that advances made as part of this project will be secured in the
record and widely accessible to the community. The development of a digital, low
power, sensor system will create opportunities for new sensing applications to
be realized where either distributed or small-footprint sensing is required.
Documentation will include at least one research paper, introducing the new
system, and additional scientific studies will show data and interpretations
from numerous settings. The system and associated studies will be presented at
national and international meetings, and be part of student thesis chapters. The
working system will be made available for use through the U.S. Marine Heat Flow
capability, including training for routine use and system
documentation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.