* 1924259
* Cybertraining: Pilot: Collaborative Research:  Cybertraining for Earth Surface Processes Modelers
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Irina Overeem, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 277,623.00

Living sustainably on a rapidly changing planet is one of the greatest modern
scientific and societal challenges. One critical aspect of global change
involves the earth's surface itself: the rearrangement of its landforms, soils,
and sediments by processes such as landslides, debris flows, floods, and coastal
erosion. The Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System, CSDMS, creates
cyberinfrastructure to enable advanced numerical models of the earth's surface,
its changes through time, and the influence of human activity. However,
traditional earth science education does not usually equip students with skills
to become effective cyberinfrastructure users and cyberinfrastructure
contributors. In order to develop innovative models for analyzing and predicting
how the earth's surface responds to environmental change and human influence,
the earth surface processes (ESP) modeling community needs a platform to teach
modern programming practices and High Performance Computing methods. This
project implements a 10-day Cyberinfrastructure in Earth Surface Processes
Institute (ESPIn) for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and early career
faculty at the CSDMS Integration Facility at the University of Colorado in
Boulder in the summers of 2020-2021 trains the next generation to be innovators.
ESPIn aims to transcend the traditional model of department-based graduate
education through interdisciplinary, problem-based, "Just in Time Teaching" of
model use and development. Over forty participants, selected from diverse
disciplinary backgrounds with explicit slots reserved for underrepresented
minorities, gain direct experience in converting their research codes into open-
source distributed software. ESPIn hosts developed lesson material in online
open access educational repositories. ESPIn helps to train a new generation of
computationally savvy, integrative scientists, while accomplishing major
community science priorities. This project thus serves the national interest, as
stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science; to advance the
national prosperity and welfare by building a capable geoscience
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth Surface Processes Institute (ESPIn) is
a 10-day immersive experience for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and
early career faculty, allowing them to make advances on critical earth surface
processes research questions with state-of-the-art modeling tools. This project
targets learners who would benefit from critical knowledge, skills, and tools to
become better cyberinfrastructure users and developers through a careful,
inclusive selection procedure. This project aims to help make scientific
advances in the study of Earth Surface Processes (ESP) that leverage the
powerful and advanced capabilities of new cybertools, such as the Python
Modeling Tool. To these ends, the primary objective is to expand the use of
cyberinfrastructure among members of the ESP research community with training
that (1) increases their competence and confidence with using
cyberinfrastructure tools, methods, and resources and (2) moves the larger ESP
community towards more widely adopting tools to advance the fundamental science
of predicting surface change. Experienced scientists, visiting faculty, and
software engineers assist with training and mentoring of the participants. ESPIn
offers hands-on training in best programming practices, numerical methods, open
source software development, advanced use of version control systems, writing
unit tests, HPC-based sensitivity testing and model uncertainty quantification
techniques. Several days are dedicated to working collaboratively on research
and coding projects. Participants work on developing their own codes, with the
intent of making codes more robust and compliant with existing ESP CI
frameworks. The Summer Institute is quantitatively evaluated for learning
efficacy and evaluations are used to iterate on lesson material quality. ESPIn
provides all developed lesson material as online learning and teaching modules
and broadly advertises these resources to the geoscience
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.