* 1924148
* CNH2-S: Mercury Pollution and Human-Technical-Environmental Interactions in Artisanal Mining
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Henrik Selin, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 748,435.00

This project applies a social, technical, and environmental systems perspective
to analyze mercury use and human well-being with a focus on artisanal and small-
scale gold mining (ASGM). Mercury is an environmental pollutant that can travel
far from its emission source, where it can damage human health and the
environment. ASGM is estimated to be the largest source of global mercury
emissions, and occurs in the context of power, race, and gender dynamics in
mining communities. A better understanding of the multiple, interacting factors
that influence mercury use in ASGM will help advance knowledge about the
atmospheric mercury system and support governance efforts to address
environmental and human health risks from mercury pollution. The project will
develop and evaluate a new theoretical framework that can be employed to analyze
interactions of people, technologies, and the environment that can contribute to
sustainability transitions. The project's broader impact will be to inform
initiatives to mitigate environmental and social harms of ASGM activities,
including those under the global Minamata Convention on Mercury. Project
participants will engage with organizations, NGOs, those affected by mercury
contamination in communities, and other experts to translate findings to
practical action. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the perspective of an
integrated human-technical-environmental system to analyze mercury use and human
well-being with a focus on artisanal and small-scale gold mining (ASGM) in
Peru's Amazonian region of Madre de Dios. Mercury poses substantial risks to
human health, both locally and through long-range transport, and ASGM is
estimated to be the largest source of mercury to the global atmosphere. Mercury
use and ASGM is also accompanied by a range of other social and environmental
problems. The project will develop and evaluate a new theoretical framework
based on a human-technical-environmental systems approach, and refined methods
for bridging quantitative and qualitative systems analysis. The project asks the
following questions: Q1) How much mercury is emitted to the atmosphere from
ASGM, globally and regionally? Q2) What are the main multilevel governance needs
and options to support reduced mercury use and improved human well-being in the
ASGM sector? Q3) How do ideas about mercury and pollution in the context of
power, race, and gender affect prospects for sustainability transitions in ASGM
regions? Q4) What frameworks can be used to better understand the links between
ASGM and sustainability, and measure progress towards improving miners' well-
being? The project deploys multi-disciplinary research methods, including
atmospheric chemistry modeling, governance research methods, and ethnographic
methods. It applies a systems framework using a matrix-based approach linking
quantitative and qualitative analysis. The matrix approach will classify system
components, map interactions among these components, and identify key points of
leverage in the system. All four questions and research methods will be refined
through coordination with local and international stakeholders. The project
results will contribute to the broader field of sustainability science through
developing frameworks and insights to assess integrated social-environmental
systems. The research will also contribute to the areas of atmospheric chemistry
(through novel inverse approaches and better constraints on mercury emissions),
governance research (by contributing to theory and empirical analysis of
multilevel governance), and political ecology and environmental anthropology
(through a better assessment of complex social relationships related to natural
resource extraction). Societal benefits include informing efforts, including
under the Minamata Convention on Mercury, to mitigate environmental and social
harms of ASGM. Students will be trained and involved in interdisciplinary and
trans-disciplinary research methods, and related case study materials will be
developed for teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.