* 1924236
* Collaborative Research: Manganese Cycling and Coupling Across Redox Boundaries within Stratified Basins of the Baltic Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Scott Wankel, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 11/30/2023
* USD 844,888.00

The trace element manganese (Mn) is distributed widely throughout the global
ocean where it cycles among three dominant oxidation states. Manganese in the
higher oxidation states is highly reactive and thereby influences the cycling of
nearly all other elemental cycles, including those of oxygen and nitrogen. The
intermediate Mn species has only recently become recognized as an abundant
component of the Mn pool, presenting now a previously unrecognized factor that
may control the chemistry of the ocean. The Baltic Sea contains high Mn
concentrations and preliminary investigations have pointed to the presence of an
operationally defined "reactive" form of Mn but the composition and consequence
of this Mn pool are unknown. This research will explore the cycling of Mn within
the Baltic Sea enabled by an established collaboration with the Leibniz
Institute for Baltic Sea Research in Warnemunde, Germany. By coupling field
measurements and targeted shipboard incubations, this study will shed light on
the processes controlling the Mn cycle and its link to the oxygen, iodine, and
nitrogen cycles. This project will educate several undergraduate and graduate
students and promote scientific exchange between research groups within the
United States and Germany. Further, outreach efforts associated with this
research will continue an existing collaboration between the PIs and the Boston
Green Academy in South Boston to introduce high school students to chemical
oceanography, and in particular biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese
(Mn) is intricately linked to nearly all elemental cycles, and yet we know
little about the processes governing its redox cycling within natural systems.
Over the past decade a number of key scientific discoveries have provided
greater insight into the diversity of processes and mechanisms involved in Mn
redox cycling and introduced Mn(III) ligand complexes as important components of
the dissolved Mn pool. The Baltic Sea is one of the most well studied stratified
marine systems and reactive Mn has been implicated as a key factor in the
formation and maintenance of suboxic zones. Thus, the goal of this research is
to explore the cycling and elemental coupling of Mn within stratified basins of
the Baltic Sea. The PIs predict that reactive Mn, as Mn(III) ligand complexes
and Mn oxide particles, is a primary control on the redox landscape of
stratified marine waters, particularly at redox boundaries and within the
suboxic zone. The PIs propose fieldwork in a local permanently stratified
brackish pond to refine experimental procedures followed by two cruises to
suboxic basins in the Baltic Sea enabled by an established collaboration with
the Leibniz Institute for Baltic Sea Research in Warnemunde. Field measurements
will be obtained using a combination of in situ sensors and ship/lab-based
instrumentation at several Baltic Sea sites to define the distribution of Mn
species and the rates of Mn redox transformations spanning the redoxcline along
with a suite of chemical information. Further, a matrix of shipboard incubations
will be conducted to constrain the underlying (a)biotic processes responsible
for the observed Mn profiles. Specifically, across oxygen and Mn gradients
spanning the redoxcline, the PIs will interrogate the link between the Mn cycle
and iodine and nitrogen species, which will ultimately help constrain current
gaps in the mass balance of these elements in Baltic Sea
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.