* 1924005
* Collaborative Research: Interaction Between Plumes and Surface Waves from the Surf Zone to the Inner-Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sarah Giddings, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 669,710.00

Rivers play an important role in delivering land-derived material (e.g.,
sediment, contaminants) and freshwater to the coastal ocean, the latter
impacting coastal circulation. Yet the role of near-shore waves and wave
breaking in plume mixing, transport, and ultimate fate along the coastline is
not yet understood. To address this knowledge gap, this project uses a
combination of measurements and numerical models to determine the fate of
buoyant river plume water in the coastal ocean. Observations from two field
experiments will measure river plume spreading and mixing in the coastal ocean.
Realistic simulations of these field sites combined with idealized numerical
simulations will allow the experiment to span a broad range of parameter space
in order to be relevant to different types of rivers across a variety of
coastlines. The improved understanding of river water mixing and fate in the
coastal ocean that will result from the work is crucial to quantifying the
spreading of sediment, pollutants, larvae, and other important material in the
nearshore. Thus, this work will aid in identifying the spatial and temporal
scales relevant to mitigating risks due to poor coastal water quality under
varying conditions, improving coastal water quality predictions and reducing
human exposure to contaminated waters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
improve the dynamical understanding of small Kelvin number, small-moderate
discharge river plumes in the presence of depth-limited surface waves. Prior
research has shown important wave impacts on plume structure and mixing, yet
significant knowledge gaps remain in the understanding of wave/plume
interactions across a range of river discharge and across the surf zone/inner-
shelf region. These knowledge gaps limit our ability to predict the ultimate
fate of small rivers and the material they carry with them, relevant to coastal
pollution, larval transport, and more. Preliminary simulations suggest there is
significant wave-driven plume modification including enhanced along-shore
spreading within the surf zone and decreased freshwater export to the inner-
shelf. A suite of idealized coupled ocean circulation and wave propagation model
simulations for varying river discharge, wave height, wave direction, tidal
stage, and Coriolis forcing will provide a parameter space to explore wave/plume
interaction. The results from idealized studies will be augmented with
conclusions from an existing study site (with existing observations and
realistic model output) and a new complementary study site. The observational
campaign and realistic simulations of the new study site are designed to capture
the missing parameter space and plume metrics that were not captured at the
existing site. Finally, combined analyses of the suite of idealized and
realistic models and observational datasets will be done to address four key
hypotheses. Ultimately this study will: (1) Determine the physical mechanisms
that trap plume water within the surf zone, (2) characterize the role of
riverine versus wave momentum fluxes on plume extent, (3) identify pathways
through which freshwater trapped in the surf zone gets exported to the inner
shelf, and (4) test existing turbulence closure models in the region of depth-
limited wave breaking in the presence of buoyancy
gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.