* 1924464
* NSF-BSF: The role of rhodopsin phototrophy in ocean's solar energy capture and its regulation in contrasting nutrient regimes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Laura Gomez-Consarnau, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 654,904.00

This is a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation's
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF-GEO) and the Israel Binational Science
Foundation (BSF) in accord with the language in the Memorandum of Understanding
between the NSF and the BSF. This Agreement allows a single collaborative
proposal, involving US and Israeli investigators, to be submitted and peer-
reviewed by NSF. Upon successful results of the NSF merit review and
recommendation by the cognizant NSF Program of an award, each Agency funds the
proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own country.
Rhodopsin phototrophy is the simplest light-dependent metabolism in nature.
Since its discovery in marine systems over two decades ago, rhodopsin genes have
been found in most microorganisms of the surface ocean. This implies that some
of the solar energy that reaches the ocean could be channeled by metabolisms
other than conventional chlorophyll-based photosynthesis. Despite the potential
importance of rhodopsin phototrophy in marine energy fluxes and the global
carbon cycle, its ecological role remains elusive. To study its relevance, this
team has developed an analytical method to determine the concentrations of the
light-sensitive pigment in rhodopsins, the chromophore retinal. First estimates
suggest that rhodopsins are able to capture more sunlight energy than
chlorophylls in marine regions where inorganic nutrients are very low, such as
the Mediterranean Sea. Yet, these patterns seem to be opposite in the coastal
north Pacific Ocean where high rhodopsin synthesis also occurs during the high-
nutrient upwelling season. Therefore, it is still unclear which environmental
variables are driving rhodopsin synthesis in the ocean. The overall goal of this
project is to understand the effects of nutrient availability on marine
rhodopsin production and light utilization in systems representative of vast
areas of the world ocean. These data are key to further extrapolate the role of
rhodopsins at a global scale and to predict their impact on ocean dynamics under
different climate change scenarios. Broader impacts of this project include
supporting the dissertation work of two graduate students and the active
participation of undergraduate and underrepresented minority high school
students in fieldwork and laboratory experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project studies the effects of nutrient availability on microbial rhodopsin
phototrophy in two marine regions which are representative of large areas of the
world ocean: the oligotrophic P-limited Eastern Mediterranean Sea and the
upwelling N-limited North Pacific. Monthly In situ rhodopsin quantifications
coupled with metagenomics and metatranscriptomics are being used to identify the
seasonal patterns of rhodopsin- based phototrophy in different microbial
taxonomic groups and environments. These field data are complemented with
seawater nutrient enrichment incubation experiments, which links nutrient
availability to rhodopsin-mediated light capture in a controlled setting.
Finally, studying the particular physiology of rhodopsin-containing bacteria
isolated from the North Pacific coast and the Eastern Mediterranean allows the
synthesis regulation strategies used by bacteria from different marine regions
and lifestyles to be determined. Overall, this combination of observational and
manipulative approaches will provide a more complete and comprehensive
understanding of the effect of nutrient supply on rhodopsin distribution,
synthesis regulation and energetic gain. The scientific and societal impacts of
this project include understanding the consequences of a potential expansion of
rhodopsin phototrophy in response to climate change
forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.