* 1924724
* ATD: Next Generation Statistical Learning Theory and Methods for Multimodal Spatio-Temporal Data with Application to Computer Vision
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Tapabrata Maiti, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 515,526.00

The main purpose of this project is to develop next-generation statistical
theory and methods of machine learning for new age spatio-temporal data that are
arising in technology-based modern world contexts such as computer vision, self-
driving cars, and imaging. The key focus of traditional statistical theory and
modeling for spatial data lies mostly in interpolation and prediction within the
study region. Further, the available techniques are restrictive because of many
strong assumptions. Besides new ways of modeling spatio-temporal data, this
project considers the classification and prediction of spatial objects. The
rapid development of information technology is making it possible to collect
massive amounts of data in multiple modalities, posing serious challenges to
data scientists for multi-tasking the tremendous amount of data in real time.
Conventional vector-based statistical modeling is computationally inefficient
and inadequate for the classification of spatial objects in complex and high
dimensional contexts. This project provides a broader and nonstandard framework
for handling such massive spatio-temporal data. The proposed theory and methods
are grounded with computer vision applications with low training sample. The
project will provide training to undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at providing two innovative ways of
modeling spatio-temporal data, artificial neural networks, and tensor and
classifying spatial objects. The techniques are well established in applied
machine learning literature but distinguish themselves from the traditional
spatio-temporal analysis in statistics. The proposed research builds upon
capturing spatio-temporal dependence using machine learning techniques to avoid
modeling large covariance matrix and capture complex spatio-temporal dependence.
The techniques avoid specifying big covariance matrices to make the models
computationally efficient and rely on less distributional assumptions. The
proposed mathematical foundations for these methods not only develop new
statistical theories, but also eliminate the value loss of these machine
learning methods due to lack of adequate mathematical justifications. Another
important feature of this project is that this considers computer vision
applications which generally come with low training sample. The popular machine
learning techniques such as deep net, neural net, or higher order tensors
require large training sample for building effective systems. A major thrust of
this project is to overcome this issue by adopting several dimension reduction
techniques that can handle high-dimensional spatio-temporal data with small
sample size without overfitting the model. The project will advance research in
high dimensional machine learning theory and methods. The theory and methods
developed in this project serve a general framework of dealing with large and
complex spatio-temporal data and has broader impacts in multidisciplinary fields
including statistics, computer science, neuroimaging, machine learning, and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.