* 1924125
* I-Corps: Early risk assessment of infant head malformations at the point-of-care
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Marius Linguraru, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project relates to the
provision of mobile and informed decision support to clinicians and caregivers
in various pediatric health conditions that involve body malformations, such as
head malformation, facial abnormality, ear deformity, and/or bowed legs. About
2.3 billion people owned a smartphone in 2017, using an average of 2-3 hours on
10 different apps daily. In a recent survey in 2016, 79% of moms were interested
in trying or learning about telemedicine for non-emergency medical issues and
40% of those owning smartphones had downloaded at least one health or wellness
app. It is estimated that the worldwide market size for mHealth--mobile medical
apps-- will reach $11 billion by 2015, a five-fold increase compared to 2017.
New parents are particularly involved with mHealth and early detection and
continuous monitoring is of utmost importance in the pediatric population. Given
the current growth potential of mHealth and its high acceptance by parents, a
mobile app is perfectly situated at bridging health gaps in pediatric care. Our
approach will use image analysis and artificial intelligence to enable
instantaneous decision support, customized recommendations, and low cost scaling
up of our technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project provides the
PediaMetrix team the opportunity to investigate the usability of a new mobile
health app, which will enable parents to capture photographs of their infant's
head using a smartphone and receive instant analysis of their head shape. We
demonstrated that our image-based algorithms accurately measure the cranial
index and cranial vault asymmetry index--two clinical parameters used to
diagnose and plan treatment for flat head syndrome (FHS). Based on the
determined FHS type and severity, the app recommends infant-specific therapeutic
re-positioning instructions and then follows up with the caregiver on a regular
basis to ensure compliance and progress during therapy. The app will send the
information to the infant's electronic health records to be reviewed by
pediatricians. We are also investigating cranial shape features with machine
learning methods to distinguish between FHS and craniosynostosis, another
condition that causes head malformations, but which typically requires surgical
treatment. PediaMetrix filed for protection of intellectual property March
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.