* 1924204
* NSF RISE: Enhancement of Research and Education Infrastructure - Laboratory for Prototype Devices Based on Functional Materials
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Michael Williams, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

HBCU-RISE: Enhancement of Research and Education Infrastructure - Laboratory for
Prototype Devices Based on Functional Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) program supports the development of research
capability at Historically Black Colleges and Universities that offer doctoral
degrees in science and engineering disciplines. Supported projects have a
unifying research focus in one of the research areas supported by the National
Science Foundation, a direct connection to the long-term plans of the host
department, institutional strategic plan and mission, and plans for expanding
institutional research capacity, as well as increasing the production of
doctoral students, especially those underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics. With National Science Foundation support, Clark
Atlanta University will conduct a project entitled "Enhancement of Research and
Education Infrastructure - Laboratory for Prototype Devices Based on Functional
Materials". The vision of this project is to increase the number of
underrepresented scientists in the interdisciplinary field of materials science.
This project will strengthen the research and education infrastructure at Clark
Atlanta University. High quality research experience opportunities for students
will be available through a university/ industry partnership. A summer research
program will provide undergraduate students with academic enrichment experience
and will serve as an introduction to the field of materials science. A new
materials science course will be developed covering the basic laws and concepts
relating the structures of solids to their physical and mechanical properties.
This project will significantly increase the number of African-Americans earning
doctoral degrees with expertise in materials science. These efforts will also
enhance career opportunities for graduate students through the development of a
multidisciplinary educational program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
component of this project will focus on the design, development and testing of
prototype lithium-air batteries. Conventional lithium-ion batteries in use in
hybrid and electric vehicles are approaching their theoretical limit. Lithium-
air technology offers the potential for ten-times the performance of today's
lithium-ion technology. Proposed research is expected to lead to the development
of new electronic materials such as electrolyte and anodes for lithium-air and
lithium-ion batteries. Experimental work will be complemented by computational
analyses. Battery studies will generate data sets to determine material design
for improved functional performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.