* 1924640
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Distributed co-Robots for Strawberry Harvesting
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Manoj Karkee, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 302,888.00

Recently, strawberry production in the United States is decreasing due to labor
shortages and the ever-increasing cost of labor, particularly for harvesting. A
high cost of production could put strawberry-growers in the U.S. at a
disadvantage in comparison to countries whose cost of labor is much less. In
order to make strawberry production in the U.S. competitive with the rest of the
world, production costs need to be reduced. This project aims to investigate
developing a small, rugged, and cost-effective co-robot system that can be used
by growers, which will ultimately lower the harvesting costs and increase
profitability of strawberry production. Additionally, the research results can
benefit other high value specialty crops, such as tomatoes and blueberries, as
they are facing similar labor shortage issues. This multi-disciplinary research
will enrich course curricula which benefits a large number of students at three
participating universities, and will provide research and development
experiences to students of underrepresented and minority backgrounds. The
outreach component of the project will educate K-12 students and the general
public about robotics in agriculture via conferences, workshops, field days, and
other learning engagement activities. Additionally, a graphic user interface
will be developed, which is adaptable as an assistive device to benefit users
with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes three primary
research thrusts. The first thrust will investigate a decentralized, scalable
row allocation algorithm for robots to achieve a consensus about which rows to
harvest, in order to achieve an overall minimum time in harvesting. The
algorithm is expected to be scalable, efficient, fast, non-conflicting, and
simple. The second thrust will develop an integrated multi-exposure fusion,
curvature analysis and hierarchical image processing algorithm. Supported by the
end-to-end deep learning technique, the algorithm will detect strawberries,
stems, and vines in field environments with a high accuracy. The third research
thrust involves a study of a parallel delta robot-arm based manipulation system
for picking and transporting harvested fruits. The associated amount of
movements will be minimized. These three thrusts will be complemented by many
other engineering tasks and a detailed cost analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.