* 1924061
* CNH2-L:  Eco-social interactions influencing human exposure to ticks and the Lyme disease agent in anthropogenic landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Maria Diuk-Wasser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,414,227.00

There are about 300,000 cases of Lyme disease every year in the United States.
There is no Lyme disease vaccine available for humans, so the only prevention
options are to reduce the number of ticks infected with the bacterium in the
environment and to reduce human contact with ticks. To help develop these
prevention methods, our study will simultaneously investigate how the ticks and
the bacteria are dispersed and survive in the environment and where people are
encountering the ticks, whether in their own yards or in the natural areas they
visit. We will use state-of-the-art technology to monitor deer movement by GPS
and human movement using a smartphone application. This will be the first study
in the United States to focus on tick-borne diseases in urban green spaces,
where dense human populations co-exist with urban wildlife that disperse ticks
and the microorganisms they carry. A multidisciplinary team of ecologists,
epidemiologists, social scientists, and economists was assembled to investigate
this complex system. By engaging with the community in a ?citizen science?
approach, the researchers will better understand people's knowledge, actions and
motivations in relation to tick-borne diseases; educate people on proper
protection methods; and provide recommendations to reduce the individual and
community risk of Lyme disease. The project is led by two Hispanic females and
will build the community of interdisciplinary scholars ready to tackle
socioenvironmental systems research, including two postdoctoral researchers, one
PhD student, and more than five Master's and undergraduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team hypothesizes that tick-borne diseases
act as an integrated socioenvironmental system in which environmental- and
human-associated drivers reciprocally influence each other. Central to the
approach is the assessment of the relative contributions of ecological and human
behavioral factors to increased Lyme disease incidence, with a focus on urban
landscapes. Because of the aggregated nature of risk in urban areas, the study
units will be 'ecological neighborhoods', each composed of an urban park on
Staten Island, New York City and the houses around that park. The researchers
will first study how the movement of deer and the abundance of other animals
result in differential dispersal of ticks in parks across Staten Island. Then,
they will explore how features of the backyards surrounding the parks influence
their attractiveness to hosts carrying ticks and the survival of ticks after
they drop off from hosts. A smartphone app will provide information on people's
movement and exposure risk. The research team will also conduct surveys to
assess people's knowledge, attitudes, and practices regarding tick-borne
diseases and identify risky behaviors and avoidance practices. By integrating
these data to inform agent-based models, the team will identify optimum
combinations of interventions at the level of the individual, community, and
city. These 'integrated tick management' approaches will be provided to policy
makers to better target public health interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.