* 1924431
* Collaborative Research: Deep Madagascar Basin (DMB) Experiment: A Quest to Find the Abyssal Water Pathways in the Southwest Indian Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,540,777.00

The deep oceans play a crucial role in regulating the Earth's climate on long
timescales, by exchanging heat and chemical compounds with the atmosphere and
moving them globally. Sometimes surface waters are carried into deepest ocean
areas where they are sequestered from further exchanges with the atmosphere over
long time periods, but where our knowledge of how water moves is incomplete. For
instance, twenty years ago in the Madagascar Basin of the southwest Indian
Ocean, deep waters were undisturbed by human influence. But newer measurements
in 2018 showed significant amounts of human-made chemical compounds there. These
inert compounds enter the ocean at the sea surface from the atmosphere, so when
and where the surface water sinks, it carries those compounds to the deep sea.
The presence of such compounds in the deep Madagascar Basin after only twenty
years counters our previous knowledge about the region. A possible explanation
is that deep currents as we understood them may have changed course and strength
in the last twenty years. To solve this puzzle, this project will measure the
deep currents in the region for the first time, using shipboard instruments
during a three-week cruise, and with two types of in-water robotic technologies
to follow these currents over several years. Combining these novel measurements
with computer simulations, this study will identify the pathways that deep
waters travel in the Madagascar Basin, and examine what causes such circulation
patterns. It will focus on currents starting near Antarctica, where the water
sinks, through fissures in massive seafloor mountain ranges and into the
Madagascar Basin, and then on how these deep waters spread to fill the basin.
The findings from this project will explain why this part of the ocean is
changing so fast, advance the knowledge of deep ocean circulation, and help
define how heat and chemical compounds are moved around within the ocean. The
proposed research will be a US contribution to the 2nd International Indian
Ocean Expedition (IIOE-2) and will provide the first direct estimate of the
abyssal circulation and temperature variability in the Deep Madagascar Basin on
a basin-scale. The project will support two undergraduate students that will be
selected to participate in the DMB cruise. The PIs will also host and mentor
UCAR's Significant Opportunities in Atmospheric Research and Science and Woods
Hole Partnership in Education students for each summer. Scripps Undergraduate
Research Fellowship students will also be mentored each summer. Moreover, the
cruise will be available to the Indian Ocean community in general for piggy-back
projects, and in particular for oceanographers and students from Mauritius, the
start and end port for the cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will investigate the largely unknown Deep Madagascar Basin (DMB) abyssal
circulation, how abyssal temperature varies in the interior, and the effects of
the tortuous seafloor topography in steering the abyssal flows. The primary
objective is to find out by which pathway(s) the younger abyssal water that
enters through deep fracture zones in the Southwest Indian Ridge spreads in the
basin, which is crucial for a better understanding of the Indian Ocean
Meridional Overturning Circulation and its variability. To determine the
pathways and the transformation of the abyssal waters in the basin interior, an
array of 75 floats ballasted to drift at 4000-m for two years and 3 deep (sea
surface to 6000 m) profiling floats will be deployed, complemented by high-
resolution hydrographic sections (including tracer analysis) across the mid-
basin and the fracture zones. The in-situ observations will be paired with a
state-of-art modeling component, which will be used to investigate the
underlying dynamics and time evolution of the deep flow field. After validation
using the new observational dataset, the model will be used to perform particle
tracking simulations to answer some specific questions that are beyond the scope
of the in-situ observations alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.