* 1924322
* CNH2-S:  Long Term Perspectives on Water Security, Food Security, and Land Management Among Pastoralists Experiencing Change
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Purity Kiura, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 09/30/2023
* USD 748,870.00

Changing weather patterns and globalization affect the long-term sustainability
of communities. Arid and semi-arid grasslands and ranching/herding communities
are particularly affected by uncertainty regarding the availability of water,
food, forage, and grazing land. This research project investigates long term
perspectives on water security, food security, habitat loss, cultural change,
and land management among pastoralists experiencing change in a rangeland
ecosystem. Using archaeological, historical aerial imagery, remote sensing
techniques, ethnography, and generative modeling, this project will contribute
to a more nuanced understanding of complex interactions within
pastoralist/grazing socio-environmental systems in semi-arid lands globally. It
will test the hypothesis that the current intersection of development, land
management, and changing environmental circumstances represents a recent
phenomenon that deviates from long-term trends and if left unchecked will
ultimately lead to environmental degradation. Project results will be widely
disseminated to increase access to clean water and healthcare among the focal
pastoralist community. The project will also produce data that is useful for
understanding the resiliency of grazing practices relevant to cattle-ranchers in
the United States and globally, and teaching materials (e.g. computer
simulations, a roleplaying boardgame) to educate US students about systems
thinking, resiliency, and conservation. Teaching materials will be made
available for free through University of Nebraska teaching initiatives and
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document the resiliency of
traditional land use systems in semi-arid lands and the changes they face in an
increasingly globalized world with shifting weather patterns. Currently, the
local ecosystem faces land degradation and loss of wildlife, while increases in
waterborne illness and food insecurity threaten the pastoralist community. The
investigators hypothesize that the current intersection of development, land
management, and changing environmental circumstances represents a recent
phenomenon that deviates from long-term trends and if left unchecked will lead
to widespread environmental degradation. Reviews of the archaeology and
paleoecology of the region indicate a long-term coupling between pastoralist
societies and the natural environment, yet current ethnographic and health
indicators suggest stress in the socio-ecological system. The overall project
aim is to integrate environmental and human data spanning 10ka to gain a deep
perspective on the system and its adaptive capacity through time. This will be
accomplished by merging data from ongoing paleoecological, archaeological, and
ethnographic research over the last several decades with new research targeted
at understanding social-ecological interactions and their implications for the
modern community. Archaeological study, historic aerial imagery, and remote
sensing data will provide a longitudinal perspective onto land use patterns and
ecology through time. Ethnographic interviews will help to characterize
traditional land use and conservation practices and their recent changes, while
investigations of health, nutrition, water quality, water and food insecurity,
human and livestock energetics, and contemporary land cover will provide a
baseline for understanding the impacts of recent developments. Finally,
generative modeling will help to establish linkages between contemporary
observations and historic proxies and allow projection of current trends
forward. Results will provide an important tool for communicating with
stakeholders (e.g. pastoralists, land managers, NGOs) and will have relevance
for understanding the complex interactions of pastoralist/grazing coupled
natural human systems in semi-arid lands globally&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.