* 1924393
* Field Measurements of Ocean Wave Whitecap-Induced Bubbles
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Malcolm Stokes, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 899,636.00

The goal of the study is to measure bubbles within active whitecaps and the
structure of the foam they form on the surface of the ocean, as a function of
wind speed and chemistry in the near surface boundary layer in wind-driven seas.
Field observations will be made using a Liquid Robotics Wave Glider (LRWG) and
include a variety of remote camera observations of ocean wave whitecaps and in
situ bubble and foam sensors. The motivation for this work lies in the critical
role wave-entrained bubbles and foam play in CO2 transport, aerosol formation,
ocean albedo, and the sea to atmosphere transport of biologically active and
climatically relevant material. The project will support two summer
undergraduate interns in marine science and participation by the investigators
in the Perspectives on Ocean Science lecture series, a public outreach vehicle
hosted by the Birch Aquarium at Scripps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to: determine the scale-dependence of bubble creation on bubble size and whether
bubble creation rates can be measured within whitecaps using breaking wave
noise; address the stabilization of surface foam by surface-active molecules in
oceanic whitecaps; and use images to examine the time-varying structure of
whitecap foam in wind-driven seas. The field study will be staged on a Liquid
Robotics Wave Glider in the open ocean waters off Point Conception. Four primary
sensory systems will be deployed: a sub-surface camera to measure bubbles inside
actively breaking whitecaps, a 4-element hydrophone array to measure whitecap
noise underwater, mast-mounted cameras to measure the cross-sectional area,
decay time and structure of whitecap foam, and hull-mounted sensors to provide
measurements of surface tension and proxies for biological
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.