* 1924096
* Collaborative Research: A New Class of Chemical Potential Driven Plug Flow Membrane Reactors for Combined Gas Separation and Direct Natural Gas Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Xinfang Jin, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 129,894.00

The shale revolution has enabled large volume production of low-cost natural
gas. The majority of this resource is still being burned for heat and power,
releasing carbon dioxide into the atmosphere and further burdening carbon
capture efforts. Meanwhile, directly converting natural gas into valuable
chemicals has received significant interest from academia and industry due to
the potential profit margin brought by low-cost natural gas. This research
project aims to further fundamental scientific knowledge related to carbon
dioxide capture, natural gas conversion mechanisms, and catalyst development
using a new class of chemical-potential driven (electricity-free), ceramic-
based, catalytic plug flow membrane reactors (PFMRs) as a platform. The gas
separation and natural gas conversion are unified in a single reactor to be
energy efficient and cost-effective. The importance and potential impact of the
ongoing scientific advances in carbon dioxide capture and natural gas conversion
technologies will be presented to the public during the annual "Edison Lecture
Series" program at the University of South Carolina (USC). USC will team up with
Benedict College to host a joint summer workshop on energy research topics to
promote education and workforce development for students underrepresented in
STEM fields. Undergraduate students at Benedict College in engineering majors
will be engaged in these research topics by offering summer internships and
academic-year part-time jobs, along with having access to USC's and University
of Massachusetts at Lowell's (UML) existing undergraduate programs. Two new
courses on the topics of gas separation / conversion and computational analysis
for electrochemical systems will be independently developed and offered for
graduate students at both USC and UML. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project seeks to develop two specific types of PFMRs. The first is based on a
triple carbonate-ion, oxide-ion and electron conductor, and within this reactor
the catalytic oxidative coupling of methane will take place using the co-
captured carbon dioxide / oxygen mixture to convert natural gas into ethylene in
the presence of a suitable catalyst. The second type of PFMR is based on a
triple oxide-ion, proton and electron conductor, and within this reactor the
catalytic non-oxidative dehydrogenation of methane will be undertaken with the
concurrent extraction of hydrogen to convert natural gas into ethylene. For both
PFMRs, the influx of carbon dioxide and / or oxygen from the feed side helps
significantly mitigate coke formation, thus prolonging the membrane / catalyst
life. The fundamental components of the project include developing new membrane
compositions and conversion-specific catalysts / supports through a combined
experimental and theoretical approach. The fundamental mechanisms governing the
methane oxidative and non-oxidative conversions and coke formation will be
studied using an isotopic exchange technique and in situ Raman spectroscopy, and
the design, testing and modeling of PFMRs via in-house catalytic reactors,
multiphysics and system modeling will be performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.