* 1924200
* CNH2-L:  Social and ecological determinants of multi-host vector-borne infections in dynamic tropical landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* John Drake, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,599,933.00

This research examines the effects of human activity, including deforestation
and reforestation, on the transmission of two vector-borne diseases of public
health concern, Chagas Disease (CD) and American Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (ACL).
CD causes heart disease, while ACL causes skin lesions that can be painful and
persist for months to years. This project also investigates how ecological
changes, disease transmission, risk management practices, and public policy
simultaneously affect human activity. Project investigators elucidate how the
dynamics of zoonotic pathogens in changing landscapes depend on complex
interactions between social and environmental conditions. As many vector-borne
diseases are expanding their ranges, this project provides public health
officials data and strategies needed to anticipate the northward advance of CD,
ACL, and other vector-borne diseases. Through collaboration with the Gorgas
Memorial Institute of Health Studies, this project improves vector-control and
disease management policies, with a direct impact on human health. This project
provides education and training to undergraduate, graduate, and professional
students, as well as public health workers, in the United States and Panama.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research contributes to advancements in the dynamics
of socio-environmental systems by integrating disease ecology and social
sciences. There has been increasing attention in disease ecology to theoretical
and empirical studies of the ecological drivers of deforestation-associated
zoonotic disease emergence, while at the same time in the social sciences there
is growing knowledge about the economic and cultural drivers of, and responses
to, forest change in the tropics. However, there is urgency in synthesizing this
knowledge as the range for many vector-borne diseases expands out of the
tropics. The investigators integrate social and ecological theory in model-
guided empirical research that analyzes co-occurring vector-borne zoonotic
diseases, Chagas Disease (CD) and American Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (ACL), in
dynamic tropical forest landscapes. Using research methodologies from
theoretical population biology, field ecology, veterinary epidemiology, and the
social sciences, this multidisciplinary team develops a new and transferable
framework for representing the combination of land conversion, related human
activities, ecological communities, as well as their relationship to vector-
borne disease transmission. Data will be gathered using ecological and social
surveys, and these will be integrated using a computer model for land use change
and disease transmission. The research focuses on three questions: (1) What
human and environmental factors determine parasite transmission and human
exposure within habitat types? (2) How does the timing and history of land
conversion affect ACL and CD transmission? (3) What determines human perceptions
and behaviors relating to infection risk across land types? The first question
will be answered by determining relative vector abundance (by collecting sand-
fly and kissing bug vectors), sampling domestic dogs from households as
sentinels for CD and ACL, gathering microclimate data from households and vector
habitats, and gathering anthropogenic data from direct observation and household
interviews. To answer the second question, investigators will compile and
analyze historical satellite imagery, air photos, regional land records, public
health records on ACL and CD presence, data on vector habitat distribution, and
survey public health officials to determine how human awareness of CD and ACL
may change as length of time since deforestation increases. The third question
will be assessed using a household survey and data from the local health system,
comparing responses to time since deforestation and estimated infection risk
from ACL and CD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.