* 1924513
* ATD: Landscape Networks and Nonlinear Diffusions for Anomaly Detection and Active Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* James Murphy, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 165,921.00

Statistical and machine learning are revolutionizing scientific fields ranging
from computer vision, to medicine, to natural language processing, and inference
of natural physical laws. Despite these rapid and impressive empirical advances,
machine learning remains only partially understood mathematically. In
particular, unsupervised anomaly detection in which algorithms must distinguish
background from anomaly with no labeled data and active learning in which only a
very small but carefully selected number of points may be queried for labels are
ripe for transformational advances. As sensors generate ever increasing
datasets, the sheer volume of data overwhelms human capacity for generating the
kinds of large training sets necessary for traditional supervised learning
algorithms. The future of machine learning relies on developing new mathematical
approaches to unsupervised and active learning, where no or little training data
is required. Innovations in this direction have potential to transform fields as
diverse as computational medicine, network security, and image processing. This
project will support 1 graduate student in the second and third years of the
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project develops new algorithms for
anomaly detection and active learning in spatiotemporal data. The emphasis is on
the analysis of high-dimensional, time-evolving data sets in a manner that is
robust to nonlinear geometries, variable sampling rates, and large quantities of
noise and outliers. The PI proposes two distinct but related lines of research.
First, to devise multitemporal anomaly detection algorithms using landscape
cluster networks. This approach handles temporally varying distributions and
labels clusters and anomalies at different levels of granularity, providing
confidence estimates and uncertainty quantifications. Second, diffusion
geometric active learning algorithms for spatiotemporal data will be developed
to allow a human analyst to label a small number of queries from the algorithm.
These queries are carefully chosen, and the labels provided by the human analyst
can radically improve cluster and anomaly detection at minimal computational
burden. The proposed methods are robust to complicated data geometries, temporal
sampling rates, noise and outliers, and ambient dimensionality of the data.
Beyond the topics of machine learning, this project makes broader contributions
to probability theory, harmonic analysis, spectral graph theory, high-
dimensional statistics, and computational linear algebra. Mathematical and
algorithmic contributions will be developed in parallel with scientific
collaborations analyzing large spatiotemporal datasets. This project focuses on
anomaly detection and active learning in three distinct spatiotemporal data
settings: large-scale commuting networks, hyperspectral image analysis, and high
energy particle physics. The proposed methods allow for real-time anomaly and
threat detection, are scalable, and mitigate the need for large training
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.