* 1924658
* Collaborative Research: Submesoscale-Resolving Large Eddy Simulations Using Reduced Biogeochemical Models
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kyle Niemeyer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 247,888.00

Improved understanding of upper ocean biogeochemistry requires a comprehensive
look at the interactions between chemical tracers and turbulence at scales
smaller than one kilometer (also termed "submesoscale"), but modeling chemical
tracers and processes at these small scales requires a tremendous amount of
computing power and time. As a result, new reduced biogeochemical models, solved
in novel ways, must be developed to perform large eddy simulations (LES) of
coupled biogeochemistry and physical processes at these scales. In the proposed
project, techniques adapted from the field of combustion for the reduction of
large chemical kinetics mechanisms will, for the first time, be used to reduce
the size of large ocean biogeochemical models. This interdisciplinary research
effort will be undertaken by a collaborative team consisting of an expert in
numerical simulations of both reacting and oceanographic flows, a biological
oceanographer with extensive knowledge of ocean biogeochemistry, and an expert
in chemical model reduction and solution. The tools developed in this project
will be made available to the broader oceanographic community, and involvement
of interdisciplinary PhD students will expose a new generation to computational
methods in oceanography and the Earth sciences. The project will provide
research experience and mentorship to undergraduate students, particularly those
under-represented in STEM, by designing projects derived from, and complementary
to, the proposed research. Ultimately, this project will benefit society through
improvements to Earth system models (ESMs) used to study climate, resulting in
more accurate predictions of future climate impacts on human health, safety, and
property. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solution of the reduced models will
be performed on graphical processing units (GPUs) using a high-order Runge-
Kutta-Chebyshev (RKC) time integration scheme. This project will culminate in
the simulation of realistic ocean scenarios and comparisons will be made with
observational data from the Drake Passage to determine the role of submesoscale
processes in generating small-scale patchiness in the partial pressure of carbon
dioxide. Ultimately, insights obtained from the LES will be used to develop a
better understanding of the interactions between small-scale turbulence and
biogeochemistry in the upper ocean, including the characteristics, dynamical
origins, and effects of tracer patchiness. Integration of complex biogeochemical
models within high-fidelity LES has previously been exceptionally difficult, but
the proposed model reduction, as well as the use of GPUs and the high-order RKC
integrator, will enable high-resolution studies of fully-coupled turbulent and
biogeochemical processes at submesoscales. These improvements will be made
possible by leveraging techniques from chemical kinetics modeling for
combustion, where reduction and integration of large chemical mechanisms in
high-fidelity simulations has been common for nearly a decade. The proposed
simulation effort will provide insights into the effects of submesoscale
turbulence, including wave-driven Langmuir turbulence, on the upper-ocean carbon
cycle, and will inform the future development of improved ESMs. In particular,
interactions between submesoscale turbulence and biogeochemical tracers are
thought to be the cause of tracer patchiness and require substantial further
study to develop more accurate subgrid-scale parameterizations for ESMs.
Moreover, simulations of the Drake Passage will provide concrete insights and
understanding of tracer patchiness for realistic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.