* 1924785
* A Study on Accelerating the Broad Implementation of Verification and Validation in Computational Models of the Mechanics of Materials and/or Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,08/31/2021
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2021
* USD 215,749.00

Predictive computational models provide enormous potential to dramatically
reduce the costs and development time of new products and manufacturing methods.
For computational models associated with the behavior of deformable solid
materials and structures, however, this potential is currently limited because
rarely are they adequately and broadly proven to yield trustworthy, accurate
results for which the level of uncertainty has been sufficiently quantified.
Therefore, the rigorous verification and validation of such models is sorely
needed; yet, it is seriously lacking. In generalized terms, verification is the
process of determining that the model?s computer code accurately represents the
underlying mathematics/equations, while validation represents the process of
determining the degree to which a model is an accurate representation of the
real, physical world. This study will assemble internationally recognized
experts to develop specific action plans to help accelerate widespread
implementation of robust and accurate verification and validation techniques in
such computational models, which would increase the possibilities of hitherto
undiscovered scientific phenomena, reduction in the lifecycle of the development
process, and facilitate optimal and innovative use of materials and structures.
The study will also help provide a stronger infrastructure and workforce for
future application and development of these powerful models. All these effects
can help enhance U.S. national security, economic competitiveness, and the
quality of life and well-being of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject
matter experts convened for this study will provide and/or execute detailed,
short term action plans, and the final project output will be a report that
addresses seven key deliverables: (1) a document which thoroughly enunciates a
strong value proposition for robust and widespread verification and validation
in the solid mechanics and materials science and engineering communities, (2) a
state-of-the-art key/best practices document specifically designed for
researchers and engineers working with these models, (3) development of new
benchmark problems for application in this modelling domain, (4) recommendations
for sustainable funding programs for large-scale collaborations that will
greatly accelerate adoption of these methodologies, (5) development of technical
society conference sessions which will jump start interest in and implementation
of these methodologies, (6) recommended workshops for addressing detailed
strategies in highly focused sub-domains, (7) specific strategies for connecting
modelers and experimentalists in order to accelerate
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.