* 1924659
* Formation of rain layers in the Warm Pool and their feedbacks to atmospheric convection in an idealized modeling framework
* GEO,OCE
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2024
* Charlotte Demott, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 612,538.00

Over the warm tropical ocean, the supply of moist air sets up convective systems
which manifest themselves in rainfall as a pattern of wet and dry spells, each
lasting 30 to 60 days and propagating slowly Eastward. Within this so-called
Madden-Julian Oscillation (MJO), the understanding of ocean feedback processes
to atmospheric convection remains incomplete, and hinders its representation in
climate and forecast models. The MJO is sensitive to upper ocean stability,
because a stable surface ocean does not mix as readily or deeply, which makes it
easier to generate larger temperature anomalies within a shallow surface layer
through solar heating or evaporative cooling. This effect has been studied more
with warm surface layers, but thin layers of relatively fresh water often formed
by rainfall can also enhance stability of the surface layer. Because these
layers tend to be small and ephemeral, they have not been studied as much. This
project will use a regional atmospheric model coupled with a simplified model of
the upper ocean to explore the impacts of rain layers on atmospheric convection.
In addition to better understanding MJO mechanisms, the project will introduce a
new model for investigating air-sea interactions, and novel analyses of ocean
feedbacks to atmospheric convection. The project will also enable collaboration
between atmospheric and oceanographic scientists, support for female scientists,
and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies during the past decade have
advanced our understanding of the importance of diurnal warm layers (DWLs) for
the onset of the MJO, how MJO convection and wind anomalies interact with the
upper ocean heat content, and have documented the evolution of large- scale sea
surface salinity (SSS) patterns shaped by MJO rainfall. Less clear, however, is
how the formation of transient ocean surface freshwater lenses, or rain layers
(RLs), may temper ocean mixing, marine surface fluxes, and MJO convection. RLs
are typically more buoyant and colder than Warm Pool surface waters, producing a
cold patch on the ocean surface. Because RLs are shallow (0.5 - 5 m) and short-
lived (&lt; 1 day), they are likely undersampled by in situ observing systems.
Direct observations of RLs in the Warm Pool are sparse, and efforts to document
their observed spatial and temporal characteristics are in their infancy. The
frequency, intensity, and duration of RLs, and their effects on atmospheric
convection throughout the MJO lifecycle are largely unknown. A collection of
rain layers generated by widespread convection would reduce surface latent and
sensible heat fluxes via SST cooling, but would also generate a fine-scale
network of sharp SST gradients, which have been linked to convective initiation.
This study will use the Regional Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS) coupled to
many columns of a 1-dimensional KPP ocean mixed layer model 1) to study the
formation of upper ocean stable layers by surface heating and freshening,
including their frequency, spatial variability, and duration, and their
regulation of upper ocean stability and mixing, and 2) to study how rain layers
may interact with convection during the MJO suppressed-to-active transition
period. Model-generated stable layer statistics will be compared to previously
published ocean observations collected during the DYNAMO field campaign. Ocean
feedbacks to convection will be assessed through a progression of diagnostics
designed to link variations in upper ocean stability to surface fluxes and the
organization of tropical convection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.