* 1924041
* The Northwestern North Atlantic: Continuing a Retrospective Analysis of Observations from the CMV Oleander on the Shelf and Slope
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Magdalena Andres, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,130.00

The shelves along the northeastern U.S. have been highlighted as a hotspot of
sea level rise and ocean warming with strong interannual to decadal variability
superimposed on a mean trend. These changes have important implications for both
climate and commercial fisheries. The study will examine this variability in the
northwestern North Atlantic over the continental shelf and upper slope. It will
use long-duration observations collected by the CMV Oleander, a commercial
volunteer observing ship, whose route regularly crosses four important regions
of the North Atlantic Ocean - the Middle Atlantic Bight (MAB) shelf, the Slope
Sea, the Gulf Stream, and the Sargasso Sea. The crossings occur once a week
during the vessel's scheduled roundtrip transits between New Jersey and Bermuda.
This work will utilize the existing, complete Oleander datasets covering the
period 1992 - 2018 and the analysis will focus on the interannual variability on
the MAB shelf and over the upper slope. This is the continuation of an earlier
project and it will support the completion of a graduate student's Ph.D.
research. The data products derived from the Oleander observations will be made
available to the science community via existing Oleander Program
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CMV Oleander has collected temperature cross-
sections of the shelf and upper slope (spanning 42 years), surface temperature
and salinity measurements (spanning 42 years), and velocity sections (spanning
28 years) with expendable bathythermographs (XBTs), bucket measurements and a
thermosalinograph (TSG), and shipboard acoustic current Doppler profilers
(ADCPs). This data set is unique in terms of its high resolution, extended
duration over multiple decades, and co-located temperature and velocity
observations. By combining these data with auxiliary in situ and remote-sensing
datasets, the project will investigate the processes that drive the low-
frequency variability in shelf temperature, shelf break jet and slope jet
velocity structure and transport, with a focus on the physical mechanisms
underlying the variability of the last 28 years. This study also will
investigate whether the slope jet, noted in some previous research but not yet
well-explored, is a regular or an ephemeral feature in the Oleander data set. In
addition, a new suite of scientific instrumentation (including salinity
profiles) is currently outfitted on the new ship commissioned to replace the old
one. As part of this study, the investigators will oversee the transition of
instrumentation packages as to ensure continuity in data collection quality and
seamless extension of the already collected time-series into the future,
suitable for capturing interannual and decadal ocean changes on the shelf and
slope. Emphasis will be placed on comparing the results from the old platform
with the new measurements of salinity and velocity profiles over the region. The
variability to be studied links open-ocean (Gulf Stream, Deep Western Boundary
Current, and Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation, AMOC) to shelf
phenomena (Middle Atlantic Bight shelf circulation, shelf break jet dynamics,
and ecosystem dynamics). Results from the prior project have been (and new
results will be) presented in both climate (AMOC) and continental shelf (Middle
Atlantic Bight Physical Oceanography and Meteorology, MABPOM)
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.