* 1924726
* I-Corps: Automated Summarization Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Edward Fox, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is focused on
improving human handling and understanding of information contained in long and
complex documents. Drawing upon NSF-funded research in digital libraries which
apply information retrieval and artificial intelligence techniques (such as
natural language processing, machine learning, and deep learning), this project
will evaluate whether such technologies (with a particular focus on
summarization) can lead to new business opportunities within both the insurance
and legal industry. One connection between these industries is the sharing of
long, often complex, documents. Integrating summarization methods with
information retrieval, and further leveraging text analysis and mining
technologies, could aid these businesses in more quickly and efficiently
managing such documents. More broadly, the problem of creating a useful summary
for a long document is applicable to many businesses, including the publishing
industry, where the proposed technology could assist both authors and readers,
as well as those involved in discovering, searching, and managing published
document collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will address how
advanced digital library methods can be improved and applied in commercial
settings. An important service to aid with managing and understanding
information is summarization. While there has been recent automation of
extractive (e.g., selecting a set of the most important sentences from a
document) and abstractive (e.g., automatically preparing an abstract as would be
done by a human abstracter) summarization methods, as applied to news articles
or other short but popular works, only extractive methods have yielded much real
success when applied to longer documents. Devising and validating effective
techniques for constructing abstractive summaries for long documents is a very
difficult problem, which is a key focus of this project's efforts. Further,
making those techniques work with complex documents in a variety of domains is a
special challenge. Connecting such efforts with big data collections, online
cloud systems, explainable artificial intelligence methods, and functional user
interfaces, are additional challenges that must be addressed in new settings
that are of commercial interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.