* 1924433
* I-Corps: Reactor Neutrino Detector Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Jonathan Link, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project concerns
potential applications of neutrino detector technology to the commercial reactor
neutrino industry and verification schemes for nuclear nonproliferation.
Neutrinos are a natural byproduct of the nuclear fission that powers nuclear
reactors. Since neutrinos are only very weakly interacting, they stream out of
the core, and through all the shielding, without being changed in anyway.
Therefore, these neutrinos carry information about the fission reaction in the
core, such as the reactor power and the mix of isotopes that are participating
in the fission reaction, which may be hard to determine using conventional
techniques. By detecting reactor neutrinos, it may be possible to image the
spatial distribution of the fission reaction in the core. This information could
be used to improve the efficiency of the reactor fuel burn. Plutonium production
in the core could be tracked, and its removal from the core recorded, which
could be used to ensure that no materials get diverted to other means, useful
for monitoring in nuclear nonproliferation
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further develop a
new reactor neutrino detector technology. This technology uses a highly-
segmented detector, made of cube of plastic scintillator, arrayed in planes,
which are separated by sheets of a second scintillator which is used to tag
neutrons. Combined these two elements are used to cleanly identify the two-part
signature of a reactor neutrino interaction in a detector. Previous reactor
neutrino detectors required meters of shielding to range out cosmic-rays which
are the largest source of background. In this detector the segmentation is used
to identify the specific pattern of the reactor neutrino interaction and reject
backgrounds that would otherwise overwhelm the rare neutrino events. A recent
deployment of a prototype detector to a commercial reactor resulted in a
positive observation of neutrinos, demonstrating the feasibility of this unique
approach to background reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.