* 1924456
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging the AMOC arrays and models to understand heat and freshwater transports in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Susan Lozier, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 510,014.00

The Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) is a large-scale
redistribution of heat and freshwater that impacts weather and climate. This
project will use numerical models of the ocean circulation to examine the long
record of observations from moorings deployed in the North Atlantic. The goals
include diagnosing the mass, heat, and freshwater fluxes of the AMOC and
assessing the relationships between observations of ocean properties at the
moorings and ocean or atmospheric properties at other locations. The project
will also determine the optimal mooring array design for observing the AMOC. The
project includes outreach to middle and high school students entered around the
North Atlantic Ocean and its unique role in climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use a suite of ocean models, including the ECCO variational data
assimilation model system, to examine the long time-series of observations from
North Atlantic mooring arrays (including OSNAP and RAPID-MOCHA). The goals
include: assimilation of Atlantic array data into global and regional ocean
state estimates to assess the value they add to independent elements of the
Global Ocean Observing System; diagnosing relationship of observed mass, heat
and freshwater transport variability at the arrays to causal atmospheric
forcing; identification of the potential for the array data to serve as proxies
for remote, unobserved variables or indices of key oceanic and climatic
relevance; and determining the optimal redesign of the OSNAP array for observing
AMOC. The proposed research will complement ongoing major investments by NSF in
observing the ocean role in climate through the AMOC and promises to ensure that
future investments are as effective as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.