* 1924354
* Understanding submesoscale tracer transport
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Joern Callies, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 548,920.00

This project is a theoretical and computational process-oriented investigation
of submesoscale tracer transport in the ocean. The work plan consists of two
research activities, the first addressing submesoscale vertical transport by
mixed layer instabilities at the ocean surface, and the second investigating the
effects of internal waves on lateral stirring in the ocean interior.
Submesoscale oceanic flows have been implicated in supplying nutrients to the
surface ocean, in providing stratification that traps phytoplankton in the sun-
lit surface layer and helps them bloom, and in subducting particulate organic
carbon from the mixed layer into the ocean interior. The work will advance
fundamental understanding of these processes and is crucial for improved
predictions of how Earth's climate will evolve in the coming decades and
centuries. The results of this work directly benefit the scientific community
developing climate models, which currently do not represent submesoscale
processes. The project supports a postdoc, a graduate student, and two
undergraduate students who will be trained in physical
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore how submesoscale
flows transport tracers such as potential temperature, salinity, carbon,
nutrients, and oxygen. In the first part of the proposed work, the mechanisms by
which submesoscale baroclinic mixed layer instabilities subduct water into the
thermocline and fold thermocline water into the mixed layer will be
investigated. In the second part, a mismatch between theoretical predictions for
the spatial structure of passive tracers in the thermocline and observations of
such tracer distributions in the real ocean will be addressed. The hypothesis
that internal waves have a leading-order effect on the observed tracer
distributions will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.