* 1924270
* Investigation of mechanisms leading to seasonal hypoxia in the Southern Benguela Upwelling System
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Julie Granger, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 512,930.00

The Southern Benguela Upwelling System (SBUS) in the eastern Atlantic Ocean
ranks among the most fertile region in the world ocean, host to economically
important fishing grounds. Unfortunately, waters of the SBUS are subject to
events wherein dissolved oxygen is severely depleted, a condition also known as
seasonal hypoxia, which have been observed to cause substantial fish kills. To
gain a better understanding of the processes triggering severe hypoxic events,
the study will combine field observations (analyzing water samples for dissolved
nitrate, nitrite, ammonium, soluble reactive phosphorus, and silicic acid, as
well as nitrate isotopic ratios to identify the origin and fate of nutrients in
upwelling systems) and modeling. This combined approach is a powerful means of
identifying the processes that contribute to the development of hypoxia in the
SBUS and the mechanisms gleaned from the proposed study are likely to extend
beyond the SBUS to other upwelling regions, such as the Northern Benguela,
California and Peru Upwelling Systems. For outreach activities, graduate
students would create a short film on their research in South Africa. This film,
made available on the University of Connecticut and the University of Cape Town
websites and YouTube, would serve as a means of communicating the science to
broader audiences. Two graduate students would be supported and trained as part
of this project. These students would have the opportunity to work with the
South African collaborators at the University of Cape Town, Drs. Sarah Fawcett
and Jennifer Veitch, involved in the study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southern
Benguela Upwelling System (SBUS), off the coasts of South Africa and Namibia, is
subject to severe seasonal hypoxia which has been observed to have catastrophic
impacts on wildlife, fisheries, and national economies. Researcher from the
University of Connecticut posit that the propensity for hypoxic events in this
region is linked to the extent of nutrient trapping on the shelf inshore of the
hydrographic fronts. This, in turn, influences the intensity of subsequent
blooms, and the consequent oxygen demand when this organic material is
ultimately decomposed at the shelf bottom. To confirm the role of nutrient
cycling in modulating hypoxic event, the scientists will utilize a combination
of observations and quantitative simulations. Analyses of dissolved nutrients
and nitrate isotope ratios from water samples collected on quarterly monitoring
cruises in the SBUS will be used to assess the role of nutrient cycling in
modulating hypoxic events. Concurrently, an idealized circulation model of the
SBUS will be initiated to test the hypotheses surrounding inshore nutrient
trapping and incident hypoxia. Specifically, the focus will be on the potential
roles of wind intensity and periodicity, shelf frontal structure, and the
alongshore pressure gradient in modulating the burden of recycled nutrients
trapped on the shelf and its association with hypoxia. Finally, the ocean
circulation and biogeochemistry of the SBUS will be modeled using a realistic
hind-cast model forced with realistic atmospheric, tidal, and ocean boundary
conditions to make hind-cast simulations of the 3-D circulation and hydrography
throughout the domain. This coupled physical-biogeochemical model would be
queried to fully investigate the proposed nutrient trapping mechanism and define
its role in modulating the intensity of hypoxia inter-annually and from which a
prognostic model can be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.