* 1924178
* CNH2-S:  Sustainable field-to-market supply chains enabled by blockchain networks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Yong Guan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 01/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project seeks to enable more sustainable food and energy systems by
creating more direct channels between consumers and farmers across food supply
chains. Consumers have growing interest in supporting sustainable and
environmentally friendly food and energy production practices. They will
consider paying more for products that contribute towards cleaner air, water,
and natural environments if they can be assured sustainability goals are being
met. Farmers and suppliers are also interested in improving field-to-market
supply chains. Advances in information technology and computational systems
could allow farmers and suppliers to keep track of their practices in ways that
consumers can incentivize. Blockchain networks are a computational approach to
securely storing and sharing records that could fill this role. However, our
scientific understanding of how blockchains could work to increase consumer
awareness of sustainable products, incentivize farmer participation in
sustainable practices, and lead to a dynamic system with long-term environmental
benefits is limited. This project will evaluate the feasibility of blockchain
networks to connect farmers to consumers and thereby increase agricultural
practices that improve sustainability. Broader impacts from this study will
include the development of fundamental mechanisms and metrics for the design and
prototype of blockchain networks in agricultural and other industries.
Curricular materials will be developed to educate K-12 teachers and
underrepresented minority students on the engineering aspects of blockchain
networks to better prepare them for future technological advances. Additionally,
these materials will be incorporated into the People in Ecosystems Watershed
Integration (PEWI) model for use in K-12 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop a framework for blockchain networks that connects farmers
and suppliers to consumers in a field-to-market supply chain. The framework
investigates optimal blockchain network designs in terms of economic cost,
accessibility, energy use, and information efficiency. Some of the factors that
will be considered include the network structure, the information storage
medium, and the transaction model. The optimal design will also account for
consumer and farmer acceptance to encourage broad participation. The driving
hypothesis is that consumers will be willing to pay higher prices for products
when the incentive can be traced directly to the original supplier. The findings
could lead to novel approaches for developing market-driven incentive systems
that empower consumers to support sustainable
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.