* 1924763
* Superoxide Dynamics in Irradiated Seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* William Miller, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 318,869.00

This study will improve understanding of how cycling of reactive oxygen species
(ROS) is affected by light in the ocean, a research topic that has been
understudied, with rates likely underestimated, and with implications for
surface ocean biogeochemistry. ROS affect primary productivity and carbon
cycling in the ocean by influencing availability of trace metals, cellular
stress, and properties of organic compounds. Superoxide is the primary ROS
controlling hydrogen peroxide formation and the fate of dioxide (O2) in
photooxidation. The investigators will use a series of controlled experimental
studies to address questions about decay rates and pathways of superoxide
formation in light versus dark seawater and how wavelength affects superoxide
production. This project will support an early career scientist, as well as
graduate and undergraduate students who will receive training in field and lab
research, optics, data analysis, photochemical modeling, presentations at
meetings and manuscript preparation. The investigator will collaborate with
local high school chemistry teachers to help them use project data in the
classroom to show environmental applications and teach basic kinetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together, the reactive oxygen species (ROS) superoxide
(O2-) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) are involved in the degradation of organic
pollutants, organic carbon cycles, redox cycling of iron, copper, and manganese
which in turn affect marine phytoplankton distributions and contribute to
external oxidative stress in major taxa of marine organisms. New understanding
of microbial roles in O2- redox chemistry, advances in optically defined
photochemical exposure systems, and the ability to simultaneously measure both
O2- and H2O2 at environmental levels with sensitive, real-time chemiluminescence
create an opportunity to re-examine unanswered questions about photo-redox
reactions in seawater. The objective of this study is to advance understanding
of ROS photochemistry in seawater by conducting controlled experiments to
capture decay rates and pathways with and without irradiation and to assemble an
improved, fully spectral photochemical model for superoxide that improves
estimates of in situ ROS dynamics in sunlit ocean waters. The investigators will
use a matrix of various standard and collected organic constituents dissolved in
constructed solutions and natural seawater and: 1) identify, quantify, and
constrain the range of photochemical and thermal reaction rates and mechanisms
responsible for observed O2- concentrations in seawater during irradiation; 2)
quantify the spectral photochemical efficiency of O2- and H2O2 production; and
3) use results in optically-based photo-chemical models to estimate O2-and H2O2
photochemical production rates in seawater across temporal and spatial scales
and various optical and chemical constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.