* 1924749
* Collaborative Research: Mass Extinction Ecological Response and Recovery in the Cretaceous/Paleogene Gulf Coastal Plain
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Carlie Pietsch, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 175,988.00

It is largely unknown how marine animals today will respond to current and
future environmental change. This research is using the geologic record of a
mass extinction event 66 million years ago as a natural laboratory to understand
habitat loss and species survival during rapid environmental changes. The
systematically collected paleo-environment and fossil data are the foundation of
immersive, online 'Virtual Field Experiences' that engage students with the
field collection and lab processing methods of Earth Sciences research. Online
experiences and lesson plans aligned with Next Generation Science Standards are
broadly available through well-known online portals and disseminated to teachers
in the Gulf Coast states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Periods of extreme, rapid
environmental change in Earth history are informative for predicting current and
future survivorship in response to changing climate. These events also provide
the opportunity to test hypotheses on macroevolutionary pattern and process.
This project involves compiling species occurrences and paleoenvironments across
the end-Cretaceous mass extinction (~66 Ma) in the U.S. Gulf Coastal Plain.
Topics of investigation include (1) the impact of available suitable habitat and
habitat continuity on extinction potential; (2) the impact of extreme
environmental change on patterns of niche stability within species, and
phylogenetic niche conservation within clades; and (3) the influence of extreme
environmental change on macroecological shifts in body size and physiological
flexibility. This research supports three female early-career PIs, and graduate
and undergraduate students at five institutions (two of which serve non-
traditional, minority-majority student populations) are trained in field,
laboratory, and analytical Earth Science. Two Virtual Field Experiences with
high school-level lesson plans will emphasize hypothesis testing and the
significance of extinction events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.