* 1924645
* Collaborative Research:  SG:  Phylogenomics and diversification of the snapping shrimp genus Alpheus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* CARLA HURT, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 157,926.00

Snapping shrimp in the genus Alpheus, known for their spectacular color patterns
and the explosive snap created by their major claw, are one of the most diverse
and abundant animal groups in tropical coral reefs. Snapping shrimp form
mutualistic relationships with a diversity of partners such as corals and fish
and are emerging as a model group for understanding symbiosis and species
diversification in marine environments. However, such studies require a more
complete understanding of how many different species of Alpheus exist worldwide,
and the relationships among these species. This research will address these
questions by building an evolutionary tree of the group with next-generation DNA
sequencing data. These data will be used to test whether factors such as host
symbioses or color patterns drove the spectacular diversification of this group.
Studying the biodiversity of this group will help to understand more broadly the
origins and maintenance of biodiversity in shallow marine tropical ecosystems.
Species pages will be created through the Encyclopedia of Life for public
outreach and educational purposes, and a partnership with a science museum will
develop workshops in science communication for undergraduates. A graduate
student, and multiple undergraduates will also be trained in genetic barcoding,
species delimitation, species descriptions, and comparative evolutionary
analyses. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will produce the first
comprehensive global phylogeny of snapping shrimp in the genus Alpheus, spanning
&gt;50% of the 300+ described species and using phylogenomic data generated via
anchored hybrid enrichment. This phylogeny will be used to test long-standing
taxonomic and morphological questions in Alpheus, such as the monophyly of
morphologically defined species groups and the role of habitat use in driving
instances of morphological convergence. A comprehensive genetic barcoding survey
of field and museum specimens will help estimate the existing worldwide
biodiversity of the group. Using phylogenetic reconstructions, fieldwork, and
color pattern analyses, researchers will test whether color patterns - long
hypothesized to have systematic importance - are important factors in
establishing species boundaries. Finally, the phylogenomic tree and data on
worldwide patterns of species diversity will be used to test whether species
diversification in Alpheus is linked to ecological factors such as
symbiosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.