* 1924673
* A community building workshop on Energy, Earth and Environmental Education
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Cathryn Manduca, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 02/29/2020
* USD 49,743.00

Use of energy is largely responsible for the economic power of the United States
and the prosperity and well being of its citizens. As America is increasing its
production of renewable energy, it is important for college students to learn
about energy sources, energy use and how to maximize the benefits and reduce the
problems associated with energy use. However, the subject of energy and the
environment is so large that it often goes beyond the knowledge of any one
professor. Professors and students from different backgrounds will come together
for a one-day workshop to share their knowledge and develop better ways of
teaching students about energy and its uses and the consequences of these uses.

To help advance the convergence among the interdisciplinary fields of energy,
Earth and environmental education, the National Association of Geoscience
Teachers and the Association for Environmental Studies and Sciences will hold
the first Energy, Earth and Environmental Education community-building workshop
as part of the 2019 AESS Conference at the University of Central Florida.
Energy, Earth, environmental and other educators and students in K-12, higher
education, and informal education will share best practices and develop new
partnerships. The agenda will include classroom issues (content, curriculum,
pedagogy and connections between theory and practice) and programs (degree and
sub-degree programs) to be explored primarily in small group presentations and
discussion. Each session will develop options and examples for integrating
energy, Earth and environmental education that will be presented in a report and
on a public website.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.