* 1924424
* Collaborative Research: Key Microbial Processes in Oxygen Minimum Zones: From In Situ Community Rate Measurements to Single Cells
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Gordon Taylor, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2024
* USD 514,960.00

Oxygen availability shapes the distributions and activities of marine organisms.
Ongoing human activities and climate change are expected to lead to expansion
and intensification of already large oxygen-stressed areas of the coastal and
open ocean. Decreases in ocean oxygen have significant ecological consequences,
including habitat loss for migratory and bottom-dwelling organisms, modification
of the marine food web, and production of trace gases with pronounced feedbacks
on climate, such as methane and nitrous oxide. Intense chemical cycling by
microorganisms occurs in oxygen-depleted marine habitats. However, a full
understanding of the consequences for marine ecosystems is hampered by limited
knowledge of actual rates of key microbiological processes and dynamics of the
microorganisms mediating them. This study combines novel methods and sampling
techniques to understand how these processes are influenced by changes in oxygen
concentration to inform predictions of important chemical exchanges within a
changing ocean and its production of climate-active gases. This deeply
collaborative project trains undergraduates (four of whom participate on the
cruise), a graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow. Outreach takes place in
middle and high schools and through social media. Data and samples from the
cruise are integrated in coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen depletion
alters cycling of major elements (especially carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur) as
well as food web functionality. This project addresses major gaps in our
knowledge of oxygen minimum zone (OMZ) processes by applying in situ approaches
to more accurately measure rates of several key microbial processes
(chemoautotrophy, denitrification, anammox, sulfate reduction and sulfide
oxidation) central to marine biogeochemical cycling. This work studies the
Eastern Tropical North Pacific OMZ, the largest open ocean oxygen-depleted
system, to 1) determine the in situ rates of microbial processes involved in
carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur cycling, 2) reveal the genomic blueprint of active
single cells involved in these processes, and 3) obtain estimates of the
relative contributions of the dominant chemoautotrophic and heterotrophic groups
to the measured rates. This work include applies cutting-edge equipment for in
situ sampling and incubations that minimize artifacts associated with
traditional water sampling approaches, allowing more accurate estimates of rates
of important biogeochemical processes. Additionally, rate measurements of
relatively undisturbed bulk and fractionated water samples make it easier to
distinguish the potential role of particle-associated microorganisms in these
OMZ processes. Single cell sorting of microorganisms using a fluorescent dye
indicative of cell activity together with metatranscriptomics informs on
metabolic pathways used for key processes by active microbial community members,
as well as the potential coupling of chemoautotrophy and nitrogen or/and sulfur
cycling. By combining stable isotope probing, fluorescence in situ hybridization
and single cell Raman microspectrometry the relative activity levels of
different microbial phylotypes involved in chemoautotrophic and heterotrophic
elemental cycling are assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.