* 1924690
* Collaborative Research: Developing Automated Nutrient and Trace Metal Methodology using Programmable Flow Injection
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Christopher Measures, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 523,836.00

Progress and discovery in the understanding of the chemical processes that
regulate the growth of phytoplankton in the marine environment is limited by the
ability of oceanographers to measure nutrients and trace metals at relevant
spatial and temporal scales. This project aims to develop a new generation of
autonomous and highly sensitive nutrient and trace metal analyzers for shipboard
use and deployment at coastal monitoring stations, with potential for
incorporation into existing autonomous observing platforms (e.g., gliders,
autonomous underwater vehicles). Such a development will generate new insights
into nutrient dynamics at a range of spatial and temporal scales and provide a
new capability to obtain high resolution data sets for nutrients and trace
metals in remote areas and environments where sample volumes are limited (e.g.,
brines, pore waters). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel
automated methods for nutrients (phosphate and silicate) and trace metals
(aluminium, manganese) using a technology called programmable Flow Injection
(pFI). pFI is a microfluidic technique, which allows to automate conventional
wet chemical analysis using microliter volumes of sample and reagents while
significantly reducing the generation waste. In order to bring low levels of
trace metals and nutrients that characterize remote ocean regions into the
analytical window of pFI, concentration techniques will also be developed and
coupled to spectrophotometric and fluorescence detection. The developed
methodologies will be intercalibrated with standard oceanographic methods by
participating in a GO-SHIP research cruise and a Hawaii Ocean Time-series cruise
of opportunity. The long-term, unattended operation of the pFI analyzers will be
evaluated at the Central California Ocean Observing System (CenCOOS) Moss
Landing Shore station, where autonomous pFI analyzers will be deployed to
undertake a year-long, hourly time series of phosphate and silicate. The data
obtained from the shore station will be made publicly available and will
complement existing monitoring data from this location, illuminating the
connection between deep ocean nutrient dynamics and biological activity in
coastal upwelling systems. The newly developed pFI analyzers will be assembled
using commercially available components and open source software to facilitate
uptake of this new methodology by the chemical oceanography community at large.
This project will also support the training and exchange of at least two
graduate students at the University of Hawaii at M&amp;#257;noa and the Moss
Landing Marine Laboratories, who will represent the next generation of
specialists in the development and application of pFI methodologies to chemical
oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.