* 1924714
* Collaborative Research: High-Performance Biocatalytic Membranes with Self-Contained Radical Polymer Mediators for Water Reclamation and Reuse
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* David Corti, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Access to clean water is among the greatest engineering challenges of the 21st
century. Efficient use of existing freshwater resources is a primary strategy to
address this challenge. However, current societal needs cannot be met without
additional water from sources like brackish water and wastewater. Successful
reclamation and reuse of these water sources depends on the development of
technologies to ensure these waters are fit for use. This project addresses this
need using natural enzymes to degrade toxic contaminants present in water. These
highly-efficient biological catalysts will be formulated into biocatalytic
membranes using recent advances in the fields of polymer chemistry and additive
manufacturing. Biocatalytic inks that contain enzymes and other tailor-made
functional components will be deposited onto nanoporous membrane supports in a
modular fashion. The modular design can be customized for specific needs by
changing the target enzymes and/or polymer mediators. Successful development of
this technology will help address the critical challenges of the Nation to
ensure the supply of safe, clean, and sustainable water resources. Broader
impacts for society will result from this project by training the next
generation of interdisciplinary scientists and engineers to address the
challenge of supplying water to the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
efficient use of existing freshwater resources is a primary strategy to supply
the Nation's water in the face of increasing demand, current societal needs
cannot be met without additional water from sources like brackish water and
wastewater. Successful reclamation and reuse of these water sources depends on
the development of technologies to ensure these waters are fit for use. Enzyme
biocatalysis is a promising platform to address this need. Such platforms
require small molecular weight redox-active mediators to facilitate the
enzymatic degradation of recalcitrant micropollutants. Although these small
molecules provide clear benefits, they are costly and can leach from processes
necessitating frequent replenishment. Therefore, it is critical to eliminate
mediator washout to make this water treatment technology feasible. The overall
goal of this project is to generate the scientific knowledge that enables the
design and fabrication of high-performance biocatalytic membranes. This will be
done by identifying control factors in the design of radical polymer-based
macromolecular mediators and elucidating the processing-structure-property
relationships that govern their co-deposition with enzymes on nanoporous
supports. The specific research tasks to achieve this goal are to: 1) identify
macromolecular mediator designs that promote the efficient degradation of
micropollutants while preventing mediator washout; 2) elucidate the processing-
structure-property relationships for biocatalytic membranes to correlate
membrane support architecture with the biocatalytic and transport properties;
and 3) evaluate biocatalytic membrane performance over the course of multiple
recover and reuse cycles to inform membrane design for field-relevant
applications. Successful completion of this research will address gaps in our
knowledge on biocatalytic membrane design and manufacture. This knowledge will
have broad impact in the fields of additive manufacturing as well as water
treatment. The Nation will further benefit by the training of interdisciplinary
scientists and engineers with the expertise necessary to advance the water
technology landscape of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.