* 1924303
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: Design of dynamic multibehavioral robots: new tools to consider design tradeoff and enable more capable robotic systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Sam Burden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,931.00

This project will create new techniques for designing robots that perform
multiple dynamic behaviors. Currently, most robots can execute a limited set of
behaviors like picking-and-placing objects or walking and running over level
ground. To expand a robot's behavioral repertoire, it is standard practice to
simply combine existing robots; for instance, attaching a robot arm to a wheeled
or legged robot base produces a robot that can both move around and pick-and-
place objects. This approach to design is expedient, but has obvious drawbacks:
first, the resulting designs may be impractically large or expensive; second,
there is a limit to the number of separate robots that can be combined, limiting
the combined robot's behavioral repertoire. It would be better for robots to
maximally re-using existing parts -- for instance, a single limb could be used
both as a leg and an arm as is common in the animal kingdom -- but such robots
are much harder to create because the relationship between design and behavior
is complex. A new paradigm of design for multi-behavior would produce robots
that can help society in a wide range of applications. For instance, home
assistance robots must operate in environments built for humans, and as such
they must have the flexibility to travel upstairs, over clutter, dig through
drawers, manipulate small objects, and more. The results of this project may
enable machines that can be customized to the demands of the specific sets of
behaviors needed, reducing cost, size, and complexity. The methods developed
here will help to lower the barrier to entry for robotics research and
development by making design of complex robots easier, opening the field to
engineers and entrepreneurs who can expand the range of applications of robotic
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable robot designers to build systems that
are capable of multiple behaviors, this project seeks to create automated
techniques that can re-use parts in different behaviors while reasoning about
performance tradeoffs that emerge between use cases. To achieve this, the
project will analyze the relationship between design and behavior for dynamic
robots using physics-based reduced order models. These models will capture the
behaviors of interest and reduce the complexity of the design search space. The
local geometry of these relationships will allow for the analysis and synthesis
of multibehavioral robots that exposes the tradeoffs between competing design
objectives. This reformulated multiobjective optimization problem will allow a
designer to work in the space of behavioral performance without having to
consider each design parameter independently, resulting in a significantly
reduced search space. These methods will allow for a robot's design to be
customized to the task scenario, increasing the overall system efficiency and
effectiveness. These results will be demonstrated and evaluated in a case study
wherein the design of a commercially-available quadrupedal robot is customized
to capably execute multiple dynamic behaviors to perform a fetching task in
varied scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.