* 1924142
* Collaborative Research: Testing the hypothesis that iron oxide - copper - gold (IOCG) deposits and iron oxide - apatite (IOA) deposits evolve as parts of the same mineral system
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Adam Simon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2023
* USD 369,270.00

The sustainability of the human race depends on finding the natural resources
necessary to maintain the built infrastructure of the developed world and to
build capacity in developing countries. Metals such as iron, copper and gold are
among the most important natural resources used by society as they are embedded
throughout our built environment. Iron is used to make steel. Copper is used to
generate electricity, and copper and gold are used to move electrical current
through all electronic products including smart phones, computers, televisions,
electric vehicles, airplanes and all medical devices. Two of the most important
sources of iron, copper, and gold are mineral deposits known as iron oxide-
copper-gold and iron oxide-apatite deposits. Geologists do not yet fully
understand the genesis of these mineral deposit types. The lack of a genetic
model limits our ability to find new deposits that are necessary to satisfy
growing demand for these metals. In this study, we will investigate the
formation of both deposit types in Chile and use the results to improve our
understanding of a general recipe that can be used to predict the location of
undiscovered deposits. The project involves underrepresented graduate and
undergraduate students at the University of Michigan and Juniata College and
will build new collaborations with the mining industry and academic partners in
Chile. The science team will also participate in educational capacity building
in West Africa each year.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Iron oxide - copper
-gold (IOCG) and iron oxide - apatite (IOA) deposits are two of the most
controversial ore deposit types in economic geology. Despite having been mined
for at least hundreds of years, there is no consensus for how the deposits
formed. Despite clear time-space relationships among IOCG and IOA deposits in
many districts worldwide, there is no consensus that the deposit types are
genetically related. Despite clear time-space relationships with igneous
activity, there is no consensus that either deposit type is genetically linked
to silicate magma. There is consensus that IOCG deposits formed by purely
hydrothermal processes, but the source of the ore fluid(s) is debated. There is
no consensus for the formation of IOA deposits, with two very different genetic
models proposed: 1) liquid immiscibility, a purely igneous process; and 2) a
hydrothermal model that invokes basinal or magmatic brines. The most controversy
centers on whether or not the two deposit types are genetically related, wherein
a continuum is hypothesized to exist from shallow-level S-Cu-Au-Fe-rich IOCG
mineralization that transitions to deeper S-Cu-Au-poor, Fe-rich IOA
mineralization. In this study, we will investigate mineralization in the world-
class Candelaria IOCG deposit and surrounding Punta del Cobre district in the
Chilean iron belt where access to deep (&gt;1,000m) exploration drill core will
allow us to test the hypothesis that these seemingly separate ore deposit types
evolve from the same mineralizing fluid. This project has the potential to
significantly change our understanding of IOCG and IOA deposits and has
transformative implications for exploration strategies for these deposit types,
which are increasingly important strategic sources of their namesake metals as
well as rare earth elements (REE), U, P, V, Ag, Co, Bi and Nb, all of which make
our built environment - education, medicine, transportation - possible. The
project involves underrepresented graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of Michigan and Juniata College and will build new collaborations
with the mining industry and academic partners in Chile. The science team will
also participate in educational capacity building in West Africa each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.