* 1924595
* A Targeted Approach to Delineating the Source(s) and Optical Properties of CDOM
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Neil Blough, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 12/31/2023
* USD 230,000.00

A Targeted Approach to Delineating the Source(s) and Optical Properties of
Chromophoric Dissolved Organic Matter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The colored
components of dissolved organic matter (DOM) absorb light to varying degrees in
all natural waters. This material, known as colored or chromophoric dissolved
organic matter (CDOM), plays an essential role in determining the color of
natural waters and influences the amount of ultraviolet and visible light that
penetrates into water bodies. Because CDOM absorbs strongly in the ultraviolet,
it can protect aquatic organisms from damaging radiation, whereas its absorption
in the visible can reduce the amount of light available for photosynthesis, thus
potentially affecting aquatic ecosystems. The absorption of light by CDOM also
initiates a series of photochemical reactions, which produce reactive oxygen
species that can transform CDOM and other compounds, and affect the availability
of essential trace metals to aquatic organisms. Despite its established
importance in aquatic chemistry, the compounds and structures that give rise to
light absorption and emission and produce the photochemical reactions are still
poorly understood. This work will use a series of laboratory tests to identify
chemical groups within the CDOM that influence its optical and photochemical
properties and how these vary with source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These tests (and
the information they can provide) include: 1) the effect of sodium borohydride
reduction on the optical absorption and emission properties (contribution of
ketones/aldehydes to optical properties); 2) pH dependence of the spectral
absorption and emission before and after borohydride reduction (identify
contributions of carboxylic acids and phenols and possible electronic
interactions between these groups and ketones/aldehydes); 3) the effect of
anoxic dithionite reduction on the optical properties (content and impact of
quinones to optical properties); 4) molecular size dependence of the optical
properties of CDOM from differing sources/locales and how this may be affected
by borohydride reduction and pH. This work will focus on laboratory studies of
humic substances and of archived samples of CDOM acquired in past field work
from diverse oceanic and freshwaters sites, but will be augmented by samples
collected from the Chesapeake Bay through a complementary collaboration with a
NASA project that aims to examine water quality in shellfish beds through direct
sampling and optical remote sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will
further support plans to initiate a program for talented and gifted students at
Kenmoor Middle School in the Prince George’s County Public Schools in Maryland.
Plans for this program include presentations/demonstrations to the students and
faculty at the middle school that are related to the goals of this project,
followed by a visit of an interested, select group of students to the PI’s
laboratory where they will be allowed to see and operate some of the scientific
instruments employed in this project and be involved in additional hands-on
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.