* 1924050
* Cr Isotope Oceanography of the Eastern Tropical North Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Edward Boyle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2023
* USD 436,231.00

Surface seawater equilibrates with the atmosphere and has high oxygen levels,
supporting the sea life within it. When this water is cooled in the winter, it
becomes denser and sinks into the depths of the ocean, and begins to lose its
oxygen as microbes respire while feeding on sinking organic matter falling from
the upper ocean. In some regions, such as the eastern tropical North Pacific
Ocean, this process leads to such low oxygen concentrations that oxygen-
respiring organisms such as fish cannot survive. There is evidence that these
regions are growing larger in recent decades raising concerns over the
consequences should these trends continue. Geologists looking at ancient
sediments have surmised that some periods in the past have had much larger
oxygen-depleted portions of the ocean, so we know the possibility exists. We are
working on a new tracer of these oxygen deficient zones, the chromium isotope
ratio of seawater. Chromium (Cr) is a trace element found throughout the ocean;
in oxygen depleted zones it is reduced from the highly soluble 6+ oxidation
state (hexavalent Cr, a toxic pollutant at high concentrations) to the
relatively insoluble 3+ state (trivalent Cr) which is removed from the ocean
attached to sinking particles. This process favors lighter Cr isotopes hence Cr
with 24 protons and 28 neutrons is preferentially transformed compared to Cr
with 24 protons and 29 neutrons. This transformation can be used to study the
extent and activity of oxygen deficient zones in the modern ocean and in
geological ancient oceans. There is very little data for Cr isotopes in these
environments, and this project will obtain some of the first data with fieldwork
sample collection in the eastern tropical North Pacific Ocean and laboratory
measurements using plasma mass spectrometry. This research can contribute to
sedimentary geological and geochemical understanding. A female Ph.D. student at
Massachusetts Institute of Oceanography will participate in the project that
will comprise most of her thesis research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Chromium (Cr)
in the aquatic environment exists in two redox states, Cr(III) and Cr(VI).
Cr(VI) is thermodynamically stable and the dominant form observed in the oxic
ocean, although a few percent of unstable Cr(III) is also observed. Cr(III) is
particle-reactive and is scavenged onto sinking particulate matter, whereas
Cr(VI) is relatively unreactive. Both species can be taken up by marine biota,
although diatoms take up Cr(III) ~20 times faster. Cr(III) has biochemical
functionality (e.g. lipid and protein metabolism), whereas Cr(VI) is a toxin
that damages cellular biochemistry. When oxygen is less than about 2 uM, Cr(III)
becomes the thermodynamically stable species, but slow reaction kinetics lets
microbial activity or environmental reductants such as Fe(II) dominate the
conversion. Theory and lab experiments indicate that this redox transformation
should be accompanied by a stable isotope ratio shift when partial conversion
occurs, with Cr(III) enriched in the lighter isotopes. Of the four Cr stable
isotopes, this process is observed using the ratio of the most abundant natural
isotopes 53Cr and 52Cr while using an enriched double spike of the scarce 50Cr
and 54Cr isotopes to correct for laboratory and instrument mass fractionation.
This sensitivity to environmental oxygen has inspired geologists to use Cr
isotope ratios as an indicator of past oxygenation conditions on earth. But
there is little data on the Cr isotope composition in marine aquatic systems
with which to ground-truth the geological inferences. We will illuminate the Cr
isotope geochemistry of the marine environment with measurements on the
horizontal and vertical distribution of Cr concentrations and Cr isotope ratios
for the Cr redox species and particulate matter for samples from the eastern
tropical North Pacific oxygen deficient zone. Cr isotope ratios are sensitive to
biological uptake and regeneration in the oxic ocean and redox processes in
oxygen deficient zones (and the latter's consequent outmixing into adjacent oxic
zones). This data will be examined in relationship to standard hydrographic
properties and nutrients and to the oceanic redox systems of nitrogen, iron, and
manganese.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.