* 1924751
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Automatic, Adaptive Detection and Description of Change in Time-Lapse Imagery
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Gregory Shakhnarovich, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 94,344.00

This project will provide algorithms for automatic, adaptive detection and
description of changes in time-lapse imagery - a series of images obtained from
the same scene over a long time frame. We wish to identify when there are
"significant" changes in the scene, and provide a text description of those
changes in natural English, where a human analyst provides feedback to determine
what kinds of changes are important (e.g., a building being built,
deforestation) or unimportant (e.g., seasonal changes). We will in particular
focus on satellite or aerial imagery, for which data sets commonly used to train
image recognition systems are inadequate. This fundamental research has the
potential to transform many application domains, including surveillance,
autonomous robotics, monitoring of civil infrastructure, high-throughput
microscopy, and climate science, in all of which change is a common and
significant occurrence. Our work on novel formulations of change description
will also impact on core areas of computer vision and natural language
processing, where many similar problems arise. The project will involve graduate
students training and postdoctoral associate
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting change is one of the fundamental
abilities for an agent perceiving and interacting with the world. Describing
changes in natural language is key to making human interaction with such an
agent efficient, accurate and transparent. Our work will advance both the
theoretical understanding of these goals and the practical methods for
implementing them. Specifically, we will address the above challenges for
developing novel mathematical frameworks for localizing gradual changes and
describing those changes in natural language; we will develop theoretical and
practical means to analyze and overcome corruption in observed imagery; and we
will develop novel theory and methods for leveraging human feedback. This work
will yield fundamental advances in the fields of change point detection and
localization, image reconstruction using deep neural networks and limited
training data, and multi-armed bandit methodology for adapting to human
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.