* 1924281
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Defining the biogeochemical context and ecological impacts of submarine groundwater discharge on coral reefs
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Nyssa Silbiger, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 867,482.00

Submarine groundwater discharge (SGD) is the flow of water from land through the
coastal seafloor into the nearby ocean. Approximately 13,000 cubic kilometers of
groundwater is discharged into coastal environments every year, yet the effects
of this fresh and often nutrient rich SGD are still poorly understood for coral
reefs. This SGD input is driven by changes in precipitation, human land use,
sea-level rise, tidal amplitude, and groundwater usage, many of which are
rapidly changing with climate and human impacts. This project improves our
understanding of SGD effects on coral reefs to better predict how both natural
and human-induced changes will affect coastal ecosystem functioning in the
future. Working in one of the most comprehensively studied coral reef ecosystems
in the Pacific (Mo'orea, French Polynesia, home of the Mo'orea Coral Reef
Ecosystem LTER); this project tests the influence of SGD on individual,
community, and ecosystem-scale coral reef processes. Using mensurative studies,
caging experiments, and a synthetic model, the investigators: 1) characterize
SGD gradients and relate it to high resolution coral reef cover data, 2)
determine how individual to ecosystem processes are influenced by SGD, and 3)
develop a synthetic model to show how changes in SGD fluxes will alter reef
ecosystem functioning. As SGD is a common feature on nearshore coral reefs
worldwide, the results of this study have global implications for understanding
the performance of coral reefs, which are essential economic, cultural, and
scientific resources. This project is structured to provide training across
multiple career levels, linking 13 undergraduate students, 2 graduate students,
2 senior personnel, 1 postdoctoral researcher, 1 female beginning lead
investigator, and 2 senior co-investigators, with a focus on encouraging
participation from underrepresented groups (e.g., through the Alaska Native and
Native Hawaiian, Asian American and Native American Pacific Islander, and
Hispanic-Serving Institutions of California State University Northridge, the
University of Hawai&amp;#699;i at M&amp;#257;noa, and California State
University Long Beach). The investigators work with local K-12 students and
teachers in Mo'orea and collaborate with an artist-in-residence to communicate
science to the broader public through interactive and immersive art experiences
in Mo'orea, Miami, and Los Angeles.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SGD is a natural and
understudied feature of many nearshore coral reef ecosystems, which can
contribute substantial changes to marine biogeochemistry, with impacts for
coastal organisms such as reef-building corals, macroalgae, and bioeroders. SGD
may play a key role in coral reef ecosystem functioning because it alters key
physicochemical parameters (e.g., temperature, salinity, and nutrient and
carbonate chemistry) that substantially affect both biotic and abiotic processes
on coral reefs. This project (i) characterizes the spatial extent and
biogeochemical signal of SGD in Mo'orea, French Polynesia, (ii) identifies how
SGD influences microbial processes, benthic organism growth rates and
physiology, species interactions between corals, macroalgae, and herbivores, and
net ecosystem calcification and production rates, and (iii) quantitatively
assesses how changes in SGD fluxes will alter reef biogeochemistry and ecosystem
functioning through an integrative modelling effort. Specifically, the
hydrogeological, biogeochemical, and ecological data collected in this study are
synthesized in a Bayesian structural equation model. This project characterizes
and quantifies how SGD directly and indirectly affects ecosystem functioning via
changes in biogeochemistry and altered individual to ecosystem responses,
thereby providing a better capacity to track and predict alterations in reef
ecosystem function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.