* 1924799
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of Droplet Generation by Breaking Wind Waves, Experiments and Numerical Simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lian Shen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 314,095.00

This is a combined experimental and numerical study of droplet generation by
breaking wind waves in the presence of surfactants and salt water. Measurements
of the average spatial distribution and diameters of droplets in wind wave
systems have been made in wave tanks and in the field, but the connection
between the dynamics of wave breaking and the generation of droplets is unclear
as are the effects of water salinity and surfactants on these generation
processes. By combining experimental measurements of the breakers and droplets
with numerical simulations of the same breaking events, the strengths of each
research method will be used synergistically to explore the physics of the
droplet generation mechanisms in breaking waves. Air-sea transfer of mass,
momentum, energy and heat is an important component of the dynamical system
controlling the weather and global climate, and droplet generation by breaking
waves makes an important contribution to these transfer processes. The results
of this study will be useful for numerical models of the system. They will also
be applicable to understanding engineering flows in which free surface and spray
generation are involved, for example in chemical engineering flows. Finally, the
droplet diameter and trajectory measurement system used in the proposed study is
thought to be adaptable for use as a field measurement system. This project will
also contribute to the education of students by fully supporting two graduate
students, a half-time postdoctoral researcher and an undergraduate student
during the summer months. At the University of Maryland, the PI will organize a
week-long summer school on nonlinear water waves. He will also host students and
teachers from a middle school program called ThinkStem in visits to his
laboratory. At the University of Minnesota, the PI will organize and outreach
program for high school students from Native American communities. The program
consists of a summer camp aimed at enhancing the students' understanding of the
environmental fluid flow processes at the water surfaces in the Great
Lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will provide, among other
quantities, highly resolved measurements of the temporal evolution of the
breaking wave profiles and similarly resolved measurements of the size and
motions of droplets with diameters down to 100 microns and smaller, while the
simulations will compute the evolution of the air and water flow fields with
state-of-the-art spatial resolution. In both the experiments and simulations,
the breakers will be generated mechanically with highly repeatable dispersively
focused wave packets and augmented by wind. By introducing soluble surfactants
and salt into the water in the experiments and simulations, their effects on
wave breaking and droplet generation will be explored. Both the experiments and
simulations will identify the time, location and characteristics of the
important droplet generation events during the breaking process. The
experimental measurements of the droplet generation events will be used to
provide data and focus for the numerical simulations and provide data for
droplets smaller than the simulations can compute. The simulations will explore
the physical processes that generate these droplet ejection events and develop
and test sub-grid models for the generation of the smallest droplets. The
effects of salinity and surfactants on each droplet generation process will be
examined. The knowledge of the effects of salinity and surfactants on the
droplet production at these experimental/numerical scales will be used to
estimate droplet production at some field-scale
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.