* 1924057
* Collaborative Proposal: CyberTraining: Pilot: Aligning Learning Materials with Curriculum Standards to Integrate Parallel and Distributed Computing Topics in Early CS Education
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kalpathi Subramanian, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,469.00

Driven by recent trends in computing hardware and architectures, the project
investigators are working with the larger community of computer science
educators to introduce parallel computing concepts into early courses in
computer science. A smart repository of available learning materials (e.g.,
lectures, exercises, assignments, assessments) is being developed that enables
computer science educators to easily find and adopt learning materials developed
by other educators. Educators are being trained to work with the investigators
and the repository system. The project serves the national interest as stated by
NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science, by incorporating current and
critical concepts in parallel computing at an early stage in a way that is
available for all computer science students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
takes a scalable and robust approach to building a large collection of materials
from a diverse group of instructors and institutions. This pilot study is taking
the needed initial steps to reaching this goal: obtaining a sound understanding
of the current materials and curricula used in early computer science and
parallel computing courses and enable their reuse. To achieve this goal, the
project develops a system to classify learning materials against two national
standards: the 2013 ACM Computer Science Curriculum Guidelines and the 2012
NSF/IEEE-TCPP Parallel and Distributed Computing curriculum. The system aims to
support advanced search features for educational materials, help identify
similarity and differences between large sets of materials, and reveal potential
gaps in existing materials. The system is accessible through a web interface to
maximize adoption by CS educators looking to introduce parallel computing
concepts, especially those in early CS courses. The project engages early users
of the system coming from the Computer Science Education community and the
Parallel Computing community through a series of workshops held at various
computer science education community events and parallel computing community
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.