* 1924942
* WORKSHOP:  EXPLORING NEW DIMENSIONS OF FOREST ECOSYSTEMS WITH STRUCTURAL DIVERSITY
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Songlin Fei, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 93,481.00

Scientists have long known that biodiversity and ecosystem structure are
important for forests. However, these concepts are mostly studied in isolation.
This has resulted in a limited understanding of how they relate to each other
and to forest function. Forest physical structure can now be easily measured
because of advances in remote sensing and computer science. The term 'structural
diversity' describes the combination of structure and biodiversity within
complex ecosystems, capitalizing on decades of ecology research. Structural
diversity estimates niche space for species in ecosystems, and it may link more
closely to ecosystem function than biodiversity. Funding will support a workshop
designed to advance the science on structural diversity and forest ecosystem
function. The group will identify urgent, new research questions and synthesize
two areas of biology: biodiversity and remote sensing of ecosystem structure.
The workshop will use data from the National Ecological Observatory Network
(NEON). Recruitment of early career and underrepresented minority scientists
will increase adoption of NEON data in scientific research. This will address a
critical need from the 2018 NEON Community Engagement Assessment Report. It also
responds to the NEON Strategic Plan by reaching current users and expanding
future use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of structural diversity within
ecological research is limited by its underdeveloped theoretical framework and a
lack of prioritized research questions. This workshop, held in partnership with
Battelle and NEON, Inc., will explore foundational questions, identify key
knowledge gaps, and prioritize future directions for this new field. The goals
of this workshop are to 1) establish an interdisciplinary consensus definition
of 'structural diversity', 2) identify key research questions about structural
diversity and its relationship to ecological processes to be addressed in the
next five years and the knowledge gaps needed to be filled to answer these
questions, 3) provide training for early career scientists to measure structural
diversity using NEON remote sensing data products. The workshop will bring
together scientists with interdisciplinary perspectives of forest ecology and
from underrepresented groups to further increase its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.