* 1924111
* CNH2-L:  Uncovering Metacoupled Socio-Environmental Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Emilio Moran, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,599,495.00

Today's global socio-environmental challenges place unprecedented demands on
natural and social sciences to understand and forecast a tightly interconnected
world. Yet most studies on socio-environmental interactions have focused on a
single socio-environmental system. While some studies have separately examined
socio-environmental interactions between adjacent or distant systems, they
usually focused on one-way impacts. Although these separate studies have
generated useful information, little is known about the relationships among
socio-environmental interactions within and across adjacent and distant systems
systematically and simultaneously. This award will fill these key knowledge gaps
by addressing some of the world's biggest challenges such as land use and food
security across scales and across borders. The results are expected to reveal
transformational insights into global food production, trade, and labor
dynamics. They can also shine light on the potential cascading consequences of
land use decisions. This innovative research represents an exciting new
frontier, with pioneering contributions to the theory, methods, and applications
of socio-environmental systems research. It will be tightly integrated with
ambitious education and outreach efforts, elevating the public's understanding
of the socioeconomic and environmental effects of complex trade relationships.
Students and postdoc will gain broad knowledge and learn important skills to
become future visionary leaders and globally engaged
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research team will apply
and quantify the holistic metacoupling framework that integrates socioeconomic-
environmental interactions within as well as between adjacent and distant
systems. Fundamental questions include: How do intracouplings (e.g., food
production within a coupled system), pericouplings (e.g., labor movement between
adjacent systems), and telecouplings (e.g., trade between distant systems)
complement, enhance and/or offset their effects on socio-environmental
feedbacks? To address this and other questions, the project will leverage
existing and new data on global trade of a major agricultural commodity --
soybeans -- and associated labor and financial flows for commodity production.
Analyses at the international/national scales will be conducted with new global
grid-based models and other state-of-the-art tools. They will be complemented by
in-depth studies at regional/local scales in key soybean exporting and importing
countries through population census and agricultural data, ecological fieldwork
and face-to-face interviews to inform the development and validation of a novel
metacoupled agent-based model. These studies, spanning local to international
scales, will be joined via systems integration. The international researchers
will understand and simulate complex dynamics and feedbacks of metacoupled
systems under various scenarios co-designed with
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.