* 1924670
* The Creeping Disaster along the Coast: Built Environment, Coastal Communities and Population Vulnerability to Sea Level Rise
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dylan Connor, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

This project explores the vulnerability of humans and the built environment to
the impacts of sea level rise by integrating detailed spatial housing data
provided by Zillow with measures of social vulnerability, sea level rise risk,
and historical flooding. This integrated dataset allows the theoretical
exploration of the role of the built environment in mediating traditional human-
natural system interactions within the context of slow moving, persistent or
creeping disasters. Based on data from coastal communities impacted by recent
hurricanes, innovative statistical techniques are used to understand the drivers
of vulnerability and potential impacts of natural disasters on community
resilience. The open, freely available vulnerability datasets created in this
project will be foundational for future disaster preparation, planning, and
post-disaster recovery. This scientific research contribution thus supports
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national
welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve coastal disaster
preparedness, which will save lives and economic losses in future
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the methodological foundation
of vulnerability analysis to better characterize populations and built
environments across coastal communities. These advances are driven by several
data innovations. Using structure-specific characteristics derived from Zillow
data, novel settlement data layers will be created at fine granularity and for
different points in time to derive built-environment vulnerability indices. The
settlement layers will be integrated with census population data through
statistical mapping techniques to create spatially refined population
distributions and ultimately compute revised measures of social vulnerability at
fine granularity within sea-level rise zones. The revised social and built-up
environment vulnerability layers will be combined over large areas and across
several points in time to assess trends in integrated measures of vulnerability.
Identifying different scenarios related to the exposure and potential impacts of
sea-level rise on vulnerable places will provide insight on how coastal
communities adapt to flood events and determine how particular development
patterns may affect vulnerability in the future. Publications, software, and
data derivatives generated during this project will be made available on the
project website, GitHub and public data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.