* 1924486
* XPS: EXPL: FP: Collaborative Research: SPANDAN: Scalable Parallel Algorithms for Network Dynamics Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Sanjukta Bhowmick, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2019
* USD 43,707.00

The goal of SPANDAN project is to create a novel architecture-independent
framework for designing efficient, portable and scalable parallel algorithms for
analyzing large-scale dynamic networks. SPANDAN will not only provide an
intuitive methodology for efficiently translating sequential algorithms into
scalable parallel algorithms for dynamic networks, but also provide mechanisms
for their analytical evaluation and serve as a mediatory layer between
applications and system level tuning. To evaluate the effectiveness of SPANDAN
framework in real-world applications, the PIs will collaborate with social
scientists and biologists. They will also integrate research findings into
various courses such as network analysis, parallel algorithms, and
bioinformatics. They will further collaborate with high schools to develop
summer courses with the goal of encouraging women and minority students to
pursue IT-related careers.

As the underlying methodology, the SPANDAN framework will exploit graph
sparsification techniques to divide the network into sparse subgraphs
(certificates) that form the leaves of a sparsification tree. This innovative
approach will lead to the design and analysis of efficient parallel algorithms
for updating dynamic networks, and reduction of memory latency associated with
parallelizing unstructured data. Specifically parallel algorithms will be
designed for maintaining network topological characteristics, and updating
influential vertices and communities. To demonstrate portability and
performance, the developed algorithms will be implemented on the distributed
memory clusters, shared memory multicores, and massively multithreaded CRAY-XMT.

For further information see the project web site at:
http://cs.mst.edu/labs/crewman/projects/SPANDAN/