* 1924085
* Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology Meeting:  University of Bloomington, IN; June 19-22, 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Gregory Demas, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,800.00

The Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology was created in 1995 to foster the
interdisciplinary collaborative research focused on understanding the basic
mechanisms of how hormones affect brain and behavior spanning all levels of
biological organization, from cells to organisms. Faculty, students and trainees
will present their research findings collected from a wide array of organisms
and across a diversity of contexts, including field-based investigations of
animals in their natural habitats, laboratory research on model systems, as well
as clinical research on a variety of topics directly related to human health.
Diverse topics will focus on biological rhythms, reproduction, courtship, social
affiliation, aggression, parenting, food intake, cognition, and mood. As in past
meetings, SBN will consist of a series of topical symposia with speakers who are
the world's leaders in their respective fields, a young investigator symposium
that highlights the outstanding research of students, trainees and new faculty,
as well as several poster sessions and mentoring events. A half-day pre-meeting
workshop will provide professional development and foster mentoring and
networking relationships across the membership. The research presented at this
meeting will ultimately result in a greater understating of how hormones affect
brain and behavior and will also help train the next generation of scientists in
this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Society for Behavioral Neuroendocrinology
is a multidisciplinary society that brings together scientists from diverse
fields, including physiological and developmental psychology, behavioral
ecology, animal behavior, chronobiology, psychoneuroendocrinology, neuroscience,
cellular and molecular endocrinology, developmental biology, and genetics. The
society fosters interdisciplinary interactions to promote conceptual advances
and continually rejuvenate the research enterprise. The goal of this
multidisciplinary perspective is the integration of cellular and molecular
concepts into a functional framework. It is expected that this goal will
ultimately lead to an understanding of the neural and physiological basis of
hormonally modulated behaviors. As in past meetings, the meeting will consist of
plenary lectures, topical symposia, young investigator symposia, and scientific
poster sessions. A wide range of professional development and mentoring
activities are also scheduled throughout the meeting targeting every career
stage, including a half-day pre-meeting professional development workshop. The
findings presented at this meeting will ultimately result in advances in the
field of behavioral neuroendocrinology and in tangible benefits associated with
training the next generation of scientists in this
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.