* 1924802
* NRI: FND: Spatial Patterns of Behavior in Human-Robot Interaction Under Environmental Spatial Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Marynel Vazquez, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2024
* USD 531,059.00

This project promotes the progress of science and robotics by advancing
autonomous reasoning about spatial patterns of group behavior during human-robot
conversations. Spatial patterns emerge during conversations as a result of every
participant's need to communicate while simultaneously perceiving everyone
else's response. For example, circular conversational groups often emerge in
open spaces. In physically constrained spaces, though, people's position might
be influenced by nearby elements, such as walls and other people, leading to
variations in acceptable group structure. To enable robots to cope with this
variability, the project provides the empirical knowledge and methods needed to
incorporate spatial constraints into the way robots reason about human (and
robot) spatial formations. The project outcomes have implications across
socially-relevant application domains in which user acceptance of co-robots can
have a positive impact, including mobile service applications, education, and
healthcare. Research activities will offer training opportunities to broaden
participation in computing, serve to mentor and train future roboticists, and
engage the public in the science of robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
foundational work in Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), this project addresses three
main questions to advance perception and decision-making for co-robots in group
settings: (1) how do spatial constraints influence conversational group
formations in HRI; (2) how can robots detect these formations under spatial
constraints; and (3) how can they autonomously generate appropriate spatial
behavior to sustain conversations in constrained environments. To this end, this
research will first focus on a formative study to better understand the effect
of spatial constraints on group formations in HRI. This effort will result in a
new public dataset of group-robot interactions that can be used to benchmark
group detection approaches. The data will contribute to lowering barriers of
entry to studying group human-robot interaction. Then, new methods for detecting
spatial group formations in HRI will be developed by combining model-based and
data-driven learning methods. Special consideration will be given to identifying
groups in constrained environments. Finally, the project will investigate
mechanisms to enable robots to take part in group formations under varying
environmental spatial constraints. This last effort will help co-robots
communicate with users and sustain group conversations by physically adapting to
the environment. Together the outcomes of the project will help robots cope with
the inherent complexity of multi-party interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.