* 1924655
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the physics of flocculation processes and cohesive sediment transport in bottom boundary layers through multi-scale modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Due to climate change, sea level rise and anthropogenic development, coastal
communities have been facing increasing threats from flooding, land loss, water
quality, and other ecosystem challenges such as harmful algal blooms. Most of
these pressing problems are directly or indirectly associated with sediment
transport, some related to sands, but many are due to fine-grained sediments.
Fine-grained sediments are cohesive and hence they transport as porous
aggregates of particles, called flocs. Through their complex structures, flocs
are vehicles of organic carbon, nutrients, contaminants and sometimes they can
contain sand grains. Consequently, their settling velocities are very difficult
to quantify. To date, most coastal/estuarine models neglect the flocculation
process and adopt a constant settling velocity to estimate deposition of fine-
grained sediments, which poses a considerable limitation of their predictive
capability for the various challenges addressed above. In order to understand
the fundamental dynamics of flocculation and their impact on fine-grained
sediment resuspension and deposition, several integrated numerical simulations
and optical-based laboratory observations across different scales will be
carried out, including those associated with the particle size, water turbulence
motions, and bottom boundary layer. Outcomes from the proposed research will be
used to better equip coastal models with sediment transport capability to tackle
challenges facing the coastal communities. The research findings will be widely
disseminated to the coastal modeling community through participation in
conferences and collaboration with the Community Surface Dynamics Modeling
System (CSDMS). The open-source code to be developed and the data from the
laboratory experiments will be disseminated through CSDMS and the flocculation
formulation codes to be developed will be integrated into the CSDMS modeling
framework via the recently released Python Modeling Toolkit (PyMT). In addition,
a clinic on flocculation modeling is planned for the CSDMS annual meeting. This
project supports 2 PhD students who will receive balanced training in coastal
processes, fluid dynamics, high performance computing and laboratory techniques.
The project also provides partial support for an early career postdoc
researcher. Two undergraduate students will benefit from this project for their
research on cohesive sediments. The project also strengthens collaboration with
the United Kingdom and Germany on novel observational and computational
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this collaborative study is to
address key challenges of cohesive sediment transport in coastal/estuarine
bottom boundary layers. The study utilizes a novel particle-resolved simulation
model to investigate the physics of flocculation and floc structures for
heterogeneous sediments. This effort is further augmented by laboratory
experiments designed to better quantify stickiness and understand flocculation
of sand-mud mixtures. Using a turbulence-resolving simulation model for fine
sediment transport in a wave-current bottom boundary layer, coupled with
enhanced flocculation formulations to model settling velocity, the investigators
will study the interplay between flocculation, resuspension and deposition of
cohesive sediments in coastal/estuarine bottom boundary layers. Five hypotheses
are developed to guide the experimental and modeling work which will provide
insight into key small-scale processes that are difficult to resolved in coastal
models. Finally, by integrating and synthesizing these research outcomes, the
study will evaluate a suite of closures for the settling velocity due to
flocculation, from complex to simple, to inform coastal/estuarine modeling of
cohesive sediment transport at regional scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.