* 1924937
* NRI: FND: Towards Scalable and Self-Aware Robotic Perception
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Nuno Vasconcelos, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

Robot vision systems should be fast, to enhance the reaction times of robots to
events in the visual world, capable of solving multiple vision problems
simultaneously, and aware of their limitations. These properties are critical
for robotic safety and collaboration. Safety is enhanced by faster reaction
times (e.g. a car faster to detect obstacles has more room to stop before
hitting them) and self-awareness (e.g., a robot should choose to stop to operate
in situations that it deems too hard to be successful in). Collaboration is
enhanced by scalability (which allows co-robots to solve more problems and thus
behave more like human collaborators) and self-awareness (which simplifies the
division of tasks between humans and robots, or teams of robots, with different
skills). However, these properties have not been the focus of computer vision
research, which has mostly addressed the design of networks that solve single
tasks, usually requiring heavy computation and relatively low frame rates, and
simply attempt to process all examples without any consideration for how
difficult they are. This project addresses all these challenges, laying the
foundation for a new generation of robotic perception systems that are more
efficient, scalable, and self-aware. The research has applicability in areas of
societal relevance, such as manufacturing, self-driving vehicles, intelligent
systems, assisted living, homeland security, etc. Educationally, the project
will provide exciting opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a research agenda composed
of several integrated contributions that advance the state of the art in deep
learning for robotic vison. This includes 1) novel neural network quantization
techniques that address the quantization of both network weights and
activations, leading to deep learning models that can be fully implemented with
binary operations, significantly enhancing the speed of all AI computations; 2)
new families of networks that exploit extensive parameter sharing to achieve
scalable inference for task ecologies, substantially increasing the number of
networks that can be cached in a processor and, therefore, the number of vision
problems that can be solved simultaneously by a robot; 3) new network
architectures for self-aware deep learning, capable of assessing the difficulty
of each example, predicting failures, and refusing to process examples that are
too difficult, so as to mitigate the possibility of catastrophic
errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.