* 1924618
* BCO-DMO: Accelerating Scientific Discovery through Adaptive Data Management
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Danie Kinkade, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 11,430,954.00

Scientific research is intrinsically reliant upon the creation, management,
analysis, synthesis, and interpretation of data. Once generated, data are
essential to demonstrating the veracity and reproducibility of scientific
results, and existing data hold great potential to accelerate scientific
discovery through reuse. The Biological and Chemical Oceanography and Data
Management Office (BCO-DMO) was created in 2006 to assemble, curate, and
publicly serve all data and related products resulting from grants funded by the
NSF core programs for Biological and Chemical Oceanography, and Office of Polar
Programs. BCO-DMO provides limnological and marine chemical, biological, and
physical data inventories from several large and intermediate-sized programs, as
well as single-investigator projects to support cross-disciplinary collaboration
to address pressing environmental questions, problems, and challenges that are
exacerbated with the increasing pace of climate change. BCO-DMO is committed to
data management capacity building efforts, improving data literacy and
increasing science engagement in data management topics through education,
training, and outreach. The project collaborates with academic institutions and
teachers, where the BCO-DMO database is leveraged for oceanographic curricula,
and engages in targeted training of informatics students, cross-pollinating
their knowledge with geoscience domain data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BCO-DMO's goal is to facilitate the
integration of its diverse datasets to enable researchers to achieve a deeper
understanding of ocean ecological and biogeochemical systems. As a domain
repository, BCO-DMO adds value and improves interoperability of data to support
activities such as synthesis and modeling, and the reuse of oceanographic data
for new research. Open access to the BCO-DMO database lowers barriers to allow
economically challenged countries to gain access to research quality data for
field decision support, policy-relevant issues, and educational purposes. The
project takes an active role in the exchange of knowledge at national and
international geoscience and informatics meetings and workshops, where standards
development and adoption occur. BCO-DMO also participates in the development and
use of open-source, standards-based technologies that enable interoperable data
systems to exchange data and information that will foster next-generation
research in all disciplines. While continuing to perform its core mission of
data management, BCO-DMO will reconstitute its data infrastructure to mobilize a
new adaptive data management strategy for addressing the evolutionary change
coinciding with the big data revolution. Leveraging data semantics BCO-DMO will
construct a knowledge graph for sustainably operating an adaptive data
repository. This infrastructure will support dataset-level and repository-level
metrics, an improved data submission experience and new data and metadata access
capabilities. Through declarative workflows, the processing of contributed data
will increase in efficiency, and result in actionable provenance records for
complete transparency of data curation practices. Taking a holistic perspective
on education, outreach and community engagement, formalized programs will be
developed to promote data reuse and interest in oceanographic
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.