* 1924279
* HDR: DSC: Interdisciplinary Traineeship for Socially Responsible and Engaged Data Scientists
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ronald Metoyer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,179,781.00

This project aims to develop an interdisciplinary and experiential learning
program for undergraduate students that enables them to think and work together
with stakeholders on data-driven problems. The University of Notre Dame, as
coordinating organization, and Saint Mary's College, a women's college as
implementation organization, will collaborate to achieve this vision. Through
capstone projects and internships, the project plans to foster data acumen,
social responsibility and engagement, and acquisition of superskills that
include teamwork, entrepreneurship, creativity, critical thinking,
collaboration, and ethics. This approach combines explanation, prediction, and
attention to cultural and social context. Structured activities held at Notre
Dame are planned to expose scholars to innovation and entrepreneurship. The
project will be founded on the principles of best practices and evidence-based
programming, while ensuring sustainability and replicability. This project
focuses on the nation's critical need to develop a workforce of trained human-
centered data scientists. It also addresses national priority, strategic goals
of the National Science Foundation, and recommendations of National Academy of
Sciences for students to acquire data acumen. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project's objective is to nurture a T-shaped scholar and cohort exhibiting data
acumen as well as professional development and superskills. Depth of knowledge
will be gained through engagement with data science and the student's respective
major/minor. Activities involving social engagement, social responsibility, and
interdisciplinary and experiential learning will impart breadth. Design thinking
and ethics will form the linchpin of this T-shape. They tie together training
and experiential learning experiences to help students effectively engage with
stakeholders and understand their needs. They will also help the scholars assess
societal impact of their projects, and incorporate human context into their
technical solutions. Through these activities, scholars have the opportunity to
build capacity to harness the data revolution in the partnering organizations
and enhance data literacy. If successful, the impact of this project will be
evident in four ways: (1) the societal significance of its human-centered theme
and the results of addressing a national strategic priority; (2) the educational
impact of engagement with community partners and stakeholders; (3) recruitment
and training of underrepresented groups informed through specific strategies;
and (4) the assembling of a network of the next generation data-driven scholars
that think about the future and cultivate capacity building and data literacy.
This network has the potential to infuse academic, government, and business
communities with the scholars' acquired skills and knowledge. NSF's Harnessing
the Data Revolution Data Science Corps program focuses on building capacity for
harnessing the data revolution at the local, state, national, and international
levels to help unleash the power of data in the service of science and society.
Projects in this program are being jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the
Data Revolution Big Idea; the Directorate for Computer and Information Science
and Engineering, Division of Information and Intelligent Systems; the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education; the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Division of
Mathematical Sciences; and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences, Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and Division of Behavioral and
Cognitive Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.