* 1924928
* III: Medium: High-Dimensional Interaction Analysis in Bio-Data Sets
* CSE,IIS
* 01/03/2019,07/31/2020
* Aidong Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 329,491.00

Discovering interactions between the attributes in a data set provides insight
into the underlying structure of the data and explains the relationships between
the attributes. This project develops multi-disciplinary approaches that
integrate computer science, statistics, and epidemiology techniques to mine
interaction relationships among attributes and phenotypes (traits or class
labels) in biological data sets. Specifically, this project develops innovative
and statistically sound methodologies for mining novel interactions within
attributes or between attributes and phenotypes to help identify critical
factors in biological applications. In particular, the novel analysis methods
can enable the genetic and environmental interactions underlying a range of
complex diseases to be delineated. The research activities of this project can
also promote the integration of biology, computer science, and statistics, which
is highly significant to many applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will formulate various metrics that enable efficient pruning and searching in
the multi-dimensional combinatorial space for identifying significant
interaction relationships. This enables highly effective approaches that build
search-based trees or identify highly correlated subspaces to detect meaningful
local interactions that may not be significant considering the whole data sets
but are strongly interacted with traits on a subset of data. This enables
comparison of data from multiple different groups such as based on age, race, or
other properties. It is important to find both common and different interactions
in different groups so that effective methods can be developed for targeted
groups. The methods developed will detect complex interactions between
attributes in multiple groups simultaneously by capturing both their
commonalities and differences in joint matrix factorization or deep learning
models. These approaches are remarkably powerful for biological applications,
such as detecting gene-gene interactions and gene-environmental interactions
that lead to breast cancer. The concept of interaction is also ubiquitous and
important in many scientific disciplines ranging from economics, sociology and
physics, to the pharmaceutical sciences. The novel approaches and analysis tools
developed in this project are useful for finding out any interaction
relationships between attributes associated with phenotype labels or without
phenotype labels. These approaches and tools are general and are applicable to a
variety of applications.