* 1924814
* I-Corps: Adaptable Speed-Endurance Training Algorithm to Manage Aerobic and Anaerobic Capacity Development
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,07/31/2020
* steven riechman, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to integrate
novel and established wearable physiological sensors, machine learning and an
adaptable exercise-training algorithm to optimize performance and minimize risk
of injury or overtraining. Professional and collegiate teams face significant
problems due to injuries, overexertion (rhabdomyolysis) and exertional heat
illness (EHI). Nearly half of these issues are avoidable via proper management
and training. In elite athletes, achieving the balance of over or undertraining
remains difficult and elusive. Elite and professional athletes, and their
coaches, sports scientists, and elite team trainers require the most precise
assessment and management of training and performance and the cost of failure is
much greater. With success in this population, this innovation can potentially
be adaptable to fitness and wellness applications where precision is less
important, and efficiency and motivation is more highly valued. For chronic
disease management applications, precision, physiological monitoring, instant
feedback, and exercise progression become vitally important.

This I-Corps project seeks to enable real-time and continuous monitoring of
physiological responses to exercise training using a custom sensor array,
adaptable speed-endurance training algorithm and integrated machine learning to
create an optimal, individualized exercise-training program for peak performance
and minimize injury in elite and professional athletes. Currently, the primary
way in which athletes manage this lacks integration and individualization of
physiological data to workload in order to prevent overtraining during the
exercise session. To date, there have been few standardized and progressive non-
steady state training programs that can adjust a program to a specific
individual. Using real-time novel and established physiological sensors with
machine learning, the training algorithm has the capability to adapt a workout
to an individual's specific physiological responses. A novel sensor developed
for this project has proven effective in preliminary testing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.