* 1924191
* Concentrations and source assessment of black carbon across tropical Atlantic air and sediment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Rainer Lohmann, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 522,171.00

Concentrations and source assessment of black carbon across tropical Atlantic
air and sediment&lt;br/&gt;PI: Lohmann (URI); co-PI: Pockalny
(URI)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Black carbon is formed during the incomplete burning
of fuels (e.g., the black clouds of smoke emitted by buses and trucks). Black
carbon does not degrade easily in the environment and can be transported long
distances, even reaching the seafloor. Yet the fluxes of black carbon in the
environment are not well known, particularly in the oceans. Rivers are
considered the dominant source of black carbon to the oceans. However, recent
results suggest that there may be regions of the ocean where the atmospheric
delivery of black carbon may be important. This study investigates whether
biomass burning (e.g., wildfires) in Africa is a source of black carbon to the
tropical Atlantic Ocean. The unique molecular and isotopic properties of black
carbon will be used to identify black carbon in the atmosphere, water and
sediment in the study region. Sediment, water column and atmospheric particles
will be collected during a 3-week research cruise across the tropical Atlantic
Ocean. Two different approaches will be used to quantify black carbon in the
environment. The research is relevant and timely for our understanding of the
carbon cycle, a key component of our ability to forecast climate and its change.
The project supports a graduate student and provide opportunities for high
school students participating in the SMILE Program (Science and Math
Investigative Learning Experiences). This project is jointly funded by the
Chemical Oceanography Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surface sediment samples
will be collected at ten sites across the tropical Atlantic Ocean in a region
known to be impacted by biomass burning events (wildfires) in Africa.
Appropriate locations for sediment sampling will be identified using state-of-
the-art ship equipment to ensure a successful coring operation. Once collected,
the black carbon and organic carbon fractions of the sediment will be isolated
and measured. A range of isotopic and molecular marker approaches will be used
to identify the likely source of these carbon fractions. The central hypothesis
is that the black carbon residing in the sediment of the tropical Atlantic Ocean
is derived from biomass burning and delivered through atmospheric deposition.
Carbon derived from recent biomass burning contains C-14 isotopes that indicate
?young? (or recently produced) carbon, while carbon from fossil fuels (?old
carbon?) has no C-14 due to radioactive decay. To further assess the origin of
the black carbon in the region, water column and atmospheric particles will be
collected during the research cruise. The origin of the atmospheric black carbon
particles (biomass burning or fossil fuel emissions) will be established through
a collaboration with colleagues in Sweden. The broader impacts of this research
include the engagement of high school students through The SMILE Program
(Science and Math Investigative Learning Experiences) at the University of Rhode
Island. The project also provides training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, with a focus on recruitment of students from under-
represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.