* 1924146
* HDR DSC: Collaborative Research: Modernizing Water and Wastewater Treatment through Data Science Education &amp; Research (MoWaTER)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Douglas Nychka, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,157,928.00

Collecting data is easier than ever before, but extracting actionable
information from it is more challenging than ever. Society needs a workforce who
understands data science and can apply it to creatively solve problems. In this
project, a novel, introductory data science course and undergraduate summer
research program will be designed to motivate students early in their academic
studies to pursue careers in data science by connecting them with authentic
projects and stakeholders. The data-rich industry of water and wastewater
treatment (W/WWT) will provide an extensive portfolio of tractable projects.
Although data are easy to collect and abundant in the W/WWT industry, methods of
monitoring, maintenance, and sensor calibration lag behind the state-of-the art.
This funded work will create opportunities to critically assess the suitability
of current methods and produce creative alternatives. Recruiting from diverse
and underrepresented populations of students, this project will produce the next
generation of data scientists who are ready to fill "mid-level" data science
positions. At the same time, this project will help W/WWT facility operators
reduce costs and improve water quality by utilizing the information in their
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statisticians, computer scientists, and environmental
engineers at Baylor University and Colorado School of Mines (Mines) will
collaborate to (i) develop a three-credit, prerequisite-free sophomore-level
course; (ii) organize a five-week data science summer program; and (iii)
cultivate relationships with W/WWT stakeholders and community colleges (CC). The
course will introduce data science through inquiry-driven modules to attract
students who may not have previously considered a data science career. It will
be offered in parallel at both universities each year and will weave not only
W/WWT facility problems throughout but also problems associated with water
scarcity, such as climate change, agricultural demands, and urbanization. The
summer program will be developed with a singular focus on solving W/WWT problems
with data. A diverse cohort will be recruited from Baylor, Mines, and CC
partners. A one-week pre-program coding boot camp will be offered to bolster
skills. PIs will curate and oversee team projects designed to develop data
acumen, teamwork, and communication. Established relationships with urban and
rural W/WWT utilities; manufacturers of W/WWT systems for decentralized use;
W/WWT treatment operators; and academic partners will provide data and problem
context. All project data will be well documented and made freely available. The
student and program-level outcomes will be formally assessed, with results
disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed journals and conference
presentations. Methods for optimal operation and monitoring developed by student
teams will be publicized through instructional videos and technical reports to
our W/WWT stakeholders and rural industry service
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Data
Science Corps program focuses on building capacity for harnessing the data
revolution at the local, state, national, and international levels to help
unleash the power of data in the service of science and society. Projects in
this program are being jointly funded by the NSF's Harnessing the Data
Revolution Big Idea; the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, Division of Information and Intelligent Systems; the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education; the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, Division of Mathematical
Sciences; and the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences,
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities and Division of Behavioral and Cognitive
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.