* 1924623
* Deciphering Interactions Among Marine Introduced Parasites and Native Hosts
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* John Chapman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 569,680.00

The world's oceans become more connected through increased global
transportation. This transportation has brought organisms to places where they
were previously not found. Some of them become invasive and disrupt native
marine habitats. Among these invasive species, parasites are particularly
troublesome. They are usually small, easily overlooked, and can cause mass
mortality of native species. Despite the serious negative impacts of marine
invasive parasites, scientists still lack an in-depth understanding of
mechanisms that enable them to successfully establish themselves in a new
habitat. This project will study three major questions regarding marine invasive
parasites' establishment: (1) How do parasites recognize new hosts when arriving
at a new habitat? (2) Why can invasive parasites spread so fast to new hosts?
(3) How do new host populations maintain viability despite heavy parasite
infestation? This study system is the native blue mud shrimp from the Pacific
coast of North America; a blood sucking parasite introduced from Asia; and the
parasite's original host, the Asian mud shrimp. This project will greatly expand
the knowledge of marine invasive biology and help develop effective conservation
strategies to avoid unforeseen ecological disasters. A citizen science program
will be established in Alaska to monitor population dynamics of the mud shrimp
and the parasite. A museum-based outreach program will be established to
encourage excitement about marine science in underrepresented elementary and
middle school girls. In addition, graduate students, undergraduate students and
high school students will participate in research to train the next generation
of scientists. This proposal was co-funded by the Symbiosis, Defense and Self-
recognition (SDS) program in the Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) Division
of the Biological Sciences Directorate and by the Biological Oceanography
section of the Division of Ocean Sciences (OCE) of the Geosciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To characterize interactions between the
invasive bopyrid isopod parasite (Orthione griffenis) and the host shrimps
(Upogebia pugettensis and Upogebia major), this research program will generate
ecological, behavioral, and genetic data over the entire range of the invasion,
from California to Alaska. First, metagenomics and behavioral experiments will
test whether microbial cues in the host burrows play a major role in attracting
parasite larval settlement, aiding the parasite's transition from Asian to North
American estuaries. Second, experiments will address whether the lacking of co-
evolutionary history between the new host and the parasite, or an "enemy
release" for the parasite, is the main driver for the high infectious rate on
the new host. The hypotheses will be tested by comparing parasite prevalence on
different hosts in their old and new distribution ranges. Lastly, the double
digest restriction site-associated DNA approach will be used to investigate the
population genomics of the new host. The research addresses multiple-level
interactions among the invasive parasite, the new host, the original host, and
the marine estuarine microbial communities. Results will serve as a model of
bopyrid invasion pattern, and aid the discovery and monitoring of other
potential marine parasite invasions or epidemics. A citizen science program and
a museum-based outreach program will be established to encourage excitement
about marine science in the public. In addition, graduate students,
undergraduate students and high school students will participate in research to
train the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.