* 1924656
* I Corps: Development of Genome Edited Cancer Vaccines
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Kaiming Ye, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to bring a
novel cancer immunotherapy vaccine to the market for treating solid and
metastatic tumors. Solid tumors exhibit the highest rates of incidence and
mortality in the United States for the past few decades. Many of the newest
advancements in immunotherapy, including bi-specific antibodies and CAR-T cell
therapy have shown minimal effect on solid tumors. The vaccine invented by this
group fills the gap by providing a personalized immunotherapy vaccine that can
stop or reduce the progression of the cancer and prevent its recurrence. It will
save millions of lives by treating those incurable cancers with this newly
developed vaccine. The plan is to investigate its customer segments, to discover
its market, and to understand its regulatory approval processes. The initial
customer discovery will be the focus of the NSF I-Corps Short Course, followed
by a market discovery and a strategy to raise funds for bringing the vaccine to
the market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is to commercialize an
immunotherapy vaccine that was developed based on a discovery made by this
group, where genome edited tumor cells were found to elicit a strong
immunogenicity against solid tumors, thereby functioning like a vaccine. The
initial animal studies supported the feasibility of this approach. Building upon
tremendous advances in cancer immunotherapy and genome editing, this vaccine
synergistically combines CRISPR genome editing, vaccinations, and personalized
medicine to fully activate a patient's immune system against cancer recurrence.
This is the first engineered tumor vaccine that prevents cancer cells from
evading the immune system. Unlike conventional cancer therapy, it does not have
severe off-target side effects. While cancer vaccines have been explored
extensively, their clinical development has seen a long lag phase due to hurdles
in regulatory approvals and their adoption into existing therapy regimes. The
vaccine developed by this group will overcome these
hurdles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.