* 1924508
* Collaborative Research: Underexplored Connections between Nitrogen and Trace Metal Cycling in Oxygen Minimum Zones Mediated by Metalloenzyme Inventories
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* John Breier, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 10/31/2024
* USD 308,612.00

Though scarce and largely insoluble, trace metals are key components of
sophisticated enzymes (protein molecules that speed up biochemical reactions)
involved in biogeochemical cycles in the dark ocean (below 1000m). For example,
metalloenzymes are involved in nearly every reaction in the nitrogen cycle. Yet,
despite direct connections between trace metal and nitrogen cycles, the
relationship between trace metal distributions and biological nitrogen cycling
processes in the dark ocean have rarely been explored, likely due to the
technical challenges associated with their study. Availability of the autonomous
underwater vehicle (AUV) Clio, a sampling platform capable of collecting high-
resolution vertical profile samples for biochemical and microbial measurements
by large volume filtration of microbial particulate material, has overcome this
challenge. Thus, this research project plans an interdisciplinary chemistry,
biology, and engineering effort to test the hypothesis that certain chemical
reactions, such as nitrite oxidation, could become limited by metal availability
within the upper mesopelagic and that trace metal demands for nitrite-oxidizing
bacteria may be increased under low oxygen conditions. Broader impacts of this
study include the continued development and application of the Clio
Biogeochemical AUV as a community resource by developing and testing its high-
resolution and adaptive sampling capabilities. In addition, metaproteomic data
will be deposited into the recently launched Ocean Protein Portal to allow
oceanographers and the metals in biology community to examine the distribution
of proteins and metalloenzymes in the ocean. Undergraduate students will be
supported by this project at all three institutions, with an effort to recruit
minority students. The proposed research will also be synergistic with the goals
of early community-building efforts for a potential global scale microbial
biogeochemistry program modeled after the success of the GEOTRACES program,
provisionally called "Biogeoscapes: Ocean metabolism and nutrient cycles on a
changing planet".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project will test
the following three hypotheses: (1) the microbial metalloenzyme distribution of
the mesopelagic is spatially dynamic in response to environmental gradients in
oxygen and trace metals, (2) nitrite oxidation in the Eastern Tropical Pacific
Ocean can be limited by iron availability in the upper mesopelagic through an
inability to complete biosynthesis of the microbial protein nitrite
oxidoreductase, and (3) nitrite-oxidizing bacteria increase their metalloenzyme
requirements at low oxygen, impacting the distribution of both dissolved and
particulate metals within oxygen minimum zones. One of the challenges to
characterizing the biogeochemistry of the mesopelagic ocean is an inability to
effectively sample it. As a sampling platform, we will use the novel
biogeochemical AUV Clio that enables high-resolution vertical profile samples
for biochemical and microbial measurements by large volume filtration of
microbial particulate material on a research expedition in the Eastern Tropical
Pacific Ocean. Specific research activities will be orchestrated to test the
hypotheses. Hypothesis 1 will be explored by comparison of hydrographic,
microbial distributions, dissolved and particulate metal data, and metaproteomic
results with profile samples collected by Clio. Hypothesis 2 will be tested by
incubation experiments using 15NO2- oxidation rates on Clio-collected incubation
samples. Hypothesis 3 will be tested by dividing targeted nitrite oxidoreductase
protein copies by qPCR (quantitative polymerase chain reaction)-based nitrite
oxidizing bacteria abundance (NOB) to determine if cellular copy number varies
with oxygen distributions, and by metalloproteomic analyses of NOB cultures. The
demonstration of trace metal limitation of remineralization processes, not just
primary production, would transform our understanding of the role of metals in
biogeochemical cycling and provide new ways with which to interpret sectional
data of dissolved and particulate trace metal distributions in the ocean. The
idea that oxygen may play a previously underappreciated role in controlling
trace metals due not just to metals' physical chemistry, but also from changing
biological demand, will improve our ability to predict trace metal distributions
in the face of decreasing ocean oxygen content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.