* 1924310
* EAGER-Black Women Work: Broadening Participation of Black Girls in Computer Science Careers
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Aaminah Norris, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 298,360.00

This project examines Black women teachers' pre-service preparation in an effort
to broaden participation of African American girls in computer science (CS)
careers by developing their computational thinking (CT) skills. This study will
examine how Black elementary school teachers learned to support their
kindergarten through sixth grade African American female students to learn CT in
efforts to inspire their futures in the CS workforce. The objective of this
research is to understand how African American women teachers support Black
students to enter computer science careers. We will specifically examine: 1)
teacher certification program components that build CT for elementary Black
girls; 2) training in culturally responsive computing (CRC); 3) CRC training in
ways that support African American girls; and 4) best practices for supporting
Black teachers at institutions of higher education where teacher certification
programs train predominately white future teachers. The overarching objective of
this research study is to add to the literature by exploring how Black female
teachers learn to inspire Black girls' participation in the CS
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.