* 1924732
* Neural Mechanisms of Generalization in the Ventral Hippocampus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Isabel Muzzio, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2023
* USD 803,768.00

The tendency to respond in similar ways to different situations, known as
generalization, can be adaptive or maladaptive, depending on the context. For
example, feeling apprehension when walking down a dark alley in any place in the
world can be important for survival; however, displaying fear in well-lit
streets is detrimental. These examples illustrate that the context or
surroundings can signal when fear generalization is adaptive. The ventral
hippocampus, an area involved in memory and anxiety, is in a key position to
code contextual valence and use this information to generate selective versus
generalized responses. Yet little is known about how this area modulates the
expression of these behaviors. The goal of this project is to determine if
different cells types within the ventral hippocampus modulate the expression of
selective vs. generalized emotional responses. Understanding the mechanisms that
control the selectivity of emotional behavior is extremely important because it
can serve to explain anxiety behaviors, such as phobias or post-traumatic
stress, where fear is continuously expressed in inappropriate contexts.
Moreover, understanding the computations underlying generalization extends
beyond emotional learning, having potential impact on artificial intelligence
and machine learning. To address this question, this project uses cutting-edge
techniques, including in vivo recordings of selective populations of cells while
animals are learning. Since UTSA is a minority serving institution, this
research also provides training opportunities to underrepresented groups and
inform the community at large about current scientific issues through an ongoing
podcast that serves to showcase prominent
neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ventral hippocampus has reciprocal
connections with the basolateral amygdala, an area involved in fear learning and
extinction, and it is the main hippocampal region sending projections to the
prelimbic and infralimbic cortices, areas of the medial prefrontal cortex
involved in fear expression and extinction, respectively. Additionally, ventral
hippocampus principal cells display large, overlapping firing fields that are
ideal for generalization processes. The overarching hypothesis of this proposal
is that the ventral hippocampus modulates selective vs. generalized responses
though the activity of distinct subpopulations of projection neurons with
different physiological and computational properties. This idea is assessed by
combining in vivo single unit and local field potential recordings along with
pathway-specific chemogenetic silencing/activation and in vitro patch clamping
techniques along with optogenetic circuit analysis to answer the following
questions: 1) How do subpopulations of ventral hippocampal cells respond and
synchronize with target regions when animals discriminate or generalize
emotional responses? 2) What is the role of different ventral hippocampus
projection cells in generalization/discrimination and how do ventral
representations change when distinct subpopulations are selectively activated or
inhibited? 3) What are the computational and synaptic properties of different
ventral hippocampus projection cells? Since too narrow or too broad
generalization can have extremely negative consequences for survival,
understanding the neural mechanisms that produce fine calibration of
generalization processes is very important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.