* 1924538
* NSFGEO-NERC: Dynamics of Warm Past and Future Climates
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Eli Tziperman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2024
* USD 480,246.00

Fossil evidence reveals past climates that were dramatically warmer than any
experienced in human history, and our understanding of these climates is quite
limited. A particular challenge is the extreme warmth of the high latitudes
demonstrated by the fossils of Ellesmere Island in the high Arctic, which
include species of alligators, giant tortoises, snakes, ferns, and flowering
plants that do not tolerate below-freezing temperatures. By comparison, winter
temperatures on Ellesmere Island today commonly drop to -40C. The Ellesmere
fossils date from the Eocene, roughly 50 million years ago, at a time when
carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration was higher, perhaps 1,000 parts per million
(ppm) compared to about 400ppm today. But climate models forced with Eocene
levels of CO2 have not successfully reproduced the above-freezing minimum
temperatures indicated by the Arctic fossil record. A dramatically reduced
temperature contrast between low and high latitudes also occurred during the
Pliocene, a warm period from two to five million years ago. The Pliocene is of
interest because its CO2 level was about the same as today yet global
temperature was 2-3C higher and sea level was considerably higher, perhaps by 25
meters. The dynamical mechanisms responsible for the warmth and small
temperature contrast of the Pliocene are not known, and climate models have not
succeeded in simulating Pliocene conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under
this award seeks to understand the fundamental mechanisms which give rise to the
high polar temperatures and low latitudinal temperature contrasts found in warm
climates. The work also examines the transition to such states, in particular
the possibility of an abrupt transition from high to low equator-to-pole
temperature contrast. The research focuses specifically on the roles of high
latitude cloud feedbacks and global ocean heat transport in warming the high
latitudes. One cloud feedback process involves a transition from the low clouds
found today over the Arctic to deep convective clouds, which could happen when
warming replaces sea ice with open ocean. The replacement of low clouds with
deep convective clouds would likely have a warming effect on the surface, which
could lead to a cycle of further sea ice reduction and further enhancement of
convective clouds. Clouds over land could also play a role in reducing cold
continental temperatures, as warmer sea temperatures cause increased moisture
transport onto the continents, resulting in clouds that block cooling of the
land surface. Research on ocean heat transport involves an examination of the
amount of heat transport required to substantially reduce the equator-to-pole
temperature difference, changes in the ocean overturning circulation that could
enhance heat transport, and pathways of ocean heat transport that would be most
effective for warming the high latitude landmasses. The combined effect of ocean
heat transport and cloud feedbacks is also examined. The work is conducted
primarily through numerical experimentation, much of it with Isca, a simplified
and highly configurable climate model developed by one of the
PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is of societal as well as scientific
interest as the world is warming and CO2 has already risen to the level of the
Pliocene. Summer Arctic sea ice has declined dramatically over the last three
decades and the cloud feedbacks considered here may be possible in the present-
day climate. A further broader impact is the development and dissemination of
the Isca model, which could serve as a research tool for a broad community of
climate researchers. Education and outreach is conducted by the PIs through
public lectures and a program connecting Boston-area high school students with
summer research opportunities. In addition, the project supports two graduate
students, thereby promoting the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the National
Science Foundation's Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National
Environment Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-
NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal
to be submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the
largest proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an
award, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the investigators
associated with its own country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.