* 1924635
* The 10th USA-China Joint Chemical Engineering Conference, Chengdu, China, May 25-29, 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Norman Li, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/28/2021
* USD 30,000.00

This grant is to provide travel support for ~30 US-based researchers to attend
The 10th USA-China Joint Chemical Engineering Conference, Chengdu, China, May
25-29, 2020. The theme of the conference is Chemical Engineering for Clean and
Sustainable Energy and a special emphasis will be placed on not only the role of
chemical engineers in the development of clean and sustainable chemical and
energy processes, but also exploring the frontiers for developing fundamentals
needed to tackle these enormous challenges. This is an important topic of global
interest and, as such, a priority area of research for the PRM program and CBET.
The organizing committee, which consists of distinguished researchers with a
broad range of skills in chemical engineering, will provide for a vibrant and
diverse atmosphere that will foster exchange of ideas on research and education.
It is anticipated that approximately 35 US-based researchers will receive
partial travel support to attend this conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the global challenges in energy, resources,
and the environment, the 10th USA-China Joint Conference of Chemical Engineering
aims to serve as a platform for scientists, engineers and technologists from
China, the US and around the world to communicate the latest developments and
share knowledge across the field of Chemical Engineering. The theme of the
conference is Chemical Engineering for Clean and Sustainable Energy and a
special emphasis will be placed on not only the role of chemical engineers in
the development of clean and sustainable chemical and energy processes, but also
exploring the frontiers for developing fundamentals needed to tackle these
enormous challenges. With all the exciting developments taking place worldwide
and particularly in the US and China, this conference promises to be an exciting
gathering for all participants. The US-based conference participants supported
by this grant will have the opportunity to network with leading researchers from
China and exchange ideas about present and future directions in research and
education. They will benefit from state-of-the-art reviews and presentations by
leading experts and by debating controversial points with their peers. The
meeting will also provide an opportunity for interaction and cooperation among
industrial and academic researchers. The organizers plan to give special
consideration to young or junior faculty members from U.S. Universities. Female
and under-represented minorities will also receive special consideration. The
conference will address global challenges with potentially significant benefits
to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.