* 1924386
* Oceanographic Testing and Verification of an Iron-Selective Electrode
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Todd Martz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 565,994.00

The lack of available iron (Fe) in seawater is widely accepted as a factor that
limits phytoplankton growth in extensive high nutrient, low chlorophyll (HNLC)
ocean areas, as well as some coastal upwelling regions. More recently, iron has
been shown to impact the ecology and species distribution of stratified
oligotrophic regimes as well. Productivity (or lack thereof) at the scale of
these iron limited areas is significant to the global marine carbon budget. The
availability of a reliable, ship-deployable Fe sensor would permit high
resolution datasets to be obtained on a routine basis, resulting in improved
understanding of global biogeochemical interactions. This proposal is designed
to make concrete steps toward improving measurement coverage by developing a
field instrument that could be used to greatly expand the data available to
modelers. This project will provide training for graduate and undergraduate
students and an undergraduate engineering class in the newly opened Scripps
Makerspace at Scripps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate the
chalcogenide Fe3+ ion selective electrode (Fe-ISE) into underway and in situ
autonomous measuring systems. The researchers will calibrate and test these
systems through: 1) comparison of the Fe3+ ion activity measured by the Fe-ISE
to the concentration of soluble inorganic iron determined independently by
competitive ligand exchange-adsorptive cathodic stripping voltammetry (CLE-
ACSV), and 2) calibration of the Fe-ISE in an artificial seawater medium with a
well-understood dissolved organic ligand background serving as a mimetic
calibration system. A secondary objective of this proposal is to enhance our
understanding of the complex chemistry that exists at the surface of the
chalcogenide ISE in the presence of a heterogeneous dissolved organic matter
pool, such as seawater. It is expected that this project will yield an improved
Fe-ISE methodology that is suitable for long term autonomous use. It is also
expected that this project will describe/develop an instrument package suitable
for long term monitoring of oceanographic variables at pier locations, shipboard
underway systems, and potentially autonomous moored and profiling
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.