* 1925713
* CCRI: Planning: Collaborative Research: Planning to Develop a Low-Power Computer Vision Platform to Enhance Research in Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Yung-Hsiang Lu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 54,997.00

This project is a planning grant to investigate how to develop a research
infrastructure for investigating energy-efficient computer vision. Computer
vision is a set of technologies for understanding image or video. These
technologies are essential in many applications, such as autonomous vehicles and
airport security. Some vision systems need to be energy-efficient because they
use batteries, for example, drones and mobile phones. This infrastructure is
planned to be available for researchers to experiment and evaluate their
solutions. The evaluation includes the success rates of identifying different
types of objects, the speed, and the energy consumption. The infrastructure has
three major components: (1) video taken by drones, (2) vision system analyzing
the data, (3) power meter. It will be designed for a wide range of vision
problems. It will also include a referee system which automates the entire
evaluation process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many beneficial applications
for low-power computer vision, for example, lightweight cameras that may provide
safety for the vision impaired, wearable cameras that may improve factory safety
or perform inventory analysis, and cameras for observing wildlife. The planning
grant is to assess the needs of such an infrastructure for academia and
industry. This team will actively engage the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.