* 1925263
* ATD: Algorithms for Point Processes on Networks for Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Xiaojing Ye, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,663.00

We live in a world full of networks: contact and social networks connect us to
our family, friends and colleagues; computer networks such as Internet allow us
to access huge amount of data and information remotely; traffic and logistical
networks deliver people, water/food, and all kinds of goods faster than ever
before. While we enjoy the conveniences brought by these networks, we must also
be aware of the threats and harms if they get jeopardized by, for example,
infectious virus, cyber-attacks, etc. The goal of this project is to develop
computational algorithms for automated early threat detection based on novel and
rigorous mathematical modeling and data analysis concepts. In particular, the
activities generated by human and other sources on these networks are modeled as
the so-called interactive stochastic point processes. These dynamics are studied
and inferred in a mathematical framework of jump stochastic differential
equations, which is further extended to integrate mean-field approximation and
deep learning techniques that fully leverage the existing big data for fast and
accurate threat detection. This project will exploit three closely related
computational problems in-depth: influence prediction, optimal sensor
allocation, and source identification, all of which are fundamental in threat
detection applications on large, heterogeneous, real-world
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit two novel approaches to
influence prediction based on a jump stochastic differential equation (JSDE)
formulation and an integration of mean field approximation and deep learning
techniques. The JSDE formulation yields a concise and exact mathematical
formulation of the temporal point process that takes into account the known
network structure and mechanism of epidemic spread; and the deep neural mean
field approach deduced from JSDE formulation maps the classical difference
method in numerical analysis into a structured multi-layer residual network,
where the unknown bias of mean field approximation can be effectively learned
from observed cascade data for rapid influence prediction. These prediction
algorithms will be used in the optimal sensor allocation and epidemic source
identification problems for threat detection and mitigation. The results
produced in this project are expected to make significant contributions to our
understanding of interdependent activities on large-scale heterogeneous networks
and the development of new, efficient algorithms for threat detection. The
outcomes of the project include novel computational techniques, rigorous
mathematical theory and analysis, and efficient numerical algorithms for threat
detection applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.