* 1925476
* CC* Integration: NetBASILISK: NETwork Border At Scale Integrating and Leveraging Individual Security Components
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Eric Boyd, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,715.00

The NetBASILISK (NETwork Border At Scale Integrating and Leveraging Individual
Security Components) project enables researchers and network engineers at the
University of Michigan to introduce the next level of security and privacy
protection scaled to the vast volume of generated research data. As attackers
develop more sophisticated tools to acquire student and faculty private data,
institutional financial information, and proprietary, often classified, research
information, it is imperative for information technology staff to detect and
stop these attacks. By observing patterns of network traffic, NetBASILISK will
accomplish these goals with a minimal impact on the speed or volume of network
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current threat prevention systems do not scale to
the growing volume of research data at an affordable cost. The University of
Michigan solution, a novel framework combining open source and proprietary
components, significantly improves system performance and accuracy in detecting
and preventing threats to institutional data. NetBASILISK comprises powerful
load balancing threat prevention mechanisms, data filtering tools, and threat
detection technology. NetBASILISK will create a secure network perimeter while
facilitating science such as cryo-electron microscopy, Large Hadron Collider
particle research, and non-distorted Internet measurement, as well as enabling
innovative network enhancements such as technologies to circumvent web
censorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NetBASILISK will be used to inform the design
of advanced network security devices for universities that scale to accommodate
the network traffic requirements of data intensive science. Lessons learned and
technology enhancements discovered by the project will be shared with the
university networking community, as well as commercial partners. The science
community will be informed of lessons learned from new design patterns employed
for border security. The science drivers of the project, including advances in
cryo-electron microscopy, networking, and physics will provide broad, impactful
benefits. Project funding will also be used to support faculty, graduate
students, and a postdoctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.