* 1925646
* Collaborative Research: RoL:  Revealing a new mechanism of action for eukaryotic transcriptional activation domains
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Alexandre Erkine, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 711,287.00

This Rules of Life project seeks to discover new molecular mechanisms for
turning genes on in eukaryotic cells. Decades of previous research have led to
the conventional belief that the proteins responsible for turning on, or
activating, genes are locked into rigid shapes. These shapes allow the proteins
to interact with DNA, or with other proteins, like a key fits into a lock. By
contrast, this project will explore a new idea that the shape of activating
proteins is not a rigid structure and that this lack of rigidity gives the
proteins the ability to operate in extremely crowded cellular space and to
interact in flexible ways with gene DNA. This idea will be tested using a
combination of laboratory experiments and computational approaches. The results
will improve fundamental understanding of how molecules interact with each other
in the cell, thereby providing a conceptual foundation for applications such as
advanced gene editing, personalized medicine or drug development. The project
will also have educational impact by providing multidisciplinary graduate and
undergraduate STEM training at Butler University and Purdue University and by
building a network of bioinformatics research communities in Indiana and other
neighboring states through participation and organization of seminar series and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptional activation domains in
transcription factors are widely believed to work via direct recruitment of
coactivators and transcription initiation complex components. Transcriptional
activation domains are known to be very heterogeneous in their amino acid
sequences, they have intrinsically disordered structure, and they have low
affinity and specificity. However, details of their mechanism of action remain
elusive. This project will test the novel idea that when coupled in the same
transcription factor with a high-affinity DNA binding domain, transcriptional
activation domains function to trigger chromatin remodeling through low-affinity
interactions with nucleosomes, which then enable subsequent recruitment of
nucleosome remodelers and transcriptional co-activators. Experiments are
designed to discriminate between the so-called "nucleosome detergent" model and
the traditional direct recruitment model. Gene activation mechanisms will be
studied by the creation and screening of large complexity libraries of cells
identical in all parameters other than the short (10-20 amino acids)
transcription activation domain of the key gene activator, that is necessary for
cell survival. Individual libraries will be screened in vivo, sequenced at the
DNA level using next generation sequencing techniques, and analyzed utilizing
bioinformatics and machine learning. Modifications related to the change of the
intramolecular context of the key library-carrying gene activator, or the change
of the reporter gene context, will help to extract key features of the
transcriptional activation domains and the biological rules of eukaryotic gene
activation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, by the
Infrastructure Innovations for Biological Research Program in the Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and by the Rules of Life initiative of the Division
of Emerging Frontiers in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.