* 1925110
* User-Adaptive and Safe Control of a Wearable Upper-Extremity Exoskeleton Robot
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Hyunglae Lee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 749,653.00

The research objective of this project is to develop an upper extremity
exoskeleton and dedicated controller that can enhance agility of arm motions
while retaining stability and safety of the coupled human-robot system. The
exoskeleton design utilizes a novel mechanism and passive slip device to align
the exoskeleton with the human user's shoulder and elbow kinematics. In
addition, the project will characterize the 3D impedances of the human shoulder
and elbow joints, thereby contributing to a fundamental understanding of the
biomechanics of the human upper extremity. A new, user-adaptive, variable
impedance controller with safety supervisor will manage the tradeoff between
agility and coupled stability in the physical human-robot system while avoiding
awkward postures that could lead to musculoskeletal injury. If successful, the
technology has potential to positively impact society and the national well-
being by reducing work-related musculoskeletal disorders and their undesirable
impacts on the productivity and healthcare costs of workers and employers.
Broader impacts of the work include mentorship, educational, and outreach
activities that focus on inclusion for underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and control a high-
performing and stable upper-extremity exoskeleton robot. A novel mechanical
design integrates parallel and serial actuation mechanisms with a passive slip
interface to improve upper extremity mobility while alleviating mechanical
interference (misalignment) between the human user's joints and the robot's
joints. A key innovation will be a characterization of the 3D impedances of the
human shoulder and elbow joints, which will contribute both to a fundamental
understanding of the biomechanics of the human upper extremity and to the
development of a novel robotic controller. The robotic controller will
incorporate the estimates of human mechanical impedance and a measure of user
intent to improve the agility of the human-robot system beyond state-of-the-art
passivity-based controllers. In addition, a high-level supervisory controller
based on the synthesis of robust controlled invariant safety sets will prevent
the coupled human-robot system from reaching unsafe or awkward configurations
that could cause musculoskeletal injury. Human subject experiments to evaluate
the performance of the system and its controller in comparison with existing
robotic controllers are planned. If successful, the "user-adaptive variable
impedance controller with safety guarantees" could provide a generalizable
example of how to manage the tradeoff between agility and coupled stability in
physical human-robot systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.