* 1925372
* I-Corps: Novel morphing drones with variable spanning and sweeping transition modes
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Abdessattar Abdelkefi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on a
multifunctional morphing drone that is capable of optimizing performance through
combining the capabilities of several single traditional drones. Compared to the
existing drones in the market, the introduction of a multifunctional morphing
drone will potentially reduce purchasing cost and storage space, carry large
payloads, maintain flight stability, and improve the endurance. This technology
will potentially be useful in applications such as agriculture, wildlife, or
forestry monitoring where there are large areas that need to be covered with
high performance, large payload capacity and multi-mission
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
multifunctional morphing drone with spanning and sweeping capabilities. The
novelty of this design originates from spanning and sweeping capability of the
drone with boom stabilization during transitions. The main purpose of the
offered concept is to design an optimal drone that can change its dimensions
according to the defined mission. The stability in transition mode of morphing
drones is one of the challenging steps for design and flight assessments.
Consequently, a new concept that changes the dimensions of the wings and
fuselage is proposed. This methodology can result in an improvement in the
drones' performance, expansion in its flight range, enhancement of its stealth
capability, reduction in drag, increase in its endurance and payload, and
reduction in vibrational instability. The advantages of this design do not only
come from the final expanded form, but also from the transitional phase. During
the expansion of the wing, the center of gravity is independent of the increased
spanning, especially in the case of an almost rectangular wing shape, which is
not significantly altering the center of gravity position along the longitudinal
axis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.