* 1925607
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Computer Assisted Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Olaf Wiest, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Computer Assisted Synthesis (C-CAS) is supported by the
Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of Chemistry. This
Phase I Center is led by Olaf Wiest of the University of Notre Dame. Other team
members include Nitesh Chawla, also of the University of Notre Dame, Abigail
Doyle of Princeton University, Robert Paton of Colorado State University,
Richmond Sarpong of the University of California, Berkeley, and Matthew Sigman
of the University of Utah. The goal of C-CAS is to combine data science, machine
learning, artificial intelligence, chemical reactions and selectivity
optimization, computational chemistry, and organic synthesis to transform how
the synthesis of complex organic molecules is planned and executed. This center
will transform chemical synthesis and increase the economic and societal
competitiveness of pharmaceutical, chemical, and technology industries within
the US. The research efforts are enhanced through multiple industrial
partnerships. As a result, a new generation of interdisciplinary teams of "data
chemists" and machine learning scholars will be trained to address the
challenges and demands of modern synthetic chemistry. A network of research,
networking and professional development opportunities will be established to
bridge the gap between disciplines, drawing students from a broad range of
backgrounds including students with disabilities. Social and mass media will be
utilized to engage the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of C-CAS
is to create a comprehensive platform for computationally planning and
optimizing synthetic pathways, predicting reaction performance, and addressing
the selectivity (e.g., chemo-, regio, stereo-) challenges inherent in complex
molecule synthesis. This center has three thrusts. The first thrust is to use
representation learning to unify heterogeneous data from a variety of sources,
including unbiased, dense, and "clean" microscopic and macroscopic data from the
literature, patents, high-throughput experimentation, electronic laboratory
notebooks and high-throughput computation. The second thrust is to exploit this
unified data representation to address the "over-the arrow" problem of chemical
reaction optimization that is the rate-limiting step in most syntheses, through
active and transfer learning that will yield interpretable and explainable
statistical and machine learning models. The third thrust is to demonstrate the
combined use of heterogeneous data and optimization algorithms with existing
synthesis planning programs to score possible synthetic routes and provide
synthetic chemists with go/no-go decisions in the synthesis of a complex
molecule. C-CAS provides quantitative training to a new generation of "data
chemists" and to machine learning researchers, thereby equipping them for
participation in interdisciplinary science, including industry-academic
collaborations. The Center delivers programming such as online and in-person
workshops, networking, and formulation and sharing of best practices in this
rapidly evolving field that enhances the interdisciplinary experience and
societal impact. The data science and computational portion in C-CAS provides
non-traditional research and networking opportunities that are particularly
suitable to students with disabilities and underrepresented minority students.
C-CAS engages non-scientists in discussions of the integration of chemistry and
machine learning through mass- and social media as well as in-person
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.