* 1925084
* NRI: FND: Human-Guided Robot Teams for Manipulating Large Flexible Sheets in Manufacturing Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 592,672.00

Large flexible sheets are processed in many manufacturing operations, including
composite sheet layup, sheet metal fabrication, and textile manufacturing. The
manual manipulation of such sheets is repetitive, stressful and ergonomically
challenging and manual operations can also lead to inconsistent product quality.
Throughput, quality, and safety of material handling operations can be
significantly improved by deploying human-guided robot teams. This enables the
human operator to guide the team operation, with robots performing tedious
physical tasks. This award supports fundamental advances in decision making to
enable a team of robots to work collaboratively with a human operator to
manipulate large flexible sheets in small production volume manufacturing
applications. The utility of fundamental advances will be demonstrated by
applying collaborative robotics to composite sheet layup. Results from this
research will enable the introduction of robots in new manufacturing
applications and are expected to make the US manufacturing industry more cost
competitive in the global market. The integration of the research with graduate
and undergraduate courses will enhance the robotics and manufacturing curricula
and enrich learning experiences of the participating students. Outreach
activities will educate and inform K-12 students about career opportunities in
robotics and manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Performing complex tasks in
hybrid work cells that include both humans and robots requires collaboration
among agents. Operation of such cells requires coordinated planning, monitoring,
and control to ensure that agents can share the workspace and collaborate
efficiently by appropriately adapting to the tasks performed by other team
members. This award will make computational advances to facilitate collaboration
among agents in shared workspaces for manipulating a flexible sheet. The hybrid
cell will use a planner to determine the tasks and assign those tasks to agents
in the cell. The hybrid cell will use deliberative planning under human guidance
to design cell layout, generate a sequence of operations, select grasp locations
and generate nominal trajectories for robots. Deliberative planning algorithms
will be developed for collaborative manipulation by proactively accounting for
interventions by controllers and humans during execution to handle
contingencies. Real-time algorithms will be developed for monitoring of the task
progress during the execution and initiating interventions to ensure that the
part is manufactured in a safe and efficient manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.