* 1925467
* CC*:  Campus Computing and the Computing Continuum:  Campus Cluster Resource:  Expanded High Performance Computing at Wayne State
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* David Cinabro, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 399,944.00

Wayne State University has made investments in research computing including
construction of a new data center, deployment of high-speed networks with global
reach, and massive storage for globally accessible data. This NSF CC* project
augments those existing high-performance computing resources through the
addition of six high-speed, multiprocessor systems with a large amount of memory
each with 1.5 terabytes and 3 NVIDIA graphic processing units (GPUs) capable of
up to 120 trillion calculations per second in each system. Simulations that used
to take months can be completed in days, thereby speeding research in many areas
and expanding resources for the University's 275 research teams and 1,500 unique
users of which 1,000 are students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of this new
equipment spreads across multiple disciplines including Computational Chemistry,
Membrane Biophysics, Molecular Dynamics, Complex Materials and ground-breaking
work in the study of Nuclear Matter and its various phases. Modeling
relativistic heavy ion collisions that produce the Quark Gluon Plasma in
reasonable wall times was beyond the capability of the old hardware, but with
the new system such simulations can be made and help shed light on strongly
coupled systems and inform the nature of the early Universe. The GPUs have
special features called Tensor Flow Cores, of particular use in Artificial
Intelligence, Deep Learning and Analytics. These augment research in urban and
environmental health. The GPUs are also a boon for education in Wayne State's
new Master of Science in Data Science joint program in Engineering, Computer
Science and School of Business&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.