* 1925964
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Defining 21st Century Lifelong Learning Skills for Engineering Practice
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Homero Murzi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 33,331.00

Lifelong learning is critical for the engineering field because of technological
advancements, changing regulations, interpretation and synthesis of massive
data, and a host of other factors. Furthermore, the Accreditation Board for
Engineering and Technology, professional licensure boards, and engineering
education research have identified that lifelong learning needs to be promoted
to better meet industry needs. Currently, educators do not have a clear, and
data proven, picture of what skills require additional study post-graduation,
how practitioners engage in lifelong learning, or how student perceptions of
lifelong learning may differ from practitioner's reality. The goal of this
research is to investigate practitioner experiences and perceptions of lifelong
learning to determine the skills developed and methods of learning utilized. The
research will also investigate how those skills and methods change throughout
career progression and how closely they match student perceptions of lifelong
learning. A better fundamental understanding of what and how practitioners study
and develop skills as they progress through their career will inform the
engineering education community about what learning abilities are required to be
prepared for lifelong learning as professional engineers.&lt;br/&gt;This study
seeks to understand three research questions: 1) What skills are most developed
by practitioners at different career positions, 2) How do practitioners find and
consume information on the skills they want to develop, and 3) What perceptions
do undergraduate students have about the skills they will need to develop
throughout their career and how do they think they will develop those skills? A
research plan has been developed to investigate and answer these questions first
by conducting qualitative analysis of semi-structured interviews of practicing
engineers in the Pacific Northwest. Interview recordings and transcripts will be
analyzed using interpretative phenomenological analysis to obtain a rich
understanding of practitioner perspectives of lifelong learning. Then, the
project will conduct quantitative analysis of lifelong learning survey results
of practicing engineers and undergraduate students. Lastly, researchers will
compare the practitioner and student survey results to identify differences in
perceptions about lifelong learning. The outcomes of the mixed-methods study
will quantify lifelong learning skills developed during engineering practice and
their relationship to career position, which will increase our fundamental
understanding about what skills practitioners study as they progress through
their career. Identifying gaps in knowledge and perceptions between student
beliefs about lifelong learning and the realities of practice will provide
insight to the engineering education field about what skills may be lacking or
less developed and how future work could further improve engineer formation and
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.