* 1925729
* CCRI: Medium: FANTAIL -- facilitating advances in network topology analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,047,999.00

Internet cartography--the scientific measurement, analysis, and annotation of
Internet topological structure--has emerged as a new field in computer and
network science. In support of this field, several global Internet measurement
infrastructures continuously execute comprehensive topology mapping measurement
experiments. For years the Center for Applied Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA) has
operated the longest-running of these measurement infrastructure platforms
(Archipelago), which has supported scientific measurement experiments of the
global Internet since September 2007. These data sets have already yielded
impacts across a broad range of computer science sub-disciplines. Yet the
biggest remaining obstacle to even more productive scientific use of this type
of data is infrastructural: the lack of an easy-to-use and analytically powerful
exploratory interface. This project will develop the FANTAIL system--
Facilitating Advances in Network Topology Analysis--to enable the full potential
value of massive raw Internet end-to-end path measurement data sets. The
proposed system will enable new research directions and increase our
understanding of the Internet as critical infrastructure. CAIDA's solutions will
lower barriers for entering the field of network science and computing research
thus leading to increased diversity of the user
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FANTAIL will have four components: (1) an interactive
web interface; (2) an application programming interface (API) built on web
standards; (3) a full-text search system; and (4) a big-data processing system.
This project will be driven by specific community-requested use cases, use open-
source components where possible, and create analysis modules that will serve as
primitives for constructing more complex data-processing pipelines. Users will
specify, via the web interface or API, a sequence of analysis modules to execute
on the set of traceroute paths matched by their queries. The FANTAIL system will
then perform the queries, run the analysis modules, and provide the output for
download for further analysis or processing by researchers on their own systems.
Different analysis modules will (1) perform data reduction (to minimize the
amount of data users need to download and process), (2) enhance raw topology
data with various annotations available publicly or created by CAIDA, and (3)
offload commonly-needed analysis/data processing tasks from
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.