* 1925761
* National Conference of Microbiome Centers; June 25-26, 2019; Irvine, CA
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Jennifer Martiny, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,942.00

Microbiomes are communities of microorganisms - bacteria, archaea, viruses,
fungi and other microeukaryotes - that inhabit all of Earth's environments from
the human body to oceans and soils. In the environment, human society depends on
ecosystem services performed by microbial communities. Microbiomes also
influence the functioning of engineered systems such as water distribution and
wastewater purification and alter the health environment of our buildings. We
are only beginning to discover the complex interrelationships between the
microbiomes of humans, animals and plants and host physiology, health, and
disease. Hence, microbiome science intersects with a wide range of important
issues. Microbiome research has flourished in recent years such that three dozen
academic centers/initiatives now exist in the United States. Operating in
relative seclusion from each other, these units face similar challenges. This
meeting will gather the Directors and Associate Directors of US Microbiome
Centers/Initiatives to share best practices and initiate coordination to serve
the larger community of microbiome researchers. Sharing of knowledge between the
Centers will help move microbiome research forward, initially by helping to
address practical challenges and in the longer-term, by helping to address the
steep conceptual challenges in field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will
take place at the Beckman Center of the National Academies of Science and
Engineering on the University of California, Irvine campus for a day and a half
meeting on June 25-26, 2019. The meeting will include ~50 people, with Directors
and Associate Directors of 36 identified Centers/Initiatives in the US,
including some that are very well established and other others that are just
forming and led by more junior researchers. Representatives from federal
agencies and private foundations will also be invited to the meeting. The agenda
will address: 1. What are different models for the structure and missions of
existing centers? 2. What are different strategies for producing the best
microbiome science? 3. What are opportunities for coordination among centers?
The desired long-term outcome of the meeting is to improve the effectiveness of
academic microbiome centers to advance research. The goal of this initial
meeting is to determine whether further coordination of a national network of
microbiome centers would be useful, identify initial priorities for such a
network, and share the results of the conference with the larger microbiome
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.