* 1925752
* CC* Regional: Integrating the Colorado Western Slope Research and Education (R&amp;E) Community into the National R&amp;E Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Marla Meehl, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 10/31/2023
* USD 84,994.00

High-speed, reliable networking infrastructure is vital to an organization's
ability to thrive in today's rapidly evolving scientific and technical
environments. Such network connectivity is essential for success in business,
science, communication, global collaboration, education, and outreach. The
network connectivity in the Western Slope Rocky Mountain region of Colorado is
challenged. This project will bring together research and education (R&amp;E)
stakeholders to identify specific areas of need, work with public and private
partners to identify infrastructure and other network resources, define the
scope of the network to be constructed, and design a network. Stakeholders
benefit from gaining knowledge of available resources for better network
connectivity, building relationships with the regional and national network
providers, technical training, and access to high-performance network
connectivity. Project goals include ensuring underserved populations from rural
areas of Colorado and Northern New Mexico have a diverse, well-educated
workforce and that students are offered the highest caliber educational
opportunities and resources. Improved network access supports economic
development and growth, increased diversity, and development and expansion of
employment opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team identifies and
documents network resources and provides a network design that addresses
feasibility, costs, and deployment of the network. The team performs site visits
to identify, document, and assess network paths, and one-time and recurring
costs. Regular meetings with stakeholders and vendors are conducted. A workshop
is planned to teach stakeholders about advanced network tools and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.