* 1925550
* CC* Integration: Archipelago: Linking Researchers On-Campuses and in the Cloud through SDN-Enabled Microsegmentation
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Tracy Futhey, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 10/31/2022
* USD 999,631.00

Researchers often generate very large amounts of data in their work, so much so
that their data stresses the underlying computer networks. Some academic
institutions build a separate network for research data, but this is very
expensive. Archipelago is a project that seeks to improve the performance and
security of computer networks to make it easier and less costly for scientists
to move, store, and analyze their data. It uses relatively small numbers of very
fast, flexible network devices which use a technique known as Software Defined
Networking (SDN) to steer research data around bottlenecks giving the appearance
of a separate science network without having to spend all the money needed to
build a true second network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archipelago addresses
shortcomings that have limited adoption of SDN within campus networks, beginning
with evaluation of next-generation SDN forwarding elements, SmartNIC (Smart
Network Interface Card) devices and purpose built SDN data planes to create its
hybrid architecture. This architecture connects islands of SDN by enforcing
traffic policies at nearby distribution points linked to commodity servers with
SmartNICs or next-generation hardware-driven SDN forwarding elements (depending
on scale) that provide control plane functionality. This shift from software to
SmartNIC forwarding accelerates data plane performance and efficient use of
distributed CPU resources for the control plane frees server resources for other
uses. This robust policy-driven architecture enables fine-grained traffic
forwarding policies for microsegmentation, enhanced cybersecurity, efficient
data transfer, and other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing agile
software development techniques that are informed by the deployment experience
at Duke and within partner environments, this project will deliver a powerful,
vendor-agnostic research network design that is easy-to-adopt for institutions
that have been reluctant to venture into SDN architectures due to personnel or
technical resource constraints. Since the Archipelago architecture augments
existing networks incrementally (and therefore cost effectively) and because its
software components are deployed via open-source licensing, it will provide new
and powerful capability to institutions that already have established SDN
networks, as well as for those that have been reluctant to venture into SDN
architectures due to financial constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.