* 1925678
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Network for Data Driven Science in Allied 21st Century Smart Multi-Campus System: A Use Case Design Through Kent State's Sharable Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Javed Khan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 383,734.00

This project from Kent State University (KSU) designs a ScienceDMZ sharable by
the ten KSU campuses spread across northeastern Ohio aligned with NSF's goal of
to innovate more scalable approaches to expand advance cyber infrastructure for
massive data drive science. A ScienceDMZ at KSU's main campus connects to
OARnet's optical exchange to have 100 Gbps unimpeded transfer rate capacity. KSU
and OARNet teams to build a virtual DMZ perimeter over a highly-responsive
regional WAN allowing researchers from bandwidth constrained regional campuses
to access the cyber-facility with uniform access. IPv6, and shared network
innovations like PerfSONAR and InCommons are employed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ScienceDMZ leverages a broad set of compelling big-data projects. The project
launches outdoor ultra-high speed wireless access infrastructure in campuses
connected to the ScienceDMZ to facilitate big-data-driven dense sensor and IoT
research projects. This project is unique in the sense that a shared regional
science DMZ is leveraged across ten campuses throughout north-eastern Ohio. The
region of the Kent's allied campuses is the Rust Belt of America. The project
brings the world of data-driven STEM research closer to this mass of students, a
large percentage of whom are Pell-eligible and/or first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.