* 1925157
* NRI: FND: Learning Visual Dynamics from Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Carl Vondrick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This project studies robots that utilize the nearby and available physical
objects to perform tasks, such as building a bridge out of miscellaneous rubble
in a disaster area. Resourceful robots have the potential to enable many new
applications in emergency response, healthcare, and manufacturing, which will
improve the welfare, security, and efficiency of the overall population. The
research investigates how the patterns between multiple senses, such as vision,
sound, and touch, will help teach the robot to solve interaction tasks without
needing a human teacher, which is expected to improve the flexibility and
versatility of autonomous robots. The project will provide research and
educational opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students in
computer science and mechanical engineering. Outcomes from this research will
translate into new educational materials in computer vision, machine learning,
and robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates robots that
interact with realistic environments in order to learn reusable representations
for navigation and manipulation tasks. While there has been significant
advancements leveraging machine learning for computer vision and robotics
problems, a central challenge in both fields is generalizing to the realistic
complexity and diversity of the physical world. Although simulation has proved
instrumental in developing platforms for machine interaction, the unconstrained
world is vast, making it computationally difficult to simulate. Instead, the
investigators aim to capitalize on the inherent structure of physical
environments through the natural synchronization of modalities and context to
efficiently learn self-supervised representations and policies for interaction
with unconstrained environments. The investigators also plan several evaluations
to analyze the generalization capabilities of such
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.