* 1925560
* Collaborative Research: Testing Evolutionary Psuedocongruence Along the Baja California Peninsula Through Integration of Geologic and Genomic Data
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Rebecca Dorsey, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2024
* USD 645,706.00

A primary goal of research in earth and biological sciences is to understand how
diverse processes such as tectonic activity, rainfall gradients, and glacially
driven climate cycles shape evolution and biodiversity over time. The central
Baja California peninsula, Mexico, hosts a previously documented pattern of
genetic divergence between northern and southern populations that is observed in
dozens of species, but the underlying controls on this divergence pattern are
presently unknown. This project aims to test three processes that may control
biodiversity along the 1000-km long peninsula, through an integrative study of
geological, ecological and genomic datasets. One societal benefit of this work
will be to leverage 'big data' and quantitatively integrate new types datasets
for scientific discovery. Among other benefits, the PIs will mentor and train
postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students in best
practices of transdisciplinary research that are necessary to keep the U.S.
globally competitive in innovation. This work will include collaboration with
Mexican scientists and will be coordinated with two other studies in central
Baja California that are currently funded by NSF. The team will create a series
of short training videos to demonstrate common fieldwork techniques, and a set
of animations to summarize the geological and biological history of Baja
California with the goal of communicating interdisciplinary geo-biological
concepts to non-specialists. The PIs will host a community workshop to advance
Earth-Life research, and implement an art-science collaborative course between
Arizona State University and the University of
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test three hypotheses to explain a
previously documented pattern of north-south genetic divergence across the
central Baja California peninsula: (1) populations were isolated by a physical
barrier (marine seaway) in the mid-Peninsular region during Pliocene time; (2)
Pleistocene glaciations isolated populations in refugia; and (3) monsoon-driven
differences in rainfall timing isolated species through asynchronous
reproduction and/or differential adaptation to precipitation regimes. The team
will map and date structural, stratigraphic, and volcanic features in the mid-
Peninsular region where the divergence occurs; use modern geochronologic methods
to constrain the timing of deposition, volcanism, deformation and uplift;
evaluate low-coverage genomes of angiosperms, reptiles, and mammals to assess
population genomic signatures, loci under local adaptation, and spatial patterns
of allelic variation; assess seasonal gene expression; develop niche models for
modern and glacial climates; and test for present-day niche divergence. This
study will embrace geological and climatic complexity to understand extrinsic
factors that control genome evolution and diversification, and explore how
biological evolution can be driven by multiple co-occurring processes through
time (pseudocongruence). Our approach uses cutting-edge geological, biological
and statistical methods within an evolutionary framework to integrate organismal
genomic evolution with co-occurring changes in the physical environment. These
findings will advance our understanding of geobiology at meso-organizational
scales (i.e., intermediate between microbial and global), and will generate new
strategies to test for diverse factors that drive evolution. Results of this
research will provide foundational steps toward developing new predictive models
of Earth-Life evolution that can be applied to deeper timescales and other
geobiological systems. This project is jointly funded by the Frontier Research
in Earth Sciences Program in the Division of Earth Sciences and the Evolutionary
Processes Cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.