* 1925066
* ATD: Nonparametric Testing and Fast Computing Methods for Spatiotemporal Models with Applications to Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ping Ma, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 415,928.00

The study of human dynamics aims to understand human behaviors using analytical
models. It has received substantial attention in the security and defense area
not only for its potential in detecting human anomalies but also for its
capability in containing potential disastrous damages and mental horror in human
society. The recent development in social media has revolutionized daily life
and inaugurated a new era in human dynamics study. It has been demonstrated that
certain human behavior can be modeled quantitatively using proxy tools. Social
media data and wearable device data are two major sources of proxies that can be
used to understand spatiotemporal trends from which we can identify abnormal
patterns in human dynamics. The abnormal patterns can be used as an indicator
for disasters. Although social media data and wearable device data contain a
wealth of information to understanding human behavior, they are constantly
evolving as users generate new content or as new routes are introduced. Classic
statistical models are not enough to model constantly-evolving spatial and
temporal trends. More importantly, the computational cost for a spatiotemporal
model is extremely high, which poses a significant challenge for real-time
analysis of human dynamics data. To overcome these challenges, we propose novel
statistical theory, methods, algorithms for efficiently analyzing local and
global trends of a spatiotemporal model. The project will train students to
participate in cutting-edge and interdisciplinary big data research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the urgent need, statistical tools for human
dynamic studies are still lacking. In this project, we aim to develop
spatiotemporal models to understand the inherent spatial/temporal trends of
social media and personal wearables data. The key challenge for analyzing large-
scale spatiotemporal data is the super-large sample size. For example, every day
Twitter takes in hundreds of million tweets. Many of these tweets are recorded
in public streams. We develop scalable computational methods to surmount the
challenge. The fast, in-network computing principles and middleware developed in
this project are fundamental and indispensable tools for "big data" computation
and autonomous systems. The proposed framework can be used to discover unusual
events in any super-large dynamic data set and inspire a new line of research in
big data analytics. The proposed statistical tools are widely applicable in
science, engineering, and humanities. The research will be conducted in
collaboration with experts in both geography and statistics; consequently, the
proposed work will be informed by rapid empirical feedback and can incorporate
modern advances in spatiotemporal modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.