* 1925694
* I-Corps: Stochastic Computing-based Host Intrusion Detection System
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Myung Lee, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
extra layer of security protection for Internet of Things (IoT) devices by using
a novel hardware-based intrusion detection system. In today's defense-in-depth
security strategy, all available security controls are placed in series aiming
to protect a device from malicious cyber-physical attack. Market research
estimates that the IoT market will reach over $500B by 2021 and security is
considered one of the biggest barriers in adopting IoT. One main reason of this
security concern is due to the limited resource of IoT devices that makes it
difficult to apply all layers of security protections. The adoption of the
proposed approach will provide additive security layer to the IoT devices that
will boost the confidence in IoT device security in cameras, drones, sensors and
others. Consequently, it may induce new industries which have previously been
reluctant to apply IoT solutions to their businesses. Due to the small resource
occupation of the proposed device security, even non-IoT industries may apply
the proposed approach to their security applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project applies Stochastic Computing (SC) to provide hardware Host
Intrusion Detection System (HIDS) security solution for resource limited IoT
devices. Current approaches to IoT security cannot provide HIDS solution to
these resource constraint IoT devices, thereby missing out from one of the
important layers in defense-in-depth security strategy. The proposed approach
exploited two salient properties of SC: 1) consumption of less silicon area and
power, 2) both SC and HIDS are inherently probabilistic in nature. SC is
generated probabilistically from conventional number system that can perform
complex mathematical operation using simple hardware blocks. The proposed
approach provides IoT devices with HIDS based on simple hardware together with
Machine Learning Neural Network Algorithm. Coupled with other security layers
such as cryptography, access control etc., this light weight hardware solution
provides strong security to the resource limited IoT devices. Embedded inside
the IoT device, this HIDS monitors the incoming packets for any malicious
activity and offers the last important layer of security
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.