* 1925001
* CloudBank: Managed Services to Simplify Cloud Access for Computer Science Research and Education
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Edward Lazowska, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2025
* USD 6,118,913.00

The University of California, San Diego's San Diego Supercomputer Center and
Information Technology Services Division, the University of Washington's
eScience Institute, and the University of California, Berkeley's Division of
Data Science will develop and operate CloudBank, a cloud access entity that will
help the computer science community access and use public clouds for research
and education by delivering a set of managed services designed to simplify
access to public clouds. Driven by the profound potential of the public cloud
and the associated complexity in using it, CloudBank will serve as an integrated
service provider to the research community through a comprehensive set of user-
facing and business operations functions. These services will span the spectrum
from novice to advanced cloud users, including front line user support, cloud
solution consulting, training, and assistance in preparing proposals that
include cloud resources. CloudBank will provide innovative financial engineering
options that will give researchers more flexible cloud terms tailored for their
needs and contribute to the sustainability of CloudBank operations. CloudBank
will help NSF by bundling multiple small requests that come directly to NSF into
a bulk request to cloud providers, dis-incentivizing more costly direct
connections. Through this aggregation and innovative financial contract types,
CloudBank will pass along savings to researchers that would otherwise be
unavailable to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CloudBank will provide on-ramp support
that reduces researcher cloud adoption pain points such as: managing cost,
translating and upgrading research computing environments to an appropriate
cloud platform, and learning cloud-based technologies that accelerate and expand
research. It will be complemented by a cloud usage monitoring system that gives
NSF-funded researchers the ability to easily grant permissions to research group
members and students, set spending limits, and recover unused cloud credits.
These systems will support multiple cloud vendors, and be accessed via
intuitive, easy-to-use user portal that gives users a single point of entry to
these functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CloudBank project and associated
portal software, outreach and training materials, and experience in negotiating
and delivering public cloud services will significantly advance the state of the
practice and understanding of how to use these resources in computer science
research and education. The close collaboration between the CloudBank project,
cloud providers, researchers, and students will simultaneously enable new
research while providing a unique opportunity to develop and study the
operational, technological and business dimensions of fundamentally new model of
public/private partnership in the service of the research
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a primary objective of CloudBank to
broaden the access and impact of cloud computing across the many fields of
computer science research and education. The project will reach hundreds of
researchers and students through allocated research projects and classes. A far
larger group of stakeholders will benefit by CloudBank outreach efforts, such as
workshops, publications, the CloudBank Center of Excellence on Cloud-Enabled
Research and Education, and the CloudBank Advisory Board. CloudBank offers a
long-term vision for service and sustainability that will broaden the impact of
public cloud computing across all sciences and help ensure that students
entering the workforce and research enterprise will be able to contribute and
compete in the global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is accessible
at http://tiny.cc/cloudbank&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.