* 1925690
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Synthesizing Quantum Coherence
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Beratan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,800,000.00

The CCI Phase I: Center for Synthesizing Quantum Coherences (CSQC) is supported
by the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of
Chemistry. This Phase I Center is led by Professor David Beratan of Duke
University. Other team members include Professors Michael Therien (also of Duke
University), Michael Wasielewski (Northwestern University), Graham Fleming
(University of California-Berkeley), and Nancy Makri (University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign). Collisions between atoms and molecules are typically random
events, and even if two reactants collide, the force of the collision may not be
sufficient to cause them to react with each other. Despite this randomness,
chemists have become quite good at predicting the rates and outcomes of chemical
reactions. However, if we wish to control chemical reactions so that they yield
only desired products or to capture energy or transport information, randomness
must be minimized. The goal of the CSQC is to understand how chemical processes
can be designed to be "coherent." An example of a coherent process is the light
emitted from a laser. The photons generated by the laser move "in sync" with
each other (the technical term is "in phase"). Other light sources (incandescent
or compact fluorescent bulbs, for example) emit photons in a random fashion.
Thus, the CSQC is designing and synthesizing molecules and assemblies of
molecules where the motions of the atoms and electrons within them can be
coherent, like the photons in a laser beam. Coherent processes have the
potential to change how we control chemical reactions, as well as greatly expand
the range of useful applications of chemistry (for example, by developing new
technologies for sensing, computing, materials science, and biomedicine). The
CSQC works to ensure that that a Center climate of inclusion and diversity is
embraced so that underrepresented minority and women students are included in
the interdisciplinary, team-based research. The students at all sites will be
trained by Duke's Program in Science Communication to explain the significance
of their research to a broad audience, contributing to our society's scientific
literacy, as well as creating core knowledge of use to the chemistry
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of CSQC is to discover how coherent
dynamic processes in electronically excited multi-chromophoric systems and
single-walled carbon nanotube superstructures enable the collection,
manipulation, and direction of energy, charge, and spin in ways that challenge
classical conceptions of temperature and reaction rates. The team applies the
tools of synthesis, molecular and nanoscale design, 2D electronic and
electronic-vibrational spectroscopies, pulse-EPR spectroscopy, and
theoretical/computational quantum chemistry to understand the coherent flow of
electronic excited states and charges, along with their coherent spin-spin
interactions, through precisely tailored nanostructures and molecules. The
development of the underlying principles will have wide ranging impact in areas
related to quantum information systems, energy conversion, molecular sensing,
and quantum computing. Students receive training in a wide spectrum of
disciplines (chemical synthesis, laser technology, theory and computation) as
well as in science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.