* 1925191
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Role of Organics in Atmospheric Contact Nucleation
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2025
* Margaret Tolbert, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2025
* USD 488,576.00

This project is focused on the study of a mechanism for the formation of ice
particles in mixed phase clouds in the atmosphere. This mechanism, called
contact nucleation, occurs when an ice nucleating particle collides with the
surface of a supercooled cloud droplet. The results of this research will
improve the ability to model particles and clouds in the Earth's
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will test the following
hypotheses: (1) Organic particles can act as contact nuclei to promote
efflorescence of mixed organic-inorganic aqueous droplets, and the effectiveness
of the organic will depend on composition of the aqueous phase; temperature and
relative humidity; and composition, oxidation, viscosity, morphology, and size
of the contact nuclei; and (2) Organic particles can act as contact nuclei to
promote ice nucleation, and the effectiveness of the organic will depend on
composition of the aqueous phase; temperature; and composition, oxidation,
viscosity, morphology, and size of the contact nuclei. The experiments will be
conducted using two complementary levitation techniques that allow freely-
floating droplets to undergo single collisions with well-defined contact nuclei:
a long working distance optical trap and a dual stage electrodynamic
balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies are expected to provide fundamental
data on contact nucleation that currently are not available in the literature.
This effort will lead to improved theoretical descriptions of heterogeneous
nucleation and enable contact nucleation to be included in atmospheric models
that predict the formation of ice particles in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.