* 1925541
* CC* Compute: Integrating Georgia Tech into the Open Science Grid for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Laura Cadonati, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 399,883.00

Studying the Universe with all possible sources of information is the objective
of multi-messenger astrophysics. Groundbreaking gravitational wave observations
with LIGO, high-energy neutrino observations with IceCube, and very high-energy
gamma-ray observations with VERITAS enable multi-messenger astrophysics. These
and future instruments like CTA enable a complete view of the most violent and
energetic phenomena in the Universe, such as the merger of black holes and
neutron stars or the processes near the supermassive black holes at the center
of large galaxies. All these efforts are computationally intensive, both in data
analysis and in simulations. The Open Science Grid (OSG) infrastructure and
services are an ideal platform to meet the computational requirements of Multi-
messenger Astrophysics. This project acquires cyber infrastructure resources to
connect Georgia Tech to the OSG and integrate these resources into computational
efforts of the previously-mentioned NSF funded facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The High Throughput Computing Cluster acquired under this award includes 12
compute nodes with 40-core Intel Skylakes with 192 GB memory to support LIGO
project requirements and others. IceCube and LIGO are supported with 4 GPU
nodes, each equipped with 16-core Intel Skylakes and 4 NVIDIA TeslaV100 GPUs
with 96GB memory. A special OSG StashCache has 432TB of storage in direct
support of projects such as CTA. The system is 10Gbps connected in the Georgia
Tech data center which in turn has 100Gbps+ to Southern Crossroads R&amp;E
exchange point. This project's resources serve as a catalyst for Georgia Tech's
long-term integration into the OSG, as a standard service offered to all
researchers on campus. An important component of this proposal is a significant
number of Graphical Processing Units, used to accelerate simulations. This
project makes Atlanta the first StashCache provider in the Southeast, as a
service that enables fast access to distributed OSG datasets by regional
institutions that participate in this national grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.