* 1925645
* CC* Compute: CAML - Accelerating Machine Learning via Campus and Grid
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Kevin Lannon, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Machine learning, a subset of the field of artificial intelligence, has enabled
impressive progress on a range of problems from identifying objects in images to
translating French into English. At the University of Notre Dame, the
Cyberinfrastructure to Accelerate Machine Learning (CAML) resource allows
faculty across the university to leverage machine learning to address problems
within their disciplines. CAML uses graphical processing units (GPUs) to provide
a significant boost in the speed of training machine learning algorithms,
enabling researching to solve problems faster and to train more complex models
capable of addressing more difficult problems. CAML benefits a wide range of
research activities, from searching for new particles at the Large Hadron
Collider to exploring new chemicals leading to medical breakthroughs. CAML also
benefits the broader community as part of the Open Science Grid, serving
researchers from universities and labs across the US. Furthermore, CAML is used
for education and outreach involving students ranging from high school to
graduate school, helping to train the next generation to tackle data science
challenges in the public and private sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAML provides
GPU resources for accelerating machine learning to the research community both
locally at the University of Notre Dame and nationally through the Open Science
Grid (OSG). CAML physically hosts GPU resources suitable for accelerating the
training of models from standard Deep Learning libraries, but also enables on-
demand cloud access to more experimental architectures like FPGA resources.
Configured for both interactive and batch access, CAML supports both small-scale
explorations to large-scale discovery science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.