* 1925871
* WORKSHOP: Graduate Student Consortium at the 2019 ACM International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Shimei Pan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 19,083.00

This is funding to provide full or partial financial support for up to 15
graduate students from U.S. universities along with faculty mentors to attend
the 2019 ACM International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2019),
to be held March 16-20 in Los Angeles, CA and to participate in a full-day
Student Consortium that will be held on March 20 in parallel with the other
workshops. The annual IUI conferences represent the growing interest in next-
generation intelligent interactive user interfaces. Attracting 200-300
attendees, they are the premier forum where researchers from academia and
industry worldwide who work at the intersection of Human-Computer Interaction
(HCI) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) come together to exchange insights and to
present outstanding research and applications whose goal is to make the
computerized world a more amenable place. Unlike traditional AI the focus is not
so much on making the computer smart all by itself, but rather on making the
interaction between computers and people smarter; and unlike traditional HCI,
there is a focus on solutions that involve large amounts of knowledge and
emerging technologies such as natural language understanding, brain-computer
interfaces, and gesture recognition. To this end, IUI encourages contributions
not only from computer science but also from related fields such as psychology,
behavioral science, cognitive science, computer graphics, design, the arts, etc.
This funding will enable attendance at the IUI conference by students who might
otherwise be unable to do so for financial reasons. It will enhance the
educational experience of funded participants, by bringing them into contact
with leading researchers in the field and by exposing them to the lively
discussion during the course of the conference that often leads to opportunities
for professional development. The quality of the conference itself will be
enhanced as well, thanks to a broadening of the base of institutions represented
and increased diversity of participants. The rich exchange of ideas at IUI has
previously proven to be a valuable source of ideas for future research, as well
as leading to collaborative efforts; this funding will extend the opportunities
for collaboration and provide intellectual stimulus to programs that have
previously sent few or no representatives to this conference. The organizing
committee has undertaken to proactively recruit student participants from
schools that have not traditionally been well represented in the IUI community.
Women and students who are members of underrepresented groups will be
particularly encouraged to participate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IUI 2019
Student Consortium will build on the success of previous such events. The heart
of the Consortium will be a full-day workshop on March 20. Student trainees will
be afforded exposure to their new research community by giving a 20-30
presentation on their work and receiving feedback from peers and a panel of
senior researchers. The event will include opportunities for students to engage
in discussion with peers and mentors, which will enhance community building. The
students' work will also be featured during the main conference in a poster
session, where they will gain additional experience explaining their work to
others in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.