* 1925524
* CRISP Type 1/Collaborative Research: Lessons Learned from Decades of Attacks against Critical Interdependent Infrastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 125,781.00

Critical interdependent infrastructures such as the power grid, water
distribution networks, and transportation networks are large-scale systems that
provide the most essential services to modern life. Traditionally, the
protection of these infrastructures has focused on preventing failures caused by
accidents; however, there is a growing concern about preventing failures
initiated by physical as well as cyber attacks. For example, the recent
Executive Order 13636 on critical infrastructure cyber-security is a timely
reminder on the growing need to improve the security posture and resiliency of
our critical infrastructures against attacks, and in particular, a call of
action for identifying well-documented and tested security best practices. The
goal of this Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and
Processes (CRISP) collaborative research project is to identify the successful
practices and lessons learned by countries subject to persistent attacks on
their critical infrastructures, and incorporate these lessons into social and
technical solutions that the U.S. can use to better understand the nature of the
threat, and to motivate better public and private sector postures for the
protection of U.S. critical infrastructures from physical as well as cyber-
attacks. The research will leverage the experience of five decades of sustained
attacks against the critical infrastructures of Colombia and study the
government and industry responses and best practices in that country. It will
also develop new algorithms and security solutions informed by the data
collected on these attacks. These lessons will be translated into a new course
focusing on terrorism, critical infrastructures, and cyber-security, with the
goal of developing a multidisciplinary Masters on cyberconflict and terrorism
targeted to students working in public policy as well as business leaders and
stakeholders in our critical infrastructures. The results will be disseminated
in academic as well as industrial conferences and in public and private
partnerships for the protection of critical infrastructures such as those led by
NIST and DHS.

Several analytical and theoretical models for interdiction or interdependencies
of critical infrastructures remain abstract and speculative not only because
there is scarce data on attacks to critical infrastructures, but also because it
is easier to consider simple models or assumptions in order to keep the problem
analytically or computationally tractable. Evidence and empirical data of how
attacks on critical infrastructures are planned and executed are essential for
studying their impact on critical infrastructures, and for identifying the
technical and social aspects for protecting these systems. Incorporating new
adversary models and defense mechanisms based on real attacks and extracting
statistics from these datasets into mathematical models of interdiction, or
control interdependencies will require new theoretical developments in
algorithms and optimization methods. For example the reconfiguration of power
systems done by the operators of the power grid in Colombia can be considered as
a moving target defense, and incorporating this dynamic aspect into interdiction
games requires new formulations that have not been studied before. In addition,
interdiction formulations considering interdependent infrastructures such as
gas, water, telecommunications, and electricity will require different models of
the "initiating events" and different models of the restoration processes.
Similarly the inclusion of interdependent infrastructure models for control
problems can add some advantages in the synchronization criteria and might
improve synchronizability and stability. The mathematical conditions for phase
cohesiveness and frequency synchronization when one infrastructure is subject to
attacks will be studied in this research. Finally, extracting policy and
strategic trends, and factors that have influenced the outcomes observed in
datasets will require extensive analysis of a complex socio-technical component
where multiple stakeholders (government, asset owners, services industry, and
vendors) have different factors influencing their actions and decisions.