* 1925658
* CCRI: Grand: Developing a Testbed for the Research Community Exploring Next-Generation Cloud Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Miriam Leeser, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,394,072.00

Cloud computing plays an important role in supporting most software we use in
our daily lives. This project will construct and support a testbed for research
and experimentation into new cloud platforms - the underlying software which
provides cloud services to applications. Testbeds such as this are critical for
enabling research into new cloud technologies - research that requires
experiments which potentially change the operation of the cloud itself. The new
testbed will combine proven software technologies with a real production cloud
enhanced with programmable hardware - Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA) -
capabilities not present in other facilities available to researchers today. The
combination of a testbed and production cloud allows a) larger scale compared to
isolated testbeds, b) reproducible experimentation based on realistic user
behavior and applications, as well as c) a model for transitioning successful
research results to practice. The programmable hardware will be a unique
resource enabling investigation into hardware acceleration techniques, and the
community outreach portion of the project aims to identify, attract, and retain
interested researchers, and to educate them in the use of the facility. The
testbed offers a unique sustainability model, by allowing additional compute
resources to be dynamically moved from institutional uses into the testbed and
back again, providing a path to growth beyond the initial
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This testbed will accelerate innovation in cloud
technologies; technologies affecting almost all of computing today. In providing
capabilities that today are only available to researchers within a few large
commercial cloud providers, it will allow diverse communities to exploit these
technologies, "democratizing" cloud computing research, and allowing increased
collaboration between the research and open source communities. The community
outreach activities of the project are targeted to researchers who explore
complex distributed systems and cloud platforms, spanning a diverse range of
backgrounds, institutions, and regions. Software tools will be developed to
provide easy and efficient access by these researchers; tutorials, workshops,
and webinars will offer training in the use of these tools and the testbed
itself. The project will support educating the next generation of researchers in
this field, and existing relationships with industrial partners of the
affiliated production cloud will accelerate technology transfer from academic
research to practical use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.