* 1925043
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Program Verification and Synthesis for Collaborative Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bilge Mutlu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 974,887.00

Developing applications for robots currently requires advanced knowledge and
skills in both robotics and software engineering. As a result, development of
robot applications is currently only accessible to a very small segment of the
population, excluding those who might have the deepest insight about potential
application domains for robots (e.g., experts in logistics, manufacturing,
marketing), those who might be better suited to design robot behaviors for human
interaction (e.g., designers, artists, psychologists), and those who might be
using and repurposing robots day-to-day (e.g., end-users, supervisors,
maintenance personnel). This project aims to design and implement a suite of
tools and methods, powered by developments in the field of programming
languages, to enable the programming of interactive robots with minimal prior
experience. These tools and methods will assist all stages of the programming
process, including ideation of what the robot behavior should be, coding of the
program, its testing on the robot to guarantee certain properties, and adapting
the program for deployments in different contexts. The research will make robot
programming accessible to the broader public and "democratize" it by
substantially lowering barriers to engagement in technology development. Through
collaborations with domain experts, the principles, methods, and tools created
by the project will be applied to real-world robotics applications, transferring
the scientific contributions of the project to robotics organizations. Through
an integrated education program, computer science training and curriculum will
be enhanced across three institutions by introducing new courses and course
modules on robotics software development. To facilitate public understanding of
and engagement with science and technology, a robot programming environment for
elementary- and middle-school-aged children will be developed along with a
structured curriculum for its use in an outreach summer program, and these will
be widely disseminated as open-source materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
innovation of the project is the development of novel paradigms for programming
that use state-of-the-art program analysis and synthesis methods to support a
wide range of programming tasks across the development cycle for robotics
applications. Specifically, the project will support each stage of the cycle in
three research thrusts with the following objectives: (1) facilitating the
capture of user intent by translating designer and end-user intent captured
through acting and dialogue into robot programs; (2) supporting iterative
development and testing by facilitating the development, refinement, analysis,
and synthesis of robust, reliable, and effective robot programs; (3) optimizing
deployment by enabling the adaptation of existing robot programs into new
environments, scenarios of use, and social contexts. The outcomes of these
research thrusts will be integrated into a suite of robot programming tools
within the ROS framework and deployed in real-world robot programming tasks in
collaboration with industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.