* 1925590
* CC* Compute: High Performance Campus Computing for Institutional Research at the American Museum of Natural History
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Cheryl Hayashi, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 399,258.00

Through the National Science Foundation CC* program, the American Museum of
Natural History (AMNH) expands the High-Performance Computing (HPC) capabilities
that directly support the Museum's research. AMNH conducts scientific research
and educational activities across astrophysics, anthropology, biology, and
geosciences. The increasingly data-intensive nature of this research requires
greater access to computational resources and to ever more sophisticated tools,
including local and remote HPC clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
AMNH is expanding its on-premise computing cluster capacity and consolidating
all existing clusters into a unified open-source software framework. These
clusters are connected to the Museum's Science DMZ, a high-performance network
specifically designed for research data flows, which provides high-speed network
access between the Internet2 and the AMNH on-premise clusters. Additionally,
AMNH researchers can execute complex workloads at scale using cloud resources at
Amazon via the same local HPC management framework. Federation with InCommon
provides both AMNH researchers and outside collaborators with secure access to
these resources via a common authentication and authorization framework.
Finally, the AMNH clusters are integrated with the Open Science Grid allowing
AMNH to offer idle computing cycles to the wider research community while
providing AMNH researchers with the same access to remote computing resources.
These improvements greatly expand the overall HPC capacity available to AMNH
scientists, increasing the speed and effectiveness of their research and
decreasing time to discovery. Additionally, the work of AMNH scientists informs
the Museum's educational and curatorial programs, directly benefiting AMNH
students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.