* 1925079
* NRI: FND: Action-perception loops over 5G millimeter wave wireless for cooperative manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Elza Erkip, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,999.00

As the autonomy of robots performing manipulation or legged locomotion tasks
increases, they require an ever-growing amount of computational resources to
successfully perceive their environment and make decisions. Yet, mobile robots
are fundamentally constrained by weight, shape and power autonomy which impose
important limits on the computational capabilities they can carry. As a possible
answer to such dilemma, cloud robotics aims to move computation to remote
servers, but it has thus far remained an elusive approach for tasks that
necessitate low delay communication and high data bandwidth between the robot
and the cloud. Such tasks include control, planning and perception algorithms
for object manipulation and legged locomotion. The 5th generation of cellular
network technology (5G) could revolutionize cloud robotics as it promises
unprecedented access to high bandwidth and low latency wireless communication.
Yet, formidable challenges remain to ensure communication reliability, safety of
robotic operation under communication degradation, and scalability to multi-
robot systems. This project aims to fully incorporate 5G technology into
robotics systems performing complex manipulation and locomotion tasks. It will
develop novel perception, control and planning algorithms that optimally
distribute computations between robots and the cloud for guaranteed safe robotic
operation. Ultimately, these algorithms will accelerate the ubiquitous
deployment of untethered 5G-enabled robots in human environments and unlock a
large range of applications for healthcare, service and industrial
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes a holistic approach to control,
perception and communication to establish the foundations of edge-based wireless
real-time action-perception loops for autonomous robots. It is organized along
four main thrusts of research. First, it will investigate novel optimal control
and planning algorithms distributed between the network edge and the robot with
performance guarantees under communication degradation. Second, it will propose
efficient computational partitioning techniques for real-time perception using
multi-modal sensing with high data rates. Third, it will characterize 5G
specific communication channels in a robotics environment via experiments and
simulations and design new mmWave communication protocols tailored for real-time
robotic action-perception loops. Finally, extensive experiments on single and
multi-robot systems, including fixed and mobile manipulators and a quadruped
robot, will demonstrate the unique capabilities of 5G-enabled robotic systems.
The outreach activities of the project will contribute to lowering barriers to
entry for scientists and industries that seek to exploit 5G-enabled robotics
through open-source distribution of algorithms and dissemination of results via
NYU WIRELESS. This effort will contribute to the education of undergraduate and
graduate students, leveraging its outcomes for curriculum development and
offering supervised projects with the possibility to work directly on state-of-
the-art experimental platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.