* 1925579
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Factors Influencing Ecological Dynamics of the Human Gut Microbiome
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2021
* David Jacobson, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2021
* USD 30,972.00

The human body is colonized by trillions of microorganisms collectively known as
the human microbiome. Research suggests that our microbiome may influence a wide
range of physiological functions and health, from immune function to mood.
However, there are still many unanswered questions about how these microbes
interact with each other and how those interactions affect human biology. By
studying large networks of microbial interactions and functions in
industrialized and non-industrialized human communities, this doctoral
dissertation research will examine the extent of ecological diversity in human
gut microbiomes and how differences in lifestyle impact this diversity. The
research team will provide hands-on workshops to participant communities to
discuss how their participation helps to advance microbiome research. The
project will also support student training and mentoring of individuals from
unrepresented groups in STEM, supporting broader participation in a rapidly
developing area of biological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans living a
Western-industrialized lifestyle have markedly different microbiomes than those
living a more traditional, non-industrial lifestyle, such as hunter-gatherers
and rural farmers from developing countries. Earlier studies have determined
that diet, antibiotic use, and contact between humans and other animals all have
major impacts on microbiome diversity. In a number of these studies, the way in
which microbial diversity was estimated did not necessarily account for the fact
that microbiomes are complex ecologies. In this study, the researchers will
investigate ecological dynamics and microbial interactions in microbiomes from
humans and pigs on family farms in Oklahoma and compare them to humans and pigs
from the African country of Burkina Faso. By comparing both humans and pigs in
an industrialized country to a developing country, the researchers will document
the effects of lifestyle on the human microbiome with a focus on human-animal
interactions. By investigating the ecological dynamics of functional redundancy
and resilience in gut microbiomes, the project will advance knowledge about
complex microbial ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.