* 1925632
* CC* Regional: Sun Corridor Network ? Arizona Community College Research Expansion
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Morgan Vigil-Hayes, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 690,708.00

Northern Arizona University (NAU) is a founding member of the Sun Corridor
Network (SCN) along with Arizona State University (ASU) and the University of
Arizona (UA). SCN delivers research and education networking to Arizona's
research universities through high-speed connections and Internet2. Research and
specialized network connectivity at Arizona community colleges are limited and
generally unavailable to academic or to specialized technical programs. This
project connects one of the nation's largest community college systems and the
northern NAU collaborator to SCN. Network expansion to Arizona's community
colleges enables research and education connectivity and support to the students
and faculty of Maricopa Community College County District's Estrella Mountain
Community College (Goodyear, AZ), Chandler-Gilbert Community College (Chandler,
AZ), Phoenix College (Phoenix, AZ) and Coconino Community College, (Flagstaff,
AZ). The network expansion advances the use of science-oriented workflows, high
performance computing in undergraduate research, instrument sharing, STEM
education, and homework gap connectivity and introduces wide area and campus
networking capacities that align with cybersecurity academic requirements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NAU and SCN will improve campus network performance,
increasing external connectivity to each campus by connecting them to SCN as a
regional aggregator. This leverages a strong existing regional relationship with
NAU, a leader in rural and online programs and services. The proposal emphasizes
outreach to determine needs and requirements, followed by design, workshops, and
science network implementation. By building new collaborations and by expanding
connectivity, NAU and SCN improve undergraduate science and technical
instruction for over 200,000 students in the Phoenix metropolitan area and
northern Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.