* 1925642
* NSF Student Travel for 2019 USENIX Research Conferences: File and Storage Technologies 2019, Networked Systems Design and Implementation 2019, USENIX Annual Technical Conference 20
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Camille Mulligan, USENIX Association
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 02/29/2020
* USD 65,000.00

The USENIX Association presents conferences at the forefront of computing
innovation and research that build collaborations between researchers and
practitioners from industry, government, and academia. These events provide
educational, mentorship, and networking opportunities of very high value to
graduate students in the computer sciences who attend. To help increase the
representation and participation of these students, this proposal provides
funding to assist approximately 20-25 US-based graduate students to attend each
of the following events:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;17th USENIX Conference on File and
Storage Technologies (FAST 2019)&lt;br/&gt;16th USENIX Symposium on Networked
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 2019) &lt;br/&gt;2019 USENIX Annual
Technical Conference (ATC 2019)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge shared and
advanced at these conferences has practical and meaningful application to many
tools used in daily life, as well as to the ethical, cultural, and social
ramifications of computing technology. This grant allows the participation of
students who would otherwise be unable to attend the conference, and extends the
impact of research presented to a broad audience of young researchers from
across the country. USENIX is an open access organization, and all research and
results presented and published at these events are freely available to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.