* 1925352
* ATD: Pop-Flow: Spatio-Temporal Modeling of Flows in Mobility Networks for Prediction and Anomaly Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bernhard Bodmann, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 187,993.00

Human mobility can be modeled at different scales, ranging from traffic in a
city to global migration patterns. Such models can describe a macroscopic,
population-wide behavior or include more levels of detail up to a microscopic
description in which individuals are followed. A main task in this project is to
convert between the averaged mobility flows at the population level and observed
individual trajectories. For example, the habits of commuters and other traffic
participants in a city are extracted from records of transportation systems in
order to build a model for the population-averaged flow. On the other hand, once
this model is established, it permits us to classify how rare an observed
pattern is in which a few individuals that were assumed to be independent behave
in a very coordinated way. This project includes a similar matching between a
model for global migration patterns and the behavior of a small group of
migrants. Next to anomaly detection, predicting mobility is important. Once the
mobility model is inferred from the observed data, it permits us to compute
future events, including the detection of high-traffic areas. This helps
determine an expected stress on infrastructure and find vulnerabilities, whether
it is for urban traffic or global migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
treats the probabilistic description of human dynamics at two levels of detail:
The deterministic description of the population-averaged time evolution, and the
description of the random outcomes for individual trajectories. A version of the
Feynman-Kac formula for perturbations of Markov semigroups is the central
element that connects the two levels of the probabilistic description. The
proposed techniques for model building from sample trajectories are new
developments in the emergent field of graph signal processing, together with
elements of statistics and dynamical systems. The behavior of dynamics at both
population-averaged and individual levels is characterized by the generator. It
encodes the probabilities for observing an event and allows us to predict flows
or to compute likelihood ratios between observed and most likely trajectories,
which permits classifying the behavior of individuals. A main problem addressed
in this project is to obtain an accurate estimate for the generator of
population flows for models at different scales. This estimate is then used to
predict mobility or to detect anomalies in small sets of individual
trajectories. Mobility patterns considered in this project include migration,
the time evolution of a global population whose members move between countries,
or mobility at a smaller scale, for example the inference of traffic flows from
observing individuals through GPS traces or data acquired by transportation
systems in a city. This project investigates under which additional,
regularizing assumptions reliable estimates of the generator can be made. In
that case, anomalies in mobility patterns can be detected with desired levels
for likelihood ratios. The regularization includes optimal transport plans and
techniques of time-frequency analysis applied to signals on graphs. The outcomes
of this project will complement models for human mobility in the engineering
literature by providing performance guarantees and rigorous error
estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.