* 1925147
* NRI: INT: Safe Wind-Aware Navigation for Collaborative Autonomous Aircraft in Low Altitude Airspace
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Samuel Vance, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,506,037.00

This project will promote the progress of science, and advance the national
health, security and prosperity by conducting fundamental research needed to
enhance safety and efficiency of aircraft operations in low altitude urban
environments. Safe and seamless inclusion of unmanned aircraft such as delivery
drones, and manned aircraft such as air taxis into urban airspace requires
building traffic management systems that account for the performance of
aircraft, pilots, and autopilots under a variety of atmospheric conditions.
Aircraft operating in low altitude urban environments are subject to turbulent
wind gusts that cannot be accurately predicted using current techniques. This
research project will address this challenge by enabling the progress of science
across multiple disciplines, including meteorology, human-robot interaction,
machine learning, data-driven modeling, robotics, and instrumentation. Desired
research outcomes will significantly impact many important applications,
including micro-weather prediction, turbulent plumes of pollutants and
emissions, drone package delivery, and air taxis. The inter-disciplinary nature
of the project will better prepare next-generation students and engineers and
the synergistic activities will broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to validate the
hypothesis that 'in-time' gust awareness by a pilot or an autopilot, can enhance
safety, efficiency and robustness of future autonomous aircraft operations in
low altitude airspace. Towards this objective, the research team will
investigate novel learning tools to model piloting behaviors, design safe and
efficient wind aware path planning algorithms, and importantly, construct short-
term gust forecast models with wind measurements. The team will develop a high-
fidelity simulation framework that integrates turbulence modeling, guidance,
navigation, control, and pilot-aircraft interface to demonstrate autonomous and
remotely-piloted aircraft flying through urban canopies with improved
predictability and increased endurance. A recommendation system that facilitates
pilot-aircraft interactions will be produced and demonstrated through both
simulations and experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.