* 1925583
* CCRI: Planning: Algorithmically Updating Repository of Reductions in Fine-Grained Complexity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Erik Demaine, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 03/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This project develops a community-maintained central repository for recording
reductions between computational problems. This infrastructure enables
theoretical computer scientists to keep track of progress and the best known
results for each problem. Fine-grained complexity is a recent branch of
computational complexity theory where the goal is to understand which
computational problems can be solved in linear time (where the time required
grows proportional to the problem size), and which fundamentally require
quadratic time (where the time grows as the square of the problem size), etc.
The basis for this field is reductions, which show how to convert problems of
one type into problems of another type, and therefore prove relations between
those problem types.

By recording reductions and their properties in a machine-understandable form,
the project enables algorithmic generation of the best known relationships
between problems. These automatically derived reductions can strengthen our
knowledge of both algorithms and hardness results, and let people identify gaps
in their knowledge and thereby define future research directions. The proposed
infrastructure could transform the way research is done in fine-grained
complexity, and more broadly, theoretical computer science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.