* 1925744
* CC* Regional: Extended Vital Education Reach Multiple Organization Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (EVER-MORe-OFFN)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2019,09/30/2022
* Stephen Wheat, Oral Roberts University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The CC* Networking Infrastructure project, Extended Vital Education Reach
Multiple Organization Regional OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (EVER-MORe-
OFFN), expands the network capabilities of Cameron University (CU), East Central
Oklahoma University (ECU) (both upgraded to 10Gbps), and Oral Roberts University
(ORU) (upgraded to 100 Gbps) by connecting them to the OneOklahoma Friction Free
Network (OFFN) through community-based Science DMZ technologies. Using 10Gb and
100Gb channels, OFFN interconnects Oklahoma's research organizations. OFFN
allows the researchers at each institution to reliably connect to supercomputers
and big data repositories, increase computational capabilities, and increase
inter-institution collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Previously, researchers
at the EVER-MORe-OFFN institutions lacked throughput speed when dealing with
large data sets. The EVER-MORe-OFFN expansion of OFFN affords these researchers
access to a high-speed and efficient network allowing for analyses and
simulations by researchers and an expanded repertoire of course projects and
assignments available to professors. Additionally, the High Performance
Computing Center at ORU is open to the collaborating universities through this
expansion.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Adding these three institutions increases the
total OFFN Institutional participation to 12 institutions. As OFFN expands, so
does the serviced population which provides new access to the necessary
resources to create research opportunities previously not afforded. This project
has broader implications for the scientific community including the next
generation of researchers and scientists unlocking the door to many exciting
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.