* 1925553
* CC* Regional:  Accelerating Research and Education at Small Colleges in Texas via an Advanced Networking Ecosystem Using a Virtual LEARN Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Pankaj Shah, LEARN: Lonestar Education and Research Network
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 957,535.00

LEARN - Lonestar Education And Research Network, a consortium of 41
organizations throughout Texas, is expanding opportunities for students and
faculty at smaller college campuses to participate in research that relies on
increasingly sophisticated network technology. LEARN has identified an initial
set of smaller colleges to take part in the project and is providing these
campuses with advanced network and performance monitoring technologies, the
expertise to manage the infrastructure, training and assistance in increasing
utilization of the underlying technologies, and a community of similarly engaged
scholars and administrators across Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of this project are to&lt;br/&gt;1. Establish a small college
collaborative environment within the LEARN community&lt;br/&gt;2. Improve
network connectivity/services at each college campus for research and
education&lt;br/&gt;3. Establish a network performance monitoring
infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;4. Establish a means to facilitate the transfer of
large data sets&lt;br/&gt;5. Deliver technical training to personnel at each
campus&lt;br/&gt;6. Develop and implement an outreach program for
informing/educating faculty, staff, and students at each college, and develop
and disseminate project results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LEARN is partnering with
national organizations in the implementation of this project. Projected impacts
include increased opportunities for students to learn about and gain experience
in advanced aspects of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
for which they might not otherwise have had an opportunity. This project can
also extend to students and faculty at other campuses in Texas and can be
replicated at other regional networks and smaller colleges throughout the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.