* 1925503
* Dissolved trace elements in the tropical Northwest Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 320,393.00

This project involves a collaboration with Chinese scientists in the analysis of
seawater samples collected during mid-2019 in the Northwest Pacific Ocean. The
cruise (designated GP09) is part of an international collaborative research
effort known as GEOTRACES, which is examining the distributions of trace
elements and isotopes throughout the oceans. Some trace elements are micro-
nutrients in the ocean, others are potentially toxic in small quantities, and
still others can be tracers or indictors of the extent of various ocean
processes such as hydrothermal inputs or productivity. The GP09 cruise affords
an opportunity to obtain trace element clean water samples from a region that is
geologically complex as well as being a meeting place for various ocean currents
and water masses. It will sample the southwest corner of the North Pacific
subtropical gyre, one of the largest oligotrophic (i.e., low nutrient) ocean
regions and arguably the largest continuous ecosystem on Earth. This region is
likely impacted by dust input (including anthropogenic aerosols), nitrogen
fixation, hydrothermal inputs, and island effects associated with weathering of
the Philippines and margin cycling. Determining material sources, sinks, and
cycling in this region is ultimately important for understanding controls on the
region's productivity. Many of the trace elements to be determined are also of
relevance for paleo-proxy applications (i.e., for understanding what the
sediment records of these elements tell us about past ocean processes). However,
successful paleo-proxy applications generally require further insight into the
processes that affect the cycling of the proxy elements. Because of the wide
range of parameters to be determined by GP09 participants, the cruise affords
substantial opportunities for collaboration with Chinese colleagues. The
knowledge and experience gained from this project will be incorporated into the
principle investigator's courses in oceanography. For outreach activities, in
collaboration with the University of Southern Mississippi Marine Education
Center, high school students will be invited to attend lectures given by
scientists about their research. A postdoctoral scholar will also be trained as
part of the project&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A researcher from the
University of Southern Mississippi will obtain clean, filtered trace element
samples from a mid-2019 oceanographic research cruise in the Northwest Pacific
Ocean. The cruise (GP09) is part of the GEOTRACES program and was led by
researchers from Xiamen University, China, with additional participants from
other major Chinese oceanographic institutions. The geological and hydrographic
complexity, along with the oligotrophic nature of the GP09 cruise track, make
this an especially interesting region for study. Trace element distributions are
likely to provide insight into various source, sink, and cycling processes of
broad interest. For example, a number of the elements we will study have been
used (or proposed to be used) as paleoredox and paleoproductivity proxies [e.g.,
barium (Ba), rare earth elements (REEs), vanadium (V), cadmium (Cd)], but a
better understanding of their oceanic cycling is needed to more fully understand
their proxy signals. The studies proposed here are also pertinent to important
issues including delivery of mineral dust and nutrient iron to the surface ocean
[gallium (Ga), REEs and possibly Cd and V], removal and internal cycling of
trace elements [Ba, REEs], tracing sources of material including margin sources
[Ba, manganese (Mn), REEs, V] and hydrothermal influences [Mn, Ba, REEs], as
well as understanding of conservative versus non-conservative changes in tracer
distributions [Ba, REEs, V]. The cruise also allows extensive collaboration with
other, mainly Chinese, investigators. Thus, the dissolved Ga data will be
compared with data obtained by colleagues on distributions of other lithogenic,
rapidly-scavenged elements like aluminum (Al) and thorium-232; the dissolved Ba
data will be shared with those determining radium and Ba isotopes; and, the REE
data will be made available to those examining neodymium isotopes, as well as
compared with other scavenging tracers such as Ga, Al, and
Th.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.