* 1925520
* CCRI: Collaborative Research: Planning for World Of Code (WoC): An Infrastructure for Open Source Software Census
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2020
* James Herbsleb, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 33,949.00

While software engineering research has made great progress over the decades,
the unavailability of data has long been a major limitation. Open source
software (OSS) makes large quantities of data available, creating the promise of
using modern quantitative techniques on very large data sets to understand how
to create better software and improve productivity. However, the data exists in
different formats, has many errors and omissions, is located in millions of
repositories around the world, and requires extensive processing to render it in
a form researchers can use. The planning grant aims to develop the requirements
for creating World of Code (WoC), an infrastructure for enhancing software
engineering research, and to build a research community centered around massive
data gathered from all open source repositories around the world. This planning
process will ensure that WoC, if realized, will enable researchers to easily
access all open source data, resolve issues of replication, avoid drawing
samples that are not representative, and reduce the risk of inappropriate
conclusions based on erroneous data. The planning grant will establish a
Steering Committee and an Advisory Board to guide the development and evolution
of the resource in a way that provides the greatest value to the community of
researchers. Hackathons will give both experienced and novice researchers an
opportunity to learn how to use WoC's prototype capabilities, add to the
tooling, and concretely express the desires and priorities of the research
community WoC seeks to serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resources needed to mine and
maintain data on the entire OSS code base and version histories far exceed what
individual research groups can accomplish in the scope of conventional
hypothesis-driven research. The pressing need to investigate the entirety of OSS
will be addressed by creating requirements and building a community for an
infrastructure that should contain: 1) A complete, rapidly updated source code
data for the entirety of OSS; 2) Tooling for data correction, augmentation, and
curation essential for such data: e.g., identity disambiguation and extraction
of dependencies; 3) Services supporting research tasks that rely on the entirety
of the collection; 4) A self-governing community of researchers, developers, and
companies who maintain, enhance, and operate this infrastructure. To elicit the
precise requirements for this OSS-wide infrastructure a wide audience of
software researchers will be engaged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.