* 1925539
* Multimode Ultrahigh Strain Rate Investigations into the Fundamental Mechanics of Polymers
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* George Youssef, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 369,593.00

Polymers are essential materials in shock-tolerant structures such as sports
gears and protective armors due to their intrinsic microstructure. However,
further advancements towards their use are limited due to the gap in the
fundamental understanding of the mechanisms dedicating the superior performance
of this class of materials in ultrahigh strain rate applications. This award
supports research to gain fundamental insights on how polymers respond to
dynamic loading through the use of shock waves to mechanically and rapidly load
the material while using spectroscopy to observe the behavior of the molecular
structure. The knowledge generated will accelerate the development of engineered
polymer-based, shock-tolerant structures with higher performance than those
currently in use. Insights from this research will broaden the application
domain of polymers in scenarios where their implementations were unforeseen in
the past. In the longterm, the outcomes of this project will also lead to
improved energy absorption performance in existing applications such as action
sports protective gears and enhanced crashworthiness of ground, aerial, and
marine vehicles. Thus, the research will not only promote the progress of
science, but due to the importance of polymers in shock-tolerant structures will
promote the development of energy absorbing structures. Paramount to this
research is the multidisciplinary approach through the integrating of advanced
optics, material science and engineering, and mechanical engineering.
Additionally, this research strives to train a diverse group of students in
technical and interpersonal skills of engineering and contribute to inculcating
the next generation of engineers to maintain the global technological
competitiveness of the United States. This award will provide hands-on research
experiences to undergraduate and high school students, integrate research and
education through undergraduate and graduate intra- and extra-curricular
activities, broaden the participation of women and minority students, and
outreach to the broader community through university open-
houses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Failure mechanisms due to high strain rate loadings
of polymers remain ambiguous. To overcome this scientific challenge, this
research strives to provide a breakthrough in revealing the interplay between
intermolecular motion and incoming multi-axial shock waves and their effect on
the intrinsic bond strength. The experimental approach hinges on leveraging the
transparency of polymers to terahertz waves, which provides the ability to
couple loading and characterization setups at the same time to uncover the in-
situ dynamic behavior of polymers as a function of loading mode, amplitude, and
strain rate simultaneously. The results will provide insights into the
intermolecular motion leading to the intrinsic failure mechanisms governing the
behavior and performance of polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.