* 1925194
* NRI: INT: FIngers See Things Differently (FIST-D): A Robotic Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) based on Augmented Tactile Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Wenzhuo Wu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,499,795.00

Explosive ordnance disposal is among the more hazardous occupations whether in
the military and law enforcement when confronted with improvised explosive
devices (IEDs), or after natural disasters when exposed explosive materials must
be quickly, safely, and expeditiously disposed. Explosive ordnance disposal
(EOD) technicians respond to dangerous situations, wearing only protective
suits, which may reduce the impact of a blast but do not provide complete
protection. Moreover, EOD technicians are subject to fatigue, heat stress, and
reduced dexterity. These can lead to a reduced ability by EOD technicians to
deal with threats effectively and safely. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robots can
greatly mitigate many of the risks, help reduce a technician's exposure and
time-on-target, lessen the risk of otherwise very dangerous situations, and keep
the technician better out of harm's way. Technician are still need albeit from
afar by teleoperating the robots. A chronic problem in EOD is the limited
perceptual information that such robotic systems can convey. Currently available
robots depend heavily on vision and video telemetry, which can be drastically
impaired when IEDs are buried or concealed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
addresses this scientific challenge by developing a multi-modal perceptual image
comprised of tactile, optical, and force information, using a telerobot. Such a
telerobot will: 1) deliver a multimodal image in a format that is easily
interpretable by the operator; 2) learn from limited observations using
principles of machine learning; 3) recognize objects from texture and weight
signatures; and 4) recommend best strategies to approach and explore the
objects. In addition to its main application, the theories and technologies
involved in this proposal impact other fields in which dexterity and tactile
feedback is key for successful task completion, such as tele-surgery. A unique
feature of this project is a set of bimanual tool tips, equipped with multi-
sensory devices for collecting tactile, force and chemical composition
information for target characterization and action. As the exploration takes
place, object profiles (based on sensed information) are built from discrete
observations, which are accumulated and fitted to machine learning models based
on transfer learning and zero/one-shot learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.