* 1925974
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the linkages between Sea-Level Change,  Sediment Transport and Geomorphology on Coastal  Freshwater Water Sequestration
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Mark Person, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2024
* USD 697,852.00

The growth of large coastal cities is putting increasing demand on supplies of
potable water as traditional sources are depleted. Increased withdrawal of local
groundwater has led to more widespread occurrences of salt-water intrusion and
new surface-water supplies are becoming politically and economically difficult
to access. As sea level rose and fell over the past million years, the shoreline
moved landward and seaward, shifting the boundary between fresh water and salt
water with the result that reservoirs of freshwater can often be found offshore.
This water could provide a significant reserve for coastal areas if other
sources are unavailable. This project will identify the extent of freshwater
buried in marine sediments in the continental shelf of New Jersey and in the
offshore delta region of Bangladesh. The research will use data from geophysical
surveys, sediment deposition, groundwater flow, and solute transport, to develop
mathematical models that simulate the accumulation of freshwater in these
submarine deposits as sea level rose. The project will also construct
simulations of groundwater production from these areas to assess the feasibility
of accessing the offshore reservoirs within the next few
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will assess how sequestration of
onshore saltwater and offshore freshwater in coastal environments is influenced
by interactions between geomorphic, sedimentological, geodynamic, and hydrologic
processes over geologic time scales of one million years or more. The research
will develop a new model using the Earth-science community code, Landlab, and
apply the code at two field sites with vastly different local sea-level,
climate, tectonic and sediment transport regimes: New Jersey and Bangladesh.
Calculated sediment type and salinity patterns from these models will be
compared to new and existing images from seismic and electromagnetic (EM) data,
as well as to available well samples measuring salinity and age of the water. An
EM survey will be carried out in Bangladesh to determine the distribution of
deep onshore saltwater and freshwater in this active deltaic environment. Along
with recently collected EM images from offshore New Jersey, these data will be
used to test the Landlab model to elucidate the factors controlling the
emplacement of fresh and saline groundwater in coastal
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.