* 1925898
* Collaborative Research: Consequences of flat slab subduction on the chemical, structural, and dynamic evolution of continental lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Lara Wagner, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,054,052.00

This project will expand our understanding of how a specific tectonic setting,
flat slab subduction, affects the continents on which we live. Flat slab
subduction occurs when an oceanic plate that normally descends into the Earth`s
mantle at a constant angle of dip changes its geometry and instead sinks only to
~50 miles depth and then travels horizontally for hundreds of miles beneath the
continent before returning to the deep Earth`s interior. An episode of flat slab
subduction beneath the western United States is believed to be responsible not
only for the formation of the Rocky Mountains and the extensive ore deposits of
the Colorado Mineral Belt, but also for wide spread explosive volcanism that
erupted ~500,000 km3 of silicic magma across the western United States between
36 and 18 million years ago (Mt. St. Helens erupted ~1 km3 for comparison). This
volcanism is believed to be due to the effects of the removal of the flat slab
and the resumption of a normal subduction geometry, but it has been difficult to
study because of the amount of time that has passed since this occurred in the
western United States, and because of uncertainty about the geometry of the flat
slab that existed before that. In Colombia, there is a unique setting where a
once extensive flat slab has split into two parts, one of which remains flat,
and one that has comparatively recently foundered and returned to a normal
subduction geometry. While this flat slab is much smaller than the one that
affected the western United States, the researchers will study the processes
responsible for the mountain building, ore deposits, and volcanic hazards in
Colombia to gain a better understanding about how continents evolve over time
and how these types of volcanic events are related to this specific tectonic
environment. This project includes an embedded teacher training initiative led
by the Carnegie Academy for Science Education (CASE) which will involve six
teachers, two from each PI city (DC, Austin, and Phoenix). Teachers will
participate in training, fieldwork, and all-hands meetings throughout the
project, and will develop bilingual lesson plans that can be shared through STEM
teacher networks. PIs will work closely with the teachers and with CASE in the
development of these lesson plans, and will visit teacher classrooms to interact
directly with students and to provide feedback. In addition, this project brings
together a diverse team that includes two female PIs, and four international
collaborators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to take advantage of
Colombia`s unique tectonic setting to evaluate the effects of flat slab
subduction and subsequent foundering on the geochemical, structural, and dynamic
evolution of continental lithosphere. Flat slab subduction has been identified
along most ocean-continent convergent margins, and has been invoked to explain
major tectonic events including the Laramide Orogeny, the evolution of the
Altiplano Plateau, and intraplate deformation and volcanism in China. The
northern Andes of Colombia provide an ideal location to assess flat slab effects
as the retroarc region in central Colombia directly juxtaposes a modern flat
slab with a segment that re-steepened over ~4 Ma. The investigators will compare
and contrast flat slab and normal subduction, allowing for both across-strike
and along-strike comparison of the records of magmatism, crustal structure,
lithospheric metasomatism, basin subsidence, and orogenic uplift. To accomplish
these objectives, the research team will include multiple disciplines like
geochronology, geochemistry, seismology, basin analysis, structure, tectonics,
thermochronology, and geodynamics. Project PIs and collaborators will 1)
seismically image both the flat and normally dipping slab regions, and the
transition between the two, to obtain evidence of the developing and persistent
effects of flat slab subduction on the overriding lithosphere; 2) study the
magmatic and geochemical effects of flat subduction on the overriding
lithosphere through time by analyzing the resulting igneous products, both above
the flat slab and along the region of flat slab foundering; 3) investigate the
spatial and temporal patterns of subsidence and uplift associated with flat
slabs and their foundering through sedimentary and thermochronologic analyses of
the Magdalena and Llanos basins and flanking Central and Eastern Cordilleras in
both settings, and 4) integrate these constraints into geodynamic models that
will improve our understanding of the conditions and parameters that control the
dynamics of flat slabs and subduction in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is cofunded by the Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events
(PREEVENTS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.