* 1925693
* RIDIR: The Sub-National Data Archive System for Social and Behavioral Data
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Kenneth Kollman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,406,244.00

This project will create the Sub-National Data Archive System for Social and
Behavioral Data. Research on political, social, and economic behavior
increasingly depends on local, sub-national data, and on analysts' ability to
combine data from multiple sources. Data may differ in geographic and time units
and in measurement approaches and may have a variety of biases. Different data
choices by researchers can lead to different conclusions and thus, across
studies, can reduce the reliability, transparency, and replicability of
empirical research. The Sub-National Data Archive System for Social and
Behavioral Data will offer social scientists, policymakers, and the general
public a suite of tools (1) to integrate different kinds of geographic data, (2)
to account for differences in measurement across primary sources, and (3) to
help assess the generalizability and robustness of research results across data
sources. By making sub-national data more accessible, the project will help
researchers inside and outside of academia test hypotheses, generate forecasts,
evaluate the effectiveness of past and existing programs, and inform the
allocation of scarce resources across competing initiatives. The overall goal is
to improve understanding of how societies develop, prosper, and change, by
enabling researchers to have easier access and effective use of highly-granular
data from local areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sub-National Data Archive
System for Social and Behavioral Data addresses three persistent problems in
social science research: mismatch between theoretical units of analysis and the
scale of available data; the availability of multiple data sources for the same
variables, which may be conflicting, overlapping or complementary; and a lack of
generalizability of empirical results across alternative measurement strategies,
or when using data from different sources and cases. This project will relieve
these bottlenecks by producing a platform to develop highly-customizable
integrated data with low technical barriers, enabling users to standardize sub-
national units of analysis across countries, employ built-in methods where
multiple data sources exist, and readily evaluate the robustness and
generalizability of their results to alternative data and measurement choices
(including shifting regional contexts). Core features of the platform will
include: (1) a user-friendly web interface, where researchers can easily
construct their own sub-national datasets from a large collection of archived
data, (2) an open-source software package, which enables users to apply these
tools to their own data, and produce a more customizable output based on
individual specifications and needs, and (3) for users who wish to contribute
original data to the platform, an archiving tool and data review process to
ensure technical compliance and quality control. The program will build on
previous data integration projects by providing a platform that covers almost
every stage in the data life cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.