* 1925704
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: A High-Performance Science DMZ and Dedicated Research Network for Duquesne University
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Rehana Leak, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 462,680.00

Duquesne University is implementing a dedicated research network and Science DMZ
for the facilitation of science-driven research, education and collaboration. A
vibrant and growing Duquesne research community conducts leading edge research
and scientific experimentation in a broad range of science domains. The campus
network is unable to support the data-intensive workflows generated by the
research community. While science drivers and research workflows vary, there is
a common need for fast and unrestricted data movement to internal and external
research computing resources. The research-focused Science DMZ
cyberinfrastructure addresses the limitations of the general purpose network by
establishing a dedicated, scalable and secure network that is optimized for
data-intensive science workflows. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project objective
is to establish a dedicated 120Gbps Science DMZ network to support the Duquesne
research community. A critical element of the Science DMZ is a Data Transfer
Node (DTN). The DTN will provide University researchers with a secure, highly-
available, high-performance data exchange point to facilitate the secure and
efficient sharing of research data with collaborating institutions and national
computational research facilities. The Science DMZ will connect to a dedicated
10Gbps uplink to the Pennsylvania-wide education and research computing network
(KINBER).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The new friction-free cyberinfrastructure not
only accelerates large scale data movement, it facilitates new and more
efficient workflows resulting in the acceleration and advancement of scientific
discovery. The research network improves opportunities to train the next
generation of research scientists and to inspire underrepresented groups to
participate in scientific research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.