* 1925601
* CCRI: Grand: Colosseum: Opening and Expanding the World's Largest Wireless Network Emulator to the Wireless Networking Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Abhimanyu Gosain, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,971,737.00

In spite of significant federal and private investments, the US wireless
research community is still lacking experimental facilities to support a science
of rigorous and repeatable experimental evaluation of wireless networked
systems, beyond simulation tools and small-scale, ad hoc, test-beds. The
research community is also lacking a shared wireless network emulation facility
to experiment and test at scale, in a fully controlled, programmable, and
observable environment, and with hardware in the loop. This project will attempt
to bridge this gap by supporting the transition of the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency's (DARPA's) Colosseum -- the world's largest wireless network
emulator -- to a shared programmable instrument open to and usable by the
research community housed at the Kostas Research Institute at Northeastern
University. Colosseum is a massive 256-by-256-channel radio frequency (RF)
emulator supported with 256 programmable software defined radios, capable of
emulating full-stack communications with abundant computational capabilities,
ability to implement Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning algorithms and
hardware in the loop. For the first time, researchers will be able to experience
in a single instrument the scale and abstractions of packet-level simulators,
the flexibility of software radios, and the fidelity of professional channel
emulation. This project will extend and accelerate research in wireless
networked systems, and contribute to bringing different communities together
(e.g., academia, government researchers, industry). A number of planned
activities will train a new generation of professionals with unique networking
system analysis and development skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
make the following core contributions:&lt;br/&gt;(i) It will open Colosseum and
make it available to the US wireless research community at large by modifying
the native software framework, originally designed to support the DARPA Spectrum
Collaboration Challenge.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) It will extend the functionalities of
Colosseum by developing new scenario creation and channel reconfiguration
capabilities and data visualization tools, as well as new edge computing,
machine learning, and data analytics functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) It will
develop a set of outreach activities to collect needs of the research community
and plan future evolution of Colosseum to best serve these
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.