* 1925735
* SBIR Phase II:  AQSync for Distributed Calibrations of Mobile Air Quality Sensing Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2021
* John Birks, LUDLUM MEASUREMENTS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2021
* USD 674,263.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable a new paradigm for air pollution monitoring
and mapping through the U.S. and globally. According to the World Health
Organization, 4 million deaths per year globally are directly linked to ambient
air pollution. Until now, the approach to monitoring of air pollutants has been
limited to measurements at a few fixed-base stations spread throughout each U.S.
state (e.g., ~30 in Colorado for a population of 6 million), and those stations
are purposely located far from air pollution hot spots in order to obtain
approximate averages. Recent advances in low-cost sensor technology has enabled
new high-resolution mapping of air pollutants throughout cities and rural areas
through vehicles of opportunity, such as those associated with ride share
services and delivery vehicles, carrying small air quality sensor packages
continuously uploading air pollution measurements to the web. The principal
roadblock to this approach, addressed in this project, is a method to
continuously verify the calibration of these mobile air quality sensors,
inherently less accurate than traditional instruments.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop, test and evaluate a distributed
calibration station, AQSync, to be mounted on lamp and traffic light posts
throughout cities and towns to provide frequent distributed calibrations of
vehicle-borne air quality sensor packages. A major challenge has been the
development of relatively low-cost miniaturized instruments offering highly
accurate measurements for inclusion in AQSync. This is particularly true for
black carbon, believed to contribute substantially to up to 200,000 premature
deaths each year in the U.S. through pollution-related health conditions such as
asthma, stroke, heart disease and cancer. The development and commercialization
of a Black Carbon Photometer in Phase I of this project represents a potentially
disruptive technology facilitating measurements of black carbon directly in the
gas phase, without the known artifacts associated with previous instruments and
within a small footprint suitable for AQSync. This project addresses the next
challenge of developing algorithms and demonstrating that implementation of
distributed AQSync calibration stations enable accurate mobile sensor
measurements to inform policy-makers, subsequently improving human health.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.