* 1925715
* CCRI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Physical Robotic Manipulation Test Facility
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Cindy Grimm, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 826,000.00

The robotics community has a rich history of research and development in
grasping and manipulation. However, it has proven to be very difficult to make
grasping work in the real world (e.g., homes and small-scale industry). Part of
the problem is the limited amount of testing that can be done in a lab. Testing
requires specialized hardware and a very large number of trials, which is
difficult for a single researcher to do on their own. The goal of this project
is to set up dedicated test centers for grasping and manipulation that can be
used by anyone with an internet connection. The test centers will provide
standardized benchmarks, software and tutorials to teach people the basics of
grasping, and hardware to perform the actual testing. This infrastructure will
make it easier for people to share and compare results, and make it easier for
people to contribute without needing to buy (and maintain) a large amount of
specialized hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are four parts to this
proposal; 1) Developing specialized hardware for testing and deploying in two
facilities (one at Oregon State University, one at the University of
Massachusetts Lowell) that have dedicated robotic arms and manipulators; 2)
Software infrastructure to enable remote access for specifying tasks, running
those tasks, then visualizing the results; 3) Implementing new and existing
benchmark protocols (such as the ones developed at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST)); and 4) Developing a community of users,
including academic, industrial, and governmental institutions. The testbed
approach should allow new and existing researchers a low cost method to
participating in the grasping and manipulation scientific community and to
provide standards from which the field can grow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.