* 1925724
* CCRI: ENS: Collaborative Research: Modernizing gem5: Expanding the Reach of Computer Architecture Simulation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jason Lowe-Power, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,928,458.00

Computer systems are increasingly important to society and the advancement of
science. In recent years, technological trends have made it increasingly
difficult to continue scaling their performance. As a result, research to
further improve computer systems is vital. Traditionally, this research has
relied on cycle-level software simulation of these computer systems to model the
potential improvements of novel techniques. However, much of the software was
written 15 years ago, and it is currently maintained by students and
researchers. This project will make a concerted effort to improve the underlying
simulation infrastructure, which will enable increased research output by the
computer systems community. It will specifically focus on the gem5
infrastructure, which is widely used in the community (e.g., cited over 3000
times) and considered the de facto tool for simulating all components of the
computing system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance and rejuvenate
the aging gem5 community infrastructure through improvements to the underlying
gem5 components, community outreach and improved user's services, and developing
new models for emerging devices required for evaluating important applications
(e.g., machine learning, augmented and virtual reality, high performance
computing, and system security). These improvements will increase the research
output of gem5's broad user base and extend the ability to perform hardware-
software co-design to the entire computer systems community. This project will
broaden the already vibrant gem5 community through reducing the barrier to entry
by (1) running two gem5 summer schools to introduce junior graduate students to
gem5 and computer systems research, (2) simplifying gem5's interface, (3)
improving the community's documentation and communication channels, and (4)
supervising a community code shepherd to help researchers integrate their code
with the community infrastructure. The investigators will also create a set of
'known-good' system configurations that will significantly increase the
productivity of researchers performing detailed cycle-level research studies.
These system configurations will be proxies for current state-of-the-art systems
and will be publicly validated against real systems and workloads suggested by
the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a sustainable path
for the future of the gem5 infrastructure by improving the code testing coverage
and increasing the robustness of hardware device models. Additionally, community
outreach efforts will broaden the community increasing the impact of gem5 and
providing more contributors to continue development of this infrastructure after
this project completes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.