* 1925708
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Sustainable Separations of Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Eric Schelter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,800,000.00

The CCI Phase I: Center for Sustainable Separations of Metals, CSSM, is
supported by the Centers for Chemical Innovation Program of the Division of
Chemistry. This Phase I Center is led by Eric Schelter of the University of
Pennsylvania. Other team members from the University of Pennsylvania include
Jessica Anna and Joseph Subotnik. Additional team members include Suzanne Bart
of Purdue University, George Schatz and J. Fraser Stoddart of Northwestern
University, Jonathan Sessler of the University of Texas at Austin, and Jenifer
Shafer of the Colorado School of Mines. Metal-containing consumer products are
many and include, for example, cell phones that incorporate more than 20
different metals, some of which are in critical or near-critical supply. The
goal of CSSM is to design and develop new, fundamental chemical reactions to
diversify metal separation science and technologies that enable greater than 99%
recycling of post-consumer products and processes at comparable or lower costs
than current market prices. CSSM develops new processes to remove, separate and
recover each of these metals by designing and developing new synthetic and redox
reactions, computational chemistry and theory, and molecular recognition
methods. The scientific broader impacts include reduced waste (pollution) and
energy consumption and increased national security (by recycling rather than
importing). A "Sustainability Ambassadors" program will be established that
involves undergraduates and graduate students. The Sustainability Ambassadors
are directly involved in research activities while also receiving professional
development and public outreach training. Outreach activities at science museums
and festivals, as well on social media platforms are planned.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCI Phase 1: Center for Sustainable Separations of
Metals, CSSM, addresses the sustainable production and recycling of metals used
in consumer products (e.g., cell phones, laptops, batteries, etc.). Such
consumer projects include rare earth elements, precious metals (gold, platinum,
and palladium), and other elements in critical or near-critical supply. In
addition to being in low natural abundance, such elements often create
significant environmental harm either during their mining, purification,
separation from consumer goods, and landfilling. The central hypothesis for this
project is that new fundamental chemistry applied to separations will enable new
and varied modes of metal separations, especially tailored for recycling. New
synthetic-, redox-, computational chemistry and theory will be developed to
accomplish metal partitioning through electro-kinetic processes. Quantum
chemical models and underlying theory, will be developed to study and predict
heterogeneous electron transfer rates, including the impact of magnetic fields.
Redox active ligands coordinated to metal cations in mixtures will enable
predictive and selective metal partitioning through kinetic means. Additionally,
new systems will be synthesized that show molecular recognition for metal
complexes and ion pairs for selective separations. Tailored recognition of metal
complexes and ion pairs by non-covalent interactions will be leveraged to enable
green and efficient separations of precious metals, lithium, and rare earth
elements using selective precipitation or chromatography. This center will
contribute new knowledge in metals separations chemistry that confers benefits
in terms of reduced waste and energy consumption, and relief from unsustainable
metal supply chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.