* 1925766
* CC* Compute: A Hybrid Cloud Environment for the Rocky Mountain Advanced Computing Consortium
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Thomas Hauser, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 399,532.00

The Research Computing group at the University of Colorado Boulder provides a
hybrid cloud infrastructure to support computing, data, and science gateway
needs that are currently not met by the existing high-performance and high-
throughput computing infrastructure. The system is also integrated into the Open
Science Grid (OSG) to enable full utilization of the deployed on-premise
hardware using otherwise idle compute capacity. The hybrid cloud system provides
one integrated system view of the on-premise and public cloud to researchers so
they can select the right resource to support their work. This new capability
eases the burden of finding appropriate computational tools for their work,
allowing researchers to focus on new discoveries and the advancement of their
fields. Major emphasis areas of the research supported are in the geosciences,
hydrological modeling, natural language processing, machine learning, and earth
analytics. Members of the Rocky Mountain Advanced Computing Consortium (RMACC)
have access to 20% of the provided cloud resources with a focus on smaller
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This hybrid cloud provides: virtual machines
either from a library or customized by the researcher; execution and
orchestration of containers; serverless computing; and hosting for persistent
science gateways and other science services. This project heavily leverages the
NSF award #1659425 "CC* Cyber Team: Creating a Community of Regional Data and
Workflow Cyberinfrastructure Facilitators" by reusing training materials on
containerization and capitalizing on relationships established during focus
groups and one-on-one consults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.