* 1925786
* Collaborative Proposal: MSA: Predicting the effects of nitrogen deposition on the soil carbon sink with a continental-scale experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Samantha Weintraub-Leff, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 4,614.00

To predict how ecosystems will respond to ongoing environmental change, it is
critical to understand how biogeochemical cycles of carbon (C) and nitrogen (N)
interact with one another. N availability influences the movement of C among its
three major terrestrial pools: plants, soils, and the atmosphere, where
concentrations of CO2 are increasing. Similarly, human activities have doubled
the quantity of reactive N in the biosphere. To understand interactions between
global N and C cycles, ecologists need to be able to predict the effects of N
fertilization on soil organic matter, which is the largest reservoir of
terrestrial C. At some sites, excess N accelerates the decomposition of soil C,
promoting release of CO2; whereas at other sites, N fertilization appears to do
the reverse, and promote soil C stabilization. This research will provide the
first experiment that will test a new theory to explain these seemingly
contradictory responses. This work is directly relevant to the development of
terrestrial ecosystem models, which represent our most important tools to
forecast when and where human disruption of the N cycle will amplify soil
C-climate feedbacks. The research will also provide a platform to engage with
groups traditionally underrepresented in ecological research, supporting hands-
on research opportunities for first-generation Native American college students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The conceptual framework tested in this proof-of-concept
study rests on the idea that N fertilization has opposing effects on two pools
of soil organic matter with distinct biogeochemical controls: unprotected
particulate organic matter (POM) vs. microbially inaccessible mineral-associated
organic matter (MAOM). N fertilization should affect the balance between POM
losses and MAOM gains in a predictable manner that is contingent on soil edaphic
and biotic properties. This research will leverage steep gradients of soil
geochemistry and climate to quantify soil C responses to altered N supply and
soil pH (which is strongly influenced by N fertilization). The experimental
approach will utilize both stable isotope tracer approaches and a complementary,
standardized "synthetic soil" method to quantify fluxes of C and N among the
microbial biomass, POM, and MAOM pools. The researchers will synthesize
responses observed in short-term laboratory studies and longer-term field-based
fertilization experiments to quantify how environmental drivers operating at
local to regional scales mediate changes in soil C cycling under N
fertilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.