* 1925603
* CC* Compute: A Cost-Effective, 2,048 Core InfiniBand Cluster at UTC for Campus Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Farah Kandah, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 408,235.00

A team of researchers at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC) will
make a significant upgrade to the campus cyberinfrastructure that will provide
state-of-the-art, cost-effective high-performance computing not previously
possible. This project will significantly improve university researchers' and
students' ability to perform, enhance, and expand their current computationally-
intensive research, prototyping, and development activities and will complement
other investments already made, in-progress, or on the plan-of-record of UTC,
including access to commercial cloud computing services. In addition to computer
science and engineering, the UTC team anticipates significant research projects
in mathematics, hydrology and computational fluid dynamics which will engage
four regional partner universities. Two teaching projects address HPC education
and use of HPC for mechanical engineering undergraduate research/design. In
addition to these funded projects, merited additional research projects are
enabled over time as the PIs, Central IT, and the cluster's Advisory Board
attract and onboard additional researchers and students requiring HPC. Among
other users are the more than 20 computational science Ph.D. students, plus
several postdocs. Furthermore, SimCenter---UTC's research computing hub---
supports undergraduate research through self-funding and REU in HPC, providing
additional users for the proposed cluster.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award
allows the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC) to procure an
innovative, 2,048-compute core, 16-server AMD EPYC2 cluster networked with
100Gbit/s InfiniBand plus 8TB of main memory and 77 Tflop/s of double-precision
floating point arithmetic. EPYC2 Rome 7nm processors will be newly available at
or near the start of the period of performance, so this project includes state-
of-the-art, cost-effective, high-performance computing not previously possible
using Intel or AMD processors. The university has invested in a "commodity"
cluster as recently as three years ago, and it is heavily utilized by the
existing user base. This system will be nearly four years old by the beginning
of this proposed grant. By way of complement, upgrades to storage (1.1PB),
internal networking, data center infrastructure, and private cloud
virtualization (coming online by mid-2019) have prepared UTC to support a new
campus-wide cluster with a growing number of users in addition to those named
here. The proposed new campus cluster will enable core scales and total cluster
memory not previously available on campus and thus help researchers prepare
their scalable problem scenarios for greater scales on national resources such
as XSEDE. Projects enabled immediately are 14 science driver projects (12
research, two teaching). Seven projects involve four regional partner
universities. At least ten NSF grants at UTK, UTC, UAB, Tennessee Tech, and Ole
Miss are enhanced. Project areas highlighted include fault-tolerant parallel
computing, performance monitoring of HPC, next-generation parallel programming
with MPI, special-purpose linear algebra, hydrology, and computational fluid
dynamics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.