* 1925692
* I-Corps: Marine Coating Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Zhiqiang Cao, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
potential commercialization of a coating product with superior durability and
antifouling performance in the targeted environmental-friendly marine coating
market. This product does not require frequent application and reduces the
biofouler growth and built-up on both moving and static objects in bodies of
water. This leads to economic benefits by improving fuel efficiency and reducing
the maintenance cost of ships and other marine structures. Environmentally,
current marine coating products function by leaching toxic chemicals (biocides)
into the water which are harmful to marine ecosystems and subject to increasing
global regulatory restrictions. This product addresses this issue by providing
an eco-friendly solution with equivalent antifouling performance. It can deliver
a disruptive coating solution that can improve vessel maneuverability, increase
fuel efficiency, and address environmental concerns by replacing current toxic
coating products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will further
develop a non-biocide, environmental-friendly marine coating technology. This
coating innovation involves novel material composition and fabrication methods
enabling a strong and durable immobilization of hydrophilic coating materials on
most hydrophobic substrates that are commonly used as anti-corrosion bottom
paints used on ship hulls. Hydrophilic materials are known for their high
capacity in resisting biofouling, but they tend to dissolve in water, instead of
staying on the substrate, leading to gradual exposure of the unprotected
substrate over time. The key innovative feature of this technology is that it
improves the poor stability and durability challenge of super-hydrophilic
polymer coatings when applied in the water environment. This coating technology
is effective against biofouling while achieving durability and robustness
required in aqueous environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.