* 1925417
* Climate Drivers and Ancient History in Greenland Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 989,502.00

Ice cores collected from the polar ice sheets contain detailed records of past
environmental conditions, climate, and climate drivers. For example, the timing,
size, and sometimes even the locations of large volcanic eruptions can be
detected in the ice. Such eruptions often were linked in the past to periods of
strong cooling and changes in precipitation patterns that disrupted food
production, leading to famines, human migrations, political unrest, and
conflict. One such eruption led to the 'year without a summer' in 1816, which
resulted in major food shortages across the Northern Hemisphere. Similarly, ice
cores contain detailed records of past industrial emissions of metals, acids,
and other pollutants. For example, lead pollution is an especially sensitive
indicator of past mining and smelting of lead/silver ores, and because many
ancient coinage was made of silver, Arctic lead pollution can be used as a proxy
or indicator past silver production and so overall economic activity. Indeed,
Greenland ice cores analyzed at high depth resolution with the latest analytical
instruments have yielded precisely dated (within one to two years) proxies of
ancient, medieval, and modern economies. When compared to known historical
events such as plagues and wars, historians, economists, and archaeologists can
assess the resilience of past societies through their response to external
shocks such as the arrival of plagues or a climate disruptions resulting from
volcanic eruptions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
develop accurately dated, high-resolution, ice-core records of a broad range of
elements and chemical species to expand and extend recently identified, causal
linkages between (1) ancient societies; (2) volcanism and hydroclimate; and (3)
wars, plagues, social unrest, and economic activity. Underpinning these efforts
will be the collection and analysis of a ~440 m ice core from the Tunu region on
the northeastern flank of the Greenland ice sheet. An ice-penetrating radar
survey extending 40-km upstream along the ice-flow line upstream of the ice-core
site will support interpretation of the aerosol and water isotope records, as
well as understanding of any possible impacts from changes in deposition
processes upstream. The ice core will be analyzed using the continuous flow
analysis system at the Desert Research Institute to develop accurately-dated
records of over 30 chemical species linked to volcanism, biomass burning, sea
salts, continental dust, and industrial pollution during the past 4,000 years.
The ice core will be dated using volcanically-constrained annual layer counting
supplemented by measurements of cosmogenic nuclides from known solar proton
events. Interpretation of the ice-core records will be conducted by an
interdisciplinary team including environmental and climate scientists,
volcanologists, historians, and social scientists. A laboratory-based course
will also be developed to train historians, economists, archaeologists, and
researchers from other related fields in ice-core analysis and how ice-core
records can be used to address historical research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.