* 1925500
* CCRI: MEDIUM: Collaborative Research: F1/10 RACECAR: Community Platforms for Safe, Secure and Coordinated Autonomy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Venkat Krovi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 339,039.00

F1/10 is a shared, open-sourced infrastructure for the development and
validation of new approaches to autonomous perception, planning, control and
coordination. This community platform will facilitate autonomous system
research, education and bench-marking through the creation of a new class of
high-performance autonomous racing cars, that are 1/10th the size of a real
(Formula 1) car and can reach a top speed of 50mph. The goal is to enable a wide
range of experimental research and education in Safe, Secure, Coordinated and
Efficient Autonomy. Much of today's research on Autonomous vehicles (AVs) is
limited to experimentation on expensive commercial vehicles that require large
teams with diverse skills and power-hungry platforms. Testing the limits of
safety and performance on such vehicles is costly and hazardous. It is also
outside the reach of most academic departments and research groups. Furthermore,
little research has been devoted to the development of safety benchmarks and
infrastructure for certifying autonomous systems, guaranteeing the safety of
data-driven decision making, power-efficient perception and control for
efficient autonomy, active coordinated safety for large vehicle fleets, and
cyber-physical security of autonomous vehicles. All of these are fundamental
requirements on the road to achieving the social benefits of autonomous
vehicles, and autonomous systems more generally. F1/10 provides rapid
prototyping hardware, software and algorithmic platforms, with full
documentation and community support for research and development of future
autonomous systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autonomous vehicles are emerging as
integral components of the US economy, and in the future, they may be at the
heart of the national economy's competitiveness in transportation and logistics.
Enabling such a transformation requires building reliably safe and efficient
autonomous vehicles and the contributions of a very diverse community of
researchers from engineering, human factors and computer science. The project's
intellectual merit resides in the design and deployment of scaled autonomous
cars that are affordable, safe to experiment with, easy to customize, can be
shared widely, and that can support a wide range of necessary research in
autonomous vehicles. This project's broader goal is to stimulate and accelerate
cross-disciplinary research in autonomous vehicle safety and efficiency, at a
time when such work is urgently needed. This project will enable researchers in
autonomous hardware, safety, security, and traffic to produce high-confidence
autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.