* 1925598
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Advancing High-speed Networking at UTC for Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Farah Kandah, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 515,663.00

A diverse PI team including researchers and the Office of Information Technology
at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga (UTC) is upgrading the campus
network infrastructure to improve the ability for professors and students to
perform, enhance, and expand R&amp;D activities. This project complements other
significant and ongoing investments/upgrades at UTC to enhance campus intra- and
inter-networking and research computing cyberinfrastructure. UTC's growing
research portfolio of faculty-driven, data-oriented research drives the network
upgrades. 100Gbit/s fiber networking infrastructure, switching, and routing
infrastructure are upgraded by this project. A Science DMZ infrastructure and
Data Transfer Node (DTN) server, both components used for inter-campus
collaborations and tuned for large-scale data transfers, support the emerging
uses of big data and data-centric external
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project upgrades networking to eight
UTC campus buildings representing all four university colleges (Engineering
&amp; Computer Science, Arts &amp; Sciences, The Gary W. Rollins College of
Business, and the College of Health, Education, and Professional Studies), as
well as the Multidisciplinary Research Building (MDRB) and the campus library.
In these buildings, at least fourteen science drivers (projects) on campus
benefit from the proposed infrastructure; several of the projects are either NSF
funded or otherwise externally supported. The co-location of three research
centers plus UTC's research computing facilities in the MDRB adds to the campus
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.