* 1925100
* NRI:INT: Integrating Robotic and AI Technologies to Support Embodied Collaborative Design
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Susan Fussell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,541,230.00

Collaborative design, in which team members work together to determine
requirements, develop design ideas, brainstorm and review physical products, is
common in many industries such as product design, website and interaction
design, and architecture. Collaborative design involves hands-on activities such
as sketching, diagraming, and creating and manipulating physical prototypes.
With the increasing globalization of the workforce, collaborative design is now
often done by virtual teams in which some members may not be physically
collocated with the design space. However, conventional collaboration tools like
video conferencing or shared documents fail to meet the needs of virtual design
teams because these tools are designed to support group activities that do not
involve physical space or objects. This project aims to solve this problem and
better support virtual design teams using human friendly robots to support
distributed hands-on design activities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will
create a "design studio of the future" that integrates human-robot interaction
and autonomous robotics to create a stronger sense of shared space. The studio
will allow members of virtual design teams to engage with physical space and
objects as successfully as members of collocated teams. Specifically, the
project will (a) develop a framework for understanding the technology needs of
virtual design teams; (b) develop and evaluate a set of interface and control
techniques for telepresence robots and manipulators that will support key phases
of the design process; (c) develop and evaluate models and algorithms of robot
autonomy that will make telepresence tools easier for virtual design teams to
use; and (d) integrate and evaluate the techniques and findings in laboratory
and field studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.