* 1925796
* Eco-DAS 3.0: Ecological Dissertations in the Aquatic Sciences: Honolulu, HI - October 2020, 2022, 2024
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Paul Kemp, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 631,549.00

Ecosystems are highly complex. Most ecological research today depends on the
involvement of a team of scientists, each of whom brings special skills and
knowledge to the team. For an ecological scientist, their most important asset
can be an extensive professional network that allows the scientist to tackle
problems that could not possibly be solved alone. Diverse professional networks
mean diverse perspectives on the most important issues of today, and creative
approaches to the science underlying possible solutions. The Ecological
Dissertations in the Aquatic Sciences (Eco-DAS) program brings together recent
PhD recipients in any area of the ecology of water bodies: oceans, estuaries,
lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, or groundwater. Although the highlight of the
program is a week-long symposium at which participants exchange ideas and
develop working partnerships, Eco-DAS participants interact for more than a
year. Before the symposium, participants share their most exciting ideas for a
collaborative manuscript related to aquatic ecology. During the symposium, they
self-organize into working groups that agree to take on one of these ideas; they
also engage in professional development training. After the symposium, the
author teams develop their selected ideas into manuscripts and ultimately
publish their work in an open-access professional publication. The professional
networks developed through Eco-DAS persist well beyond these original projects,
and often lead to new research projects, collaborations, and publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium series encourages and fosters
interdisciplinary collaborations among early career scientists from diverse
subdisciplines, to the benefit of both the science and the researchers. The
symposium participants represent the latest additions to the national research
effort and are likely to become leading scientists in future; Eco-DAS alumni
include recent award recipients, publication editors, and tenured faculty.
Evaluations of the Eco-DAS program provide strong evidence that participation is
likely to increase professional success by expanding the professional network of
participants to include colleagues from diverse disciplines, and by initiating
new collaborations that are likely to promote further collaboration in future.
Each Eco-DAS symposium generates 6-10 published papers, including reviews,
commentary, and original research. &lt;br/&gt;The Eco-DAS program includes the
following components:&lt;br/&gt;-- A diverse group of participants is selected
from an exceptionally well qualified pool of applicants. Applicants must be
within one year of their PhD in a field related to aquatic ecology, and must be
current U.S. residents, working with U.S. scientists, or have plans to conduct
research in the U.S. or with U.S. scientists. Because a diversity of perspective
is an important component of group creativity and productivity, the selection
process will consider the diversity of backgrounds represented among the
participants. An intended added-value will be increased diversity in the
professional networks of participants. &lt;br/&gt;-- Participants begin by
proposing interdisciplinary manuscripts that would depend on developing a team
with complementary expertise. &lt;br/&gt;-- Author teams self-organize during
the symposium around a subset of the offered topics. &lt;br/&gt;-- Mentor-led
discussions, informative panels, and workshops are held during the symposium to
prepare participants for the challenges of academic and non-academic careers in
the aquatic sciences.&lt;br/&gt;-- By the end of the symposium, teams have
developed outlines for the selected manuscripts. &lt;br/&gt;-- The manuscripts
are written after the symposium, and ultimately appear in open access in
professional publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.