* 1925629
* Collaborative Research:  Time Dependence of Seismic Parameters in Hawaii
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 174,766.00

Hawaii is one of the most seismically active regions in the world. For the past
few decades, it has been used as a natural laboratory for studying the
interactions between seismic and magmatic processes. The U.S. Geological Survey
(USGS) Hawaiian Volcano Observatory (HVO) has an extensive network of
instruments to investigate in real-time the ongoing activity on the island of
Hawaii. Yet, much less attention has been paid to seismic-parameter temporal
variations. These variations have considerable potential for quantifying the
activity and possibly forecasting major destructive events. Here, the
researchers calculate seismic parameters for all events in the Hawaii island
recorded over the past 33 years. They analyze their time dependence and examine
both the long-term variations and the short-term changes before and after
significant events. One goal is to evaluate to what extend crustal stress
changes explained by past events are predictive of future large events. The team
also investigates whether there is a long-term evolution in activity. This
project provides support and training for several graduate and undergraduate
students. Its outcomes have direct implications for forecasting seismic and
volcanic events in Hawaii island. The three-year award was co-funded by NSF
Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS) program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to complete a comprehensive search for
temporal variations in seismic parameters and gain new insights into the
interactions between seismic and magmatic processes. The investigated parameters
include seismicity rate, b-value, fault plane solutions, coda Q, velocity and
anisotropy structure, and near-source Vp/Vs ratios. The work exploits digital
seismic data recorded by the USGS HVO seismic stations. It leverages on
available 3-D seismic velocity and attenuation models, earthquake relocations,
and focal solutions provided by prior studies. Results quantify potential
variations in seismic parameters before and after magmatic (eruptions and
intrusions) and non-magmatic (earthquakes and slow-slip) events. They also
evaluate potential long-lasting changes over the past 33
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.