* 1925681
* CC* Team: Great Plains Regional CyberTeam
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* David Swanson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,399,479.00

Advances in science and technology fields are increasingly accomplished as part
of multidisciplinary and multi-institutional collaborations that require complex
cyberinfrastructure. A regional CyberTeam led by the Great Plains Network will
support and advance the computational and data-intensive research across the
region through the development of specific cyberinfrastructure resources,
workforce training, and the development of unique, mutual, and cross-
institutional support methodologies and agreements. The project advances the
adoption and experience of advanced computing and data resources by developing a
model built upon best and emerging practices for cross training and researcher
outreach, pairing an experienced mentor at one institution with a mentee at
another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives are to: 1) Improve campus
awareness and adoption of advanced cyberinfrastructure. 2) Increase the number
of campus research computing and data professionals at mentored institutions,
especially for institutions with small IT staffs with many job duties. 3)
Increase the capabilities of campus cyberinfrastructure resources. 4) Enable
development, deployment, and operation of cyberinfrastructure to make science
efficient, trusted, and reproducible. The CyberTeam is a cross-institutional
team consisting of technical leaders in the region paired with new members of
the workforce, graduate and undergraduate students interested in joining the
cyberinfrastructure workforce, and the institutional research computing
leadership for regional research universities. It provides a model for
distributed support teams to support cyberinfrastructure and aid in the
development of a cyberinfrastructure engineering and facilitation workforce.
Generalized best practices for a regional team of CI mentors including specific
mentorship plans, retrospectives, and reference materials are
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.