* 1925085
* NRI: INT: Wearable Robots for the Community: Personalized Assistance using Human-in-the-loop Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,499,696.00

This project will advance the progress of customizable soft robotic exosuits for
seamless assistance in everyday activities, to mitigate impairment or to augment
normal functionality. Soft robotic exosuits are a new class of functional
clothing that apply mechanical assistance to wearers' joints in parallel with
their muscles. Millions of Americans with neurologically-based walking
impairments, such as the nearly seven million people living post-stroke, could
benefit from the unobtrusive assistance that exosuits can provide during
walking. Similarly, healthy individuals who carry heavy loads over long
distances (e.g., first responders or soldiers) could benefit from using exosuit
technology to partially alleviate their burden. Synchronizing mechanical
assistance to the wearer's natural rhythm is essential to realizing the
potential of these devices. The soft robotic exosuits created in this project
will monitor the wearer's walking pattern using body-worn sensors, apply machine
learning methods to personalize the robotic assistance pattern, and continuously
update that assistance pattern as the wearer's gait changes. In contrast,
current methods rely on expert clinicians and technicians to manually tune
assistance patterns. This project will contribute new knowledge to advance the
national health and prosperity. The multidisciplinary research team includes
roboticists, movement scientists, and clinicians, who will work closely with
persons poststroke in laboratory and clinical
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work developing human-in-the loop
optimization strategies for exoskeletons suggests that it is possible to lower
the metabolic cost of walking by treating the exosuit control as an optimization
problem, with direct measurements of metabolic cost serving as the objective.
However, recording such measurements require bulky devices that interfere with
normal breathing, meaning the method cannot currently work in everyday
environments. Additionally, lowering the metabolic cost of walking is not the
only goal of exosuits in persons poststroke, whose gait is characterized by slow
movement and compensations such as hip hiking, circumduction, and vaulting.
Successful human-in-the-loop optimization in clinical populations will need to
address all these factors, not just metabolic cost. An initial basic-science
exploration will find effective proxies for metabolic cost in healthy
populations and develop a multi-objective function in people poststroke. In both
cases, the objective function must be unobtrusive to measure, accurate, and
responsive to changes in exosuit control. A second implementation phase will use
human-in-the-loop optimization to automatically adapt control parameters of
portable systems assisting healthy individuals and people
poststroke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.