* 1925552
* Collaborative Research: Origins of Southeast Asian Rainforests from Paleobotany and Machine Learning
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Maria Gandolfo-Nixon, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 06/30/2024
* USD 475,002.00

Fossil leaves are the most abundant record of ancient plant life and millions of
specimens are contained in museum collections around Fossil leaves are the most
abundant record of ancient plant life, and millions of specimens are contained
in museum collections around the world, with more discoveries every year.
Nevertheless, leaf fossils alone currently provide limited information about the
evolution of regional and global plant communities because individual leaf
characteristics from a single plant species can vary widely, and detailed, time-
consuming examination of each leaf fossil might still not connect it to its true
biological family. This project addresses the problem in two ways. First will be
the development of the Virtual Paleobotany Assistant (VPA), an artificial
intelligence tool that will use machine learning techniques to rapidly analyze
leaf characteristics to assign individual fossils to plant families and orders.
The VPA, together with more traditional methods of paleobotany, will then be
used to interpret the origins of the incredibly diverse tropical rain forests
that now exist in Southeast Asia. These plant communities evolved during times
of major continental movements and have connections to the former supercontinent
of Gondwana, the Indian subcontinent, and Eurasia. Ascertaining the evolutionary
and biogeographic pathways that led to the assembly of these tropical forests
will help in preserving this important natural resource as the regional human
population burgeons. The VPA will be made freely available on the internet and
mobile platforms, enabling paleobotanists around the world to make discoveries
far beyond this project. The unique collaboration between paleontologists and
machine-learning experts will create extremely fertile ground for
interdisciplinary advances, while catalyzing new international partnerships and
student opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses two of the
most difficult challenges in paleobotany, fossil leaf identification and the
fossil history of Southeast Asian (Malesian) rainforests. Decoding the
biological affinities of leaf fossils holds central significance for the
improved knowledge of plant evolution, biogeography, and paleoclimate. This
project will use deep learning on image databases of extant and fossil leaves to
develop the first application (the Virtual Paleobotany Assistant, VPA) for
computer-assisted identifications of leaf fossils to plant families and orders.
The living floras of Southeast Asia are composed of a stunningly complex
juxtaposition of plant lineages that diversified after arriving from disparate
sources, including Gondwana (fossils to be studied in Patagonia and Australia),
the Indian Plate (India and Pakistan), and Eurasia (South China, Indochina,
Malay Archipelago). However, the diverse biogeographic components remain poorly
understood due to limited paleobotanical data in many of the source areas. Many
widely cited hypotheses are weakly corroborated from fossils; paleobotany and
machine vision will coordinate to reveal the identities of fossil plants,
correlate them to the geologic time scale, and re-interpret Malesia's floristic
history. The influx of new paleobotanical data will test fundamental hypotheses
about the relative contributions to Southeast Asian rainforest floras from
different source areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.