* 1925741
* CCRI: ENS: Machine Learning Democratization via a Linked, Annotated Repository of Datasets
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sameer Singh, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,792,952.00

Machine learning (ML) is one of the fastest growing research areas within
computer science and is enabling a multitude of new applications that span
medicine, the sciences, engineering, business, and more. A cornerstone in the
steady progress of machine learning over the past 30 years has been regular and
continuous systematic empirical comparisons of different ML algorithms on
testbed ML datasets. However, as the numbers of ML research papers, algorithms,
and datasets all continue to grow rapidly, ML researchers are faced with
information overload, making it near impossible to keep track of the latest
performance advancements in a systematic manner. In turn, this creates
significant inefficiencies for researchers, slowing down the pace of advances in
new ML research and applications. This project will address these issues by
building upon the success of the existing University of California - Irvine
(UCI) Machine Learning Repository, a well-known and widely-used online public
repository of ML testbed datasets that ML researchers use to evaluate and track
progress in ML algorithm development. This project will extend the Repository
with additional information about the datasets and steps to replicate the
results; both can significantly amplify the productivity of ML researchers. The
project will do so by harnessing significant ML community engagement and
outreach in its design and operation, and will also provide training to students
from different backgrounds on how to engage with, and contribute to, machine
learning research. Given that ML algorithms are now being applied to prediction
problems in areas as diverse as climate science, judicial decisions, and
personalized medicine, the advances in scientific reproducibility from this
project, in terms of systematic evaluation of ML algorithms, have potentially
far-reaching societal and scientific benefits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
existing UCI Machine Learning Repository directly impacts tens of thousands of
ML researchers and students, by providing a standard and widely-cited set of
testbed datasets to support both research and education. This project will
involve building the next version of the Repository that will provide rich
metadata for ML datasets, linking datasets to research papers and automatically
extracting metadata and performance data in leaderboard style. The new
Repository will also provide systematic support for reproducible science by
allowing users to readily validate empirical ML results on testbed datasets.
This project will lead to research advances in two aspects. The first aspect
will be the development of new methods and algorithms for information extraction
of metadata from the scientific literature. The second aspect will result from
improvements in the way ML researchers carry out their experimental work.
Providing tools to support broader, more systematic, and more reproducible
evaluations of ML algorithms, will lead to ML advances that are more robust,
better calibrated, and more likely to operate well when used in real-world
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.