* 1925992
* Collaborative Research: MRA: Seasonality of Photosynthesis of Temperate and Boreal Conifer Forests Across North America
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Barry Logan, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 123,206.00

The climate of the Earth is warming due to increased carbon dioxide (CO2) in the
atmosphere, a result primarily of combustion of fossil fuels to provide energy
for human activities. Forests worldwide are helping to mitigate the atmospheric
increase. Forests absorb more CO2 now than in prior decades, slowing the
increase and benefiting society. In response to warming, the timing and
magnitude of photosynthesis by land plants is changing in many locations, making
it difficult to predict how forest carbon cycle feedbacks may affect future
climate. Satellite remote sensing indicates that deciduous forests across North
America have generally responded to environmental change by extending their
growing season, with earlier spring leaf flush and later fall leaf drop.
However, we do not understand how evergreen coniferous forests respond to
warming because of limitations of traditional remote sensing techniques.
Scientists also need better understanding of physiological processes that allow
conifers to withstand cold winters. This study will link observations of
reflected and emitted light from conifer forests at scales from leaf to forest
canopy to satellite, to focus on seasonality of photosynthesis by conifer
forests in space and time. The research will utilize cutting-edge scientific
infrastructure built by the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) in
forests from Florida to Alaska. This work will document the variations in
physiology that occur in forests experiencing winters of varying severity, to
refine and test models of photosynthesis to predict the critically important
role of forests in mitigating future environmental change. This project will
benefit ecological scientists by improving techniques in satellite remote
sensing to quantify seasonality of conifer photosynthesis across North America.
The project will engage the public by conducting science outreach efforts at the
Natural History Museum of Utah, providing interactive resources to help visitors
connect changes observed in their backyard to similar ecosystems across the
continent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants are frequently exposed to more sunlight
than they can use for photosynthesis, even when weather conditions are
favorable, and without protective mechanisms, tissue damage would result. Plants
have evolved elaborate physiological processes to safely dissipate excess
sunlight energy. During the growing season, this involves light-dependent,
reversible cycling of carotenoid pigments of the xanthophyll cycle, a highly-
conserved photoprotective process across the plant kingdom. However, during cold
winters, the xanthophyll pigments participate in an alternate, poorly-understood
light-independent process, remaining in photoprotective mode during both the day
and the night. Both photoprotective types involve seasonal pigment and
physiological changes that alter leaf color, and affect fluorescence emission by
chlorophyll molecules. Using a variety of tower- and satellite-based
instruments, these physiological changes can be detected via light reflected
from vegetation (as the photochemical reflectance index, the
chlorophyll/carotenoid index, and others) and via solar-induced fluorescence.
The project's overall objective is to quantify spatial and temporal variability
in forest photosynthetic capacity of conifer forests across North America, using
NEON and other infrastructure. We will link observations of vegetation
reflectance and fluorescence with high temporal and spatial resolution (tower-
based spectroscopy) to tower-based carbon fluxes, conifer-needle-level
photosynthesis and pigment composition. These data will be assimilated to refine
and test models of seasonal forest photosynthesis and provide new tools to
launch a continental-scale observational framework to quantify photosynthetic
response to environmental change over the 30-year NEON
lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.