* 1925596
* CC* Compute: Accelerating Computational Research for Engineering and Science (ACRES) at Clarkson University, A Campus Cluster Proposal
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Brian Helenbrook, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 396,950.00

Clarkson University is building a computational cluster (ACRES: Accelerating
Computation Research for Engineering and Science) to support data and
computationally intensive projects aligned with Clarkson's four
interdisciplinary research themes: Data Analytics, Healthy World Solutions,
Advanced Materials Development, and Next Generation Healthcare. ACRES
facilitates the conduct of high-impact, collaborative research that requires
access to high-performance computing (HPC) resources, enables research currently
not practical/feasible, and also supports student-learning opportunities through
credit-bearing courses, undergraduate research, and an existing NSF REU site
focusing on HPC. As a campus resource, ACRES is made available to any faculty
member or student at the University according to queueing policies implemented
to ensure fair-access. And, ACRES supports Clarkson's increased focus on
computational research and a cluster hire of computationally active faculty.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACRES compute cluster replaces an existing, five-year-
old high-performance compute cluster whose computational capacity provided 1.05M
core-h/yr. Research need for computational capacity has grown to an identified
total of 8.5M core-h/yr. ACRES is sized to meet current demands and modest near-
term growth with unused computational capacity being shared via the Open Science
Grid (OSG) to benefit the broader scientific community. This new computational
resource provides 9.8M core-h/year through 1120 cores, high-speed Infiniband
interconnect, four NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs, and 40 TB of scratch
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.