* 1925030
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Mesh Of Robots on a Pneumatic Highway (MORPH):  An Untethered, Human-Safe, Shape-Morphing Robotic Platform
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sean Follmer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,048,354.00

This project will create and explore a robotic architecture consisting of a
compliant, shape-changing, truss-like structure. A truss typically consists of
triangles of load-bearing members, each of which can resist tension and
compression and each of which is pinned to other members at both ends. In this
concept, the structural members are inflated tubes and the nodes are a network
of simple robots that can travel along the tube lengths. By their motion, the
networked node-robots can cause large shape changes in the overall truss
structure, allowing the same robot to reconfigure itself for diverse functions,
including different modes of locomotion and manipulation. In addition to the
ability to change shape, movement of the node-robots also enables dynamic
functionality. Because the structural members are compliant inflatable tubes,
the entire structure can be made safe for collaborative activities with human
partners. In contrast to some pneumatic robot designs the inflatable tubes
nominally maintain a constant volume, hence the system does not need to be
tethered to a high capacity pressure source such as a large pump or air tank.
This project incorporates strengths from the fields of soft robotics, collective
robotics, and truss-based robotics, with the potential to overcome limitations
of these individual research areas. The approach offers the potential for
enabling ubiquitous, human-safe co-robots for applications such as a shape-
changing personal mobility device that could act, as necessary, as a walker, a
sit-to-stand aid, a fall-guarding device, or a stair aid. Similarly the approach
could be used in industrial applications, such as a multi-function co-robot for
construction workers, changing shape as needed to help lift, align, hold, prop,
or push. Finally, this versatile and human-friendly concept is well-suited as an
education and development platform for non-experts, for example as a hands-on
learning tool for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is organized
around three objectives, each requiring increasing complexity and functionality:
1) locomotion across non-flat terrain, 2) crawling, climbing, and jumping, and
3) engulfing, manipulating, and applying large forces to objects in the
environment. The project will evaluate the results with respect to the goals of
each objective through hypothesis-driven, controlled experiments in real-world
scenarios with quantitative metrics and statistical analyses of the results. New
fundamental knowledge is anticipated in the realm of physically networked
distributed robots, adding new understanding about the scalability of such
systems. The project will also advance knowledge surrounding customizability of
robotic systems to specific environments and tasks, exploring optimal control
and shape change of a given topology. Additionally, the development of
controllable friction materials for large-scale soft robots will provide new
understanding of interactions between soft robots and their environments.
Finally, the development of a new paradigm of constant-volume pneumatic robotics
constitutes a groundbreaking conceptual advance to the field of soft robotics,
which will greatly enhance the practicality of soft mobile robots, by
eliminating the need for an air supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.