* 1925497
* SaTC: Expanding Research Frontiers with a Next-Generation Anonymous Communication Experimentation (ACE) Framework
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rob Jansen, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,594,091.00

The ability to expand research frontiers through system deployment has been
hindered by a lack of experimentation frameworks that can be used to safely and
accurately evaluate new algorithms and network protocols at scale. This is
particularly true for anonymous communication systems, which are generally
understood to be among the most secure ways to communicate online, but are
difficult to experiment with because (1) they are designed to be resistent to
observation and (2) experiments must be crafted very carefully to ensure they do
not endanger the systems' users. This project develops the Anonymous
Communication Experimentation (ACE) framework, a novel open-source software
platform that enables privacy researchers to better understand and experiment
with anonymity systems. ACE supports the construction of large, realistic, and
high fidelity simulations of anonymity networks. ACE allows researchers to run
existing software on top of a virtualized network, allowing them to safely and
accurately evaluate the effectiveness of new attacks and defenses, and
experiment with new protocols and algorithms before they are deployed in live
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to promote the development of
new algorithms and techniques for more robust and private communication by
providing a framework for development and testing. ACE significantly advances
the state-of-the-art in network simulation by providing: (1) an application
emulation component to facilitate the execution of language-agnostic processes
in support of website fingerprinting and censorship circumvention research; (2)
a lightweight network simulation component that allows dynamic changes in
support of location- and network-aware anonymous communication; (3) an
interposition component to hook together the emulated processes with the
simulated network; (4) a deterministic simulated virtual kernel that emulates
Linux system calls; and (5) parallel and distributed execution components to
ensure that ACE is accessible to universities and research labs that lack large
server infrastructure. We will also develop a user interface, a toolkit to model
inputs and visualize outputs, and a data repository to share and archive
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.