* 1925837
* MSA- Will Ongoing Tree Loss Alter Connectivity Among NEON Domains: Evaluating Detectability of Ecoclimate Teleconnections to Enable Use of NEON Data
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Abigail Swann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,761.00

Scientists have shown theoretically that the death of trees in one place can
affect weather patterns across continents with impacts on ecosystems far away.
This concept, called ecoclimate teleconnection, is like El Nino, where climate
in North America is altered by warm water in the Pacific Ocean thousands of
miles away. This project will test whether ecoclimate teleconnection from Amazon
deforestation and tree death in western North America are detectable in far-away
observations of temperature or rainfall. Knowing how these connections work and
how large an affect they have is critical for making well informed decisions
about how we use land for agriculture and pasture and for coordinating global
efforts to store carbon by growing forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
hypothesis for this project, based on recent work quantifying the theoretical
magnitude of ecoclimate teleconnections?where ecosystems in one location impact
climate and thus ecosystems in another, is that "Ecoclimate Teleconnections
driven by large forest loss events are detectable in observational networks." To
test this hypothesis researchers will (1) generate hypotheses of the climate and
ecosystem impacts resulting from historical forest loss events, (2) test whether
ecoclimate teleconnections are detectable in observations using historical
observations, and (3) assess the ability to detect future events using data from
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). This research will advance NEON
science by demonstrating how the network can be used for detection of ecoclimate
teleconnection events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.