* 1925563
* RIDIR: Developing and Deploying the Criminal Justice Administrative Records System
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Keith Finlay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,659,718.00

The Criminal Justice Administrative Records System (CJARS) is a project created
to address gaps in the existing data infrastructure of the U.S. criminal justice
system. The U.S. criminal justice system has six million individuals under
correctional supervision and requires hundreds of billions of dollars in public
expenditures. Scholars and policymakers have consistently called for robust,
scientific analysis quantifying the benefits and costs of justice practices, yet
this goal has been fundamentally constrained by limitations including a lack of
data integration across agencies and jurisdictions as well as an inability to
measure outcomes in social and economic domains. CJARS addresses these gaps by
collecting administrative data from criminal justice agencies across the U.S.,
harmonizing event data into a common national format, and linking person-level
records to form longitudinal histories of life course interactions with the
justice system. In partnership with the U.S. Census Bureau, CJARS data will be
made available in Federal Statistical Research Data Centers, where criminal
justice data can be integrated with a wide range of socioeconomic survey and
administrative data, and thus support a new generation of innovative research on
the U.S. criminal justice system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
three areas of activity: (1) preparation of CJARS for external research access
by benchmarking it to existing statistical series and performing advanced
validation checks based on integrated criminal and non-criminal microdata; (2)
production of novel research on the U.S. justice system that illustrates the
breadth of possibilities enabled by the CJARS platform; and (3) development of
access infrastructure and launching of outreach activities to engage a large and
diverse user base. The research includes studies of the prevalence of criminal
justice interactions across the U.S. and the methodology of harmonizing
administrative records. Outreach activities will raise awareness of data and
research opportunities, facilitate new research proposals, and maximize the
scientific value of the infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.