* 1925790
* Fracture and Fatigue of Liquid Crystal Elastomers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Lihua Jin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 336,565.00

This project will investigate fracture of liquid crystal elastomers under a
single or multiple cycles of loading. A liquid crystal elastomer is an elastomer
with liquid crystal molecules on a polymer network aligning in a certain
direction. Liquid crystal elastomers find broad applications in stimuli-
responsive actuators and soft robotics. Therefore, understanding their fracture
behavior and preventing their failure have practical significance. Studying
nonlinear fracture mechanics of liquid crystal elastomers, which involves
coupling between stretching of polymer networks and reorientation of liquid
crystal molecules, is also fundamentally unique and important. This project has
broader impacts in education and technology. The research work will be included
into a new graduate class, integrated into research projects for graduate and
undergraduate students, and developed into demonstrations for K-12 outreach
activities. In addition, understanding fracture of liquid crystal elastomers
will have long-term impacts in the fields of stimuli-responsive actuators and
soft robotics by preventing failure of liquid crystal elastomers during
operation and designing durable liquid crystal elastomers for reliable
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to establish a
nonlinear fracture mechanics theory for liquid crystal elastomers, and
experimentally characterize their fracture and fatigue processes and properties.
This project will use both simulations and experiments to determine the crack-
tip fields, energy release rates, and fracture energies of liquid crystal
elastomers under a single or multiple cycles of loading. A viscoelastic field
theory of liquid crystal elastomers coupling the fields of stress and liquid
crystal orientation, along with the cohesive zone model will be established and
used to computationally calculate the time-dependent crack-tip fields and energy
release rates, to simulate crack propagation, and to determine the fracture
energies of polydomain and monodomain liquid crystal elastomers. Experimentally,
mode I and mode III fracture energies of liquid crystal elastomers will be
measured by the pure shear and trousers tests, and the crack-tip fields will be
observed using digital image correlation and transmission circular
polariscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.