* 1925577
* Collaborative Research: The risks of safety: xylem anatomy and tradeoffs between reproduction, growth, and drought survival in conifers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jarmila Pittermann, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2024
* USD 417,579.00

Increasingly severe and frequent droughts threaten tree health in many regions.
Key factors that affect whether a tree survives a drought include the anatomy of
the cells (xylem) that conduct water and make up the wood, and how the tree
invests resources toward wood growth versus reproduction versus defending itself
from insects. These factors can all vary between individual trees. This project
aims to improve scientific understanding of how investment of carbon resources
affects survival in a severe drought by combining measurements of all these
functions. The researchers will make use of forest plots in the Sierra Nevada
mountains of California, many of which exhibited high tree death in the historic
2012-2016 drought. A small cylinder of wood will be removed from living and dead
trees to measure overall growth, xylem cell anatomy, carbon in the wood, and
production of defensive resins. Live twigs will be used to measure other traits
related to water movement through the xylem. Cones produced by living pines will
also be counted for several years to compare allocation to reproduction to
amount of wood growth. These measurements will be combined to assess how growth
relates to temperature and precipitation (climate) and how growth, xylem
anatomy, and defense affect the chance that a tree will die in a drought, as
well as whether these relationships differ between locations or species. These
results will in turn be combined with the analysis of growth versus reproduction
to identify which resource investment strategies work best under different
drought scenarios, helping to identify conifer seed sources that will perform
well under future climates. The project will provide research experience and
training in the collection, processing, and/or analysis of dendrochronology and
cell anatomy data for PhD students and undergraduates. The investigators will
collaborate with the CalTeach program to develop learning modules that teach
students about tree physiology and forest ecology while reinforcing other STEM
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two drivers of tree mortality during drought
that have received the most theoretical attention are hydraulic failure and
carbon depletion/starvation, but biotic agents are also an important cause of
death. This project will A) determine the relationships between tree radial
growth, xylem anatomy, and resin duct production and drought-related mortality
risk in seven species of Sierra Nevada conifers, B) confirm whether thicker
xylem walls consistently embody more carbon resources, C) test whether there are
tradeoffs between cone production and carbon investment and embolism resistance
in the stem in pines, and D) model the lifetime fitness consequences of
different levels of investment in overall growth, tracheid walls, resin ducts,
and reproduction under different levels of drought stress. Examining multiple
traits through a carbon-allocation lens will also enable connection of carbon
allocation in the stem to potential tradeoffs with seed production. Results will
be an important step in modeling forest dynamics in drought-prone forests in a
multigenerational eco-evolutionary manner. The findings of this study will help
inform efforts to identify conifer seed sources that will perform well under
future climates by providing evidence for the real-world consequences of traits
such as hydraulic safety or resin production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.