* 1925709
* CCRI: Planning: Establishing A Hand-Gesture Research Platform for Behavior Biometrics and Cognitive Robotics (HGRP)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Dijiang Huang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 03/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The hand is one of the most complex and beautiful pieces of natural engineering
in the human body, and it represents a triumph of complex engineering,
exquisitely evolved to perform a range of tasks. Hand-gestures have been used
for many areas and how to model hand-gestures has broad and profound impact on
addressing the nation's priorities and societal needs, e.g., manipulators and
co-robot in manufacturing, natural human-computer interaction for virtual
reality, wearable platforms in consumer electronics, hand-gesture biometrics in
cybersecurity, etc. In this project, one of the research goals is to build a
hand-gesture research platform, Hand-Gesture Research Platform (HGRP). HGRP
targets at enabling researchers to easily access various hand-gesture data to
validate their hand-gesture recognition models, benchmark the performance of
newly developed algorithms, and compare with research outcomes from others.
Moreover, HGRP is used to gather research communities' feedback based on
existing cutting-edge hand-gesture research to prioritize the need on
establishing a hand-gesture focused computing research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HGRP framework is based on a cloud
computing platform and is used to enable research capabilities in the following
areas: (a) hand-gesture biometrics; (b) cognitive Robotics; and (c) programmable
interfaces for gesture-based data processing and visualization. HGRP is composed
by the following salient features:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Data collection based
on two major types of sensors: (a) motion detection sensors, e.g., wearable
sensors such as watch, wrist band, on figure sensors, data motion gloves,
infrared motion detection sensors, etc., and (b) video sensors such as leap
motion sensors, video recorders, etc. The detected hand-gesture data is sent to
data storage for processing and storing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*Data are
collected and stored on an objective storage service, and frequently used data
is stored in memory storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;*A GPU-based private cloud is
established to allow researchers to implement well- known hand-gesture data
processing models and establish benchmarking models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HGRP
also allows researchers to submit computation tasks for evaluations and
comparative studies. HGRP provides a web-based data collection, processing,
sharing, and storing APIs that allow researchers remotely to access the hand-
gesture repository for data retrieval, processing, sharing, storing through web
services APIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.