* 1925343
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Muscle Ultrasound Sensing for Intuitive Control of Robotic Leg Prostheses
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Nicholas Fey, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scheidt
* 03/31/2021
* USD 578,233.00

The research objective of this project is to enable volitional control over
lower-limb prostheses through the integration of sonomyographic sensing - the
ultrasound imaging of amputated (i.e., residual) limb muscle morphology - to
control the Utah Lightweight Leg. This powered prosthetic leg is comprised of
powered ankle and knee modules, and is roughly half the weight of contemporary
technologies. The project team will use sonomyographic sensors in combination
with mechanical sensors to infer the user's intent in anticipation of ambulation
mode or joint motion, for example locomotor transitions from walking over level
ground to ramps or stairs. The team will then perform human subject experiments
comparing the ability of participants with transfemoral amputation to ambulate
with and without various sonomyographic control algorithms enabled. If
successful, the project will have positive impact on national health and welfare
by improving the lives of individuals with amputation in terms of their
independence and ambulation abilities, and by mitigating undesirable secondary
effects of amputation such as a fear of falling and long-term joint health.
Additional broader impacts of the work include enhanced undergraduate and
graduate research experiences for veterans and underrepresented minorities, as
well as outreach activities to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robotic leg
prostheses can overcome the limitations of conventional passive prostheses by
generating net-positive energy during the gait cycle and actively regulating
joint motion. However, scientific barriers must be overcome for robotic leg
prosthesis to safely and effectively operate in real-world settings. The goal of
this project is to fill the knowledge gap regarding the integration of the
user's volition in the control of lightweight robotic ankle and knee prostheses.
The research team will measure muscle contractions of the user's residual limb
using wearable ultrasound probes. Specific objectives of this project are: 1) to
identify optimal design guidelines to integrate sonomyographic sensing into
state-of-the-art powered knee-ankle prostheses; 2) to determine specific
algorithms that best anticipate the user's intention to perform different
ambulation modes in a timely, accurate, and reliable manner; and 3) to
understand how to optimally combine information gathered from sonomyography and
mechanical sensors to control a robotic leg prosthesis within specific
ambulation modes. Algorithms will be implemented on a lightweight robotic ankle
and knee prosthesis to evaluate the hypothesis that providing users with
anticipatory volitional control will lead to enhanced performance in complex and
uncertain environments, thereby fostering seamless integration of robotic
prostheses with human users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.