* 1925281
* NRI: INT: A New Paradigm for Geometric Reasoning through Structure from Category
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Laszlo Jeni, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 473,699.00

The task of a robot determining the 3D shape and pose of an object is critical
to the advancement of generally deployed collaborative robotics. Current
artificial intelligence (AI) still struggles with such tasks. Until now the
problem of inferring an object's 3D pose and shape (i.e., geometric reasoning)
through AI has largely been treated as a 3D supervised learning problem. That
is, the AI is given 2D images with corresponding 3D labels to learn. These 3D
labels are costly and error prone to obtain at a large scale, acting as an
intrinsic barrier to the advancement of geometric reasoning within robotics. In
this project, the research team advocates a new paradigm for geometric reasoning
that requires no 3D supervision - using a mathematical framework called
"structure from category". Success will result in autonomous systems such as
vehicles, robots, and drones with dramatically enhanced perception and planning
abilities to navigate their way in 3D world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep neural
networks (DNNs) - the heart of most AI systems in robotics - are currently used
like black boxes. It is hard to instill them explicitly with real-world
knowledge; instead they learn implicitly through labelled examples. This becomes
a problem when such examples are not available in abundance. This research aims
to shift this paradigm for AI from an opaque black-box to a transparent "glass-
box", to facilitate the principled inclusion of explicit constraints and priors
such as geometry. In this project, the research team has a novel way around this
impasse, by reinterpreting the nonlinearities within a DNN as hierarchical
sparsity constraints. Using this approach, the research team advocates for a
method of inferring 3D shape and pose solely from 2D labels, dramatically
improving the ability of modern DNNs to perform effective geometric reasoning at
scale across large amounts of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.