* 1925487
* Collaborative Research:  Repeated Adaptive Radiation in the Coevolutionary History of Birds and Feather Lice
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Kevin Johnson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 322,715.00

This project uses Avian feather lice as a model system to better understand how
ecological interactions shape evolutionary patterns. Avian feather lice have
repeatedly evolved particular morphologies, they live on different parts of the
host's body and they differ in how they escape host defense. For example, some
species of lice have evolved to be very thin and narrow and can fit between the
barbs of the wing feathers where they cannot be easily removed, while others
have evolved large mandibles to bite down on the feathers. The purpose of this
study is to better understand the process of how these repeated adaptations have
occurred in response to interactions with their hosts. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will involve extensive training of three graduate students and a postdoc in both
molecular and morphological analysis and support further development of the
software aTRAM. A module for undergraduate education will be developed in
collaboration with NSF funded Biodiversity Literacy in Undergraduate Education
(BLUE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To study repeated evolutionary
adaptation this study will use genomic, morphological, and species interaction
data to elucidate the pattern and processes underlying repeated co-evolutionary
events. The main objectives are to 1) Sequence whole genomes of 280 species of
feather lice to determine the number of repeated adaptive radiations in this
group; 2) Use morphological measurements from both CT scanned and slide mounted
specimens to examine morphological convergence with each ecomorph; 3) Use these
sequenced genomes to identify genes with signatures of selection that are
associated with ecomorph transitions; and 4) Compare the phylogeny of the lice
with that of their avian hosts to evaluate whether ecomorph transitions occur
more often at major host switching events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.