* 1925863
* Collaborative Research: Do arc-continent collisions in the tropics set the Earth's climate state?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Oliver Jagoutz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2024
* USD 443,175.00

Over its history, Earth has experienced warm ice-free and cold glacial climates,
but it is unknown if transitions between these background climate states were
the result of changes in CO2 sources or sinks. On these multi-million year
geological timescales, CO2 enters the ocean and atmosphere primarily by volcanic
outgassing and is removed primarily though the chemical erosion of rocks, which
delivers calcium and magnesium via rivers to the ocean where they react with CO2
to form carbonate. It is hypothesized that the tectonic closure of ocean basins
and formation of mountains at equatorial latitudes could drive cooling by
creating topography and eroding highly soluble oceanic rocks in the warm, wet
tropics. This process increases global weatherability, thereby increasing
Earth's potential to sequester CO2 in carbonates through chemical erosion. The
investigators aim to test the hypothesis that changes in global weatherability
have controlled the Earth's background climate state with coupled geological,
geochemical, and modelling studies. This broader impact of this work will
benefit society by generating and disseminating knowledge about geological
climate change at both the K-12 and college level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers have developed a global database of arc-continent collisions through
the Phanerozoic, which mark the closure of former ocean basins, and
reconstructed their position with state-of-the-art paleogeographic models. The
results from this analysis revealed a temporal coincidence between the maximum
global extent of arc-continent collision in the tropics and the occurrence of
every major glacial period in the Phanerozoic. The investigators will refine
geological constraints and tectonic reconstructions in five critical belts.
Through these case studies, the researchers will generate thermochronological
data and refine the exhumation history of New Guinea and construct a new
paleogeographic model for suturing in the Alpine-Himalaya belt. The
investigators will also acquire new stratigraphic, geochronological, geological,
petrographic, geochemical, and paleomagnetic data along Permo-Carboniferous
sutures from Mexico to South America, Ordovician sutures in the northern
Appalachian, and Neoproterozoic sutures in the Arabian-Nubian Shield. These
field and laboratory data will be integrated with paleogeographic, weathering,
and climate models to develop estimates for the change in pCO2 resulting from
arc-continent collisions in the tropics utilizing the GEOCLIM model framework.
This framework integrates climate models run at varying pCO2 with global
weathering models such that the variable climatology can be used to estimate the
effect of changes in global weatherability model on long-term steady-state pCO2
levels. In this framework, the investigators will perform sensitivity tests to
isolate the effects of specific parameters such as lithology or topography. The
researchers will further calibrate these models with source-to-sink cation
studies in modern and paleo ophiolite watersheds. Finally, they will develop
statistical methods to evaluate the strength of correlation and test
hypothesized causal mechanisms for environmental change. Through this research
the investigators will directly train a postdoctoral researcher, 5 PhD students
and numerous undergraduate research assistants. To disseminate this basic
research, the team will hold public seminars and workshops with K-12 teachers,
and construct classes on Tectonics and Climate with online course materials,
both at the high-school and undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.