* 1925090
* ngVLA Design &amp; Development: FY2020
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Anthony Beasley, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 09/30/2023
* USD 25,799,515.00

The National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) has been working with the
astronomical community on the development of the next-generation Very Large
Array (ngVLA). The ngVLA is envisaged as an interferometric array with ten times
greater sensitivity and spatial resolution than the current VLA, Very Long
Baseline Array (VLBA) and the Atacama Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA),
operating in the frequency range of 1.2 - 116 GHz. This project will end in the
conceptual design down-select for each major sub-system within the array, and
allow the transition to the preliminary design of these subsystems. Critical
technical development and risk reduction activities will be included to ensure
that novel leading-edge technologies that may reduce cost or improve performance
are considered in the down-select. The two-year project ends with a proposal for
MREFC candidacy, and a system design that is ready for an NSF-led conceptual
design review (consistent with the NSF Major Facilities
Manual).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The ngVLA will be a
transformative, multi-disciplinary scientific instrument that will open a new
window on the Universe through ultra-sensitive imaging of thermal line and
continuum emission down to milliarcsecond-scale resolution, as well as
unprecedented broad-band continuum polarimetric imaging of non-thermal
processes. These capabilities are the only means with which to address a broad
range of critical questions in modern astronomy, including direct imaging of
Earth-like planet formation in the terrestrial zone, studies of dust-obscured
star formation and the cosmic baryon cycle down to parsec-scales out to the
Virgo cluster, undertaking a cosmic census of the molecular gas which fuels star
formation back to first light and cosmic reionization, and novel techniques for
exploring temporal phenomena on timescales from milliseconds to years in this
new era of multi-messenger astrophysics. The ngVLA will be optimized for
observations in the spectral region between the superb performance of ALMA at
sub-mm wavelengths, and the future Phase I Square Kilometer Array (SKA-1) at
decimeter and longer wavelengths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: The
ngVLA project offers opportunities for student training, increased participation
of underrepresented groups, tangible benefits to the wider U.S. research
community (e.g., data archive access and the commercialization of new
technologies), and positive impacts to the environment and economy of the
communities that host the facility. The proposed effort will provide
supplemental funding to the NRAO Office of Diversity and Inclusion (ODI) and
Education and Public Outreach (EPO) departments to expand their core activities
to include the ngVLA. Programs that will be positively impacted include the
African American Teaching Fellows (AATF), the National Astronomy Consortium
(NAC) undergraduate program, and the National and the Inter-National Exchange
(NINE) program. In addition to the broader participation and educational
impacts, the ngVLA project will have a direct impact on fostering a revitalized
U.S. high-tech manufacturing hub in the southwest, with precision machine
fabrication and manufacturing in New Mexico, Arizona, and
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.