* 1925623
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Gate City Research Network - A Multi-Institution Science DMZ
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Jeff Whitworth, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 499,912.00

The Gate City Research Network (GCRN) is a collaboration between the University
of North Carolina at Greensboro (UNCG) and North Carolina A&amp;T State
University (NC A&amp;T) to create a multi-institutional science DMZ supporting
research activities through a dedicated, low-latency, high-speed research and
education network connection. The GCRN enhances researcher access to high
performance computing (HPC) resources supporting the competitive and innovative
research environment state-wide and regionally by connecting the Southeastern
Nanotechnology Infrastructure Corridor through the Joint School of Nanoscience
and Nanoengineering (JSNN).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GCRN, connected to the
North Carolina Research and Education Network and Internet2, provides a
dedicated, separate research network to overcome the latency challenges imposed
on the enterprise networks that support the administrative and growing
entertainment service traffic. The addition of a high-speed data transfer node
facilitates fast transfers of large data to federated HPC environments at
partner institutions and provides the foundation to enhance the end-to-end data
flow processes from research instrumentation to analysis, simulation and
modeling computational resources, significantly increasing the fundamental
research capacity in disciplines such as chemistry, nano-engineering, nano-,
computer-, and data science. The GCRN is committed to producing open access
design, sustainability and governance documentation, use and performance data,
and testing and operations protocols in support of developing a 21st-century
data capable workforce and serving as a model for a scalable and efficient
multi-institutional science DMZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.