* 1925737
* CCRI: Medium: DNS, Identity, and Internet Naming for Experimentation and Research (DIINER)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,458,440.00

Naming and identification in the Internet is essential to find websites (e.g.
www.nsf.gov) and other services. The Domain Name System (DNS), Identity, and
Internet Naming for Experimentation and Research (DIINER) project proposes to
accelerate research on Internet naming, identification, and the DNS by providing
research infrastructure, data, and community building. The project will provide
(1) a testbed and tools to allow experimentation on DNS data and to support
gradual transition of new approaches from research into experimental use and
ultimately to operation. (2) The project will provide data about how DNS is used
and how the DNS system and servers perform, in the context of a framework for
privacy-sensitive anonymization and controlled data sharing. The DIINER project
will also work to (3) foster a collaborative research community by tightening
the feedback loop between the creativity and perspectives of academia and the
knowledge and real-world problems and data of operation of critical
infrastructure, holding workshops about these topics and about these tools and
new research methods. The DIINER project builds on the University of Southern
California (USC) Information Sciences Institute (ISI) experiences both running
operational DNS services such as B-Root and working with the research community
to share data and provide research infrastructure. The anticipated outcome of
DIINER is scientific progress on how to carry out research on Internet naming,
identity, and DNS; improvements to the performance, reliability, security, and
privacy of how Internet naming, identity, and DNS are done today; and support of
education and research at the USC and in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Internet's DNS most commonly maps names to addresses (e.g. www.nsf.gov to
128.150.4.107), and its use has grown to include applications like anti-spam and
Content Delivery Networks. With DNSSEC (Domain Name System Security Extensions),
DNS protects data integrity and can ground trust systems, X.509 communications
and Certificate Authorities. But Internet naming, identification, and DNS face
many challenges. Security has changed as the Internet has moved from a low-risk
academic experiment to a trillion-dollar marketplace, bringing threats from
organized crime and nation states. DNS has also gathered great inertia, with a
huge, change-resistant installed base, from millions of home routers to
sophisticated commercial clusters. Its identification as "critical
infrastructure" adds both technical and political inertia. These requirements
compound technical challenges, such as minimizing latency, and often leave the
research community distant from operational reality, without the data and
infrastructure they need to make credible
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DIINER project proposes to meet these
challenges and reverse DNS ossification by enabling new research in Internet
naming and trust, and easing transition from research to operational deployment,
while preserving stability. Its goal is to unite isolated researchers by growing
an Internet naming and identification community around DIINER, a new shared
research infrastructure providing: (1) parallel DNS resolution evaluation (PRE)
to support safe testing of experiments within live, real-world deployed DNS, and
(2) live instrumentation and measurement to share real-world DNS query and
performance data, with responsibility supported by technical and legal methods.
Today researchers are under-supported, with only limited DNS data available,
often long after collection and with limited ability to share, and no support
exists for real-world experiments at scale. USC ISI is uniquely prepared to lead
this effort with operational responsibility for the B-Root DNS server, long-term
involvement in networking research and graduate education, and independence from
commercial interests. The DIINER approach spans the DNS ecosystem, from end-
computers (stub resolvers), to organization-level recursive resolvers, and to
authoritative DNS servers. The proposed infrastructure will integrate with
B-Root, second-level-domain authoritative resolvers, and with a recursive
resolver. Stakeholders include end users, Internet services providers (ISPs),
and other kinds of service providers, from operators of public DNS services, to
commercial DNS providers. The DIINER project will release tools it develops as
open source, augmenting research-infrastructure-as-service with third-party
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.