* 1925797
* MRI: Acquisition of an Energy-tunable X-ray Analytical Characterization Tool (EXACT) for Measuring Local Structure and Chemistry in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Faisal Alamgir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 332,500.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports the acquisition
of a lab-based energy-tunable x-ray analytical characterization tool (EXACT),
which will provide element-specific chemical-state and local atomic environment
information for bulk materials. Such an instrument will also provide a platform
for hands-on training of nascent and future users of synchrotron-enabled
materials characterization methods by allowing them to gather initial data in
preparation for more advanced measurements at synchrotron facilities. The
project will also have significant broader impact by providing leadership
opportunities to a highly diverse team in terms of rank, gender, race and
academic disciplines. The EXACT project will bring together a coalition of users
from diverse regional institutions, including research universities,
predominantly undergraduate institutions, and historically black colleges and
universities. The instrument will serve as a platform for in-depth scholar
training on radiation-matter interactions and will merge well into existing
laboratory modules of the graduate and the undergraduate curriculum at the
Georgia Institute of Technology (GT). The instrument will feature in a regional
training hub for new and proficient users of world-class synchrotron
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Energy-tunability and high energy
resolution detection will enhance in-house research capability at GT.
Measurements using two types of spectroscopies, previously unavailable at GT,
will now be possible with EXACT: x-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) and
high-resolution x-ray emission spectroscopy (XES). Collectively, XAFS and XES
can be used to elucidate local atomic structural information, such as, bond
distance, coordination, order/disorder parameter, local symmetry, and local
chemical information, such as oxidation state, ligand type, etc. The EXACT
facility will provide an x-ray energy range of 2-12 keV with an average energy
resolution of about 1 eV, comparable to those at standard synchrotron beamlines.
While there is a compromise on the source flux relative to a synchrotron, EXACT
measurements can deliver useful XAFS/XES data over a reasonable timescale
(within about an hour or even less for concentrated samples). The science space
to be explored includes: reaction mechanisms of active materials in batteries
and fuel cells under in-situ/operando conditions; role of coordination chemistry
and electronic structure on bulk material properties and separations processes
of f-element materials; metal-ligand bond covalency in transition metal,
lanthanide, and actinide complexes; detailed characterization and structural
screening of candidate spin-liquid materials for quantum computing; elucidating
reaction mechanisms related to microbially impacted mineral
formation/transformation (e.g. biomineralization and bioweathering); mechanistic
processes of embedding catalyst nanoparticles in metal organic frameworks and
investigating photo and electrocatalytic nitrogen fixation (reduction and
oxidation) on iron and titanium based oxides with transition metal based co-
catalyst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.