* 1925903
* Structural controls on Fe oxide formation: A crystallographic analysis of the growth of hematite versus goethite
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Peter Heaney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 474,916.00

Dating back to the earliest hominids, the minerals hematite and goethite (both
iron oxides) have provided us with durable, non-toxic red, yellow, and brown
pigments, and today these minerals are synthesized in the millions of tons. They
also are of critical economic importance because they serve as the primary
reserves used to extract iron, and iron accounts for 90% of the world's metal
consumption. Moreover, they can control the ability of soils to remove
contaminants from groundwater because they frequently form as coatings on other
soil minerals, such as quartz and feldspar. Even as only a microscopic veneer,
they can attract and remove toxic metals, which otherwise would not react with
the quartz or feldspar hosts. In spite of their economic and environmental
significance, geologists continue to debate how they form and what mechanism
determines which of either hematite or goethite is likely to crystallize.
Understanding this formation process matters because some scientists have used
hematite and goethite ratios to infer the climatic conditions that generated
ancient soils. This project strives to determine the chemical conditions that
dictate whether hematite or goethite will form in natural environments by using
an innovative X-ray scattering technique that allows researchers to monitor iron
oxide minerals at the atomic scale as they crystallize from fluids. In addition
to this research helping scientists design more accurate historical (and
predictive) climate models, the Investigators will also develop an interactive
program that focuses on the geological and technological significance of iron
oxides. These exercises will take advantage of a Smithsonian Learning Center
called Q?rius, which attracts approximately 100,000 school children each year,
and the U.S. National Museum of Natural History's extensive collection of iron
oxide specimens to explain the important role of these minerals for maintaining
the nation's technological and economic welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
past decade, several studies have argued that the ratio of hematite to goethite
in soils can yield quantitative estimates of mean annual precipitation, raising
the possibility that hematite/goethite ratios in paleosols may serve as proxies
for ancient climate. The application of hematite/goethite proxies to Ordovician
paleosols has, however, conflicted with the results of well-established climatic
indicators. Recent research by the Principal Investigators has revealed that the
crystallization of hematite relative to goethite is determined by a complex
interplay of solution pH, temperature, and time. The PIs hypothesize that the
formation of goethite is outcompeted in certain conditions by the metastability
of 'hydrohematite,' a mineral discovered 175 years ago and discredited in the
1920s. Specifically, they suggest that the reaction of ferrihydrite to
hydrohematite is favored in alkaline systems (pH ~8) at low to moderate
temperatures (below 130oC). The composition of hydrohematite falls halfway
between those of the goethite and hematite endmembers, and the transition from
hydrohematite to stoichiometric hematite involves structural discontinuities
suggestive of the onset of magnetic coupling between neighboring iron atoms. The
PIs will combine state-of-the-art, synchrotron X-ray diffraction techniques with
computational methods to understand the factors that control the relative
thermodynamic stabilities in this system of iron (hydr)oxide nanophases.
Accurate applications of hematite/goethite proxies for paleoclimate
reconstruction require a rigorous understanding of the rates at which
ferrihydrite alters to goethite and hematite and on the variables that influence
which reaction products form. The series of research thrusts outlined in this
proposal will provide important constraints on the character and the rates by
which iron (hydr)oxides evolve in maturing soils. The results thus will improve
the utility of hematite and goethite as a climate indicator, and they will
reveal the relationship between the defect states and the physical properties
and behaviors of iron oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.