* 1925747
* CC* Network Infrastructure: Enabling Research with Mines' Underground Research Facility
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Michael Erickson, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 480,591.00

This award provides funds to install extensive cyberinfrastructure and expand
Wide-Area Network (WAN) speeds to the Colorado School of Mines' Edgar
Underground Educational and Research Facility. Such cyberinfrastructure upgrades
further establish the Edgar Underground Educational and Research Facility as the
premier facility for innovative research in underground environments.
Furthermore, this facility provides an environment for students, educators,
researchers, and external partners to collaborate across a wide variety of
scientific and engineering disciplines. As a result of the project, researchers
can better leverage campus, public, and private resources efficiently and expand
research opportunities in areas such as underground communications and
networking; sub-surface studies of microbial genetics and environmental DNA;
remote monitoring of geologic features, seismic, electric or magnetic anomalies;
and remote and autonomous control of terrestrial and aerial
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colorado School of Mines' Edgar Underground
Educational and Research Facility is located 25 miles west of main campus in
Idaho Springs, CO. Due to the challenges of the surrounding terrain and remote
location of the Edgar Facility, commodity ISP provides only one bonded pair of
DSL lines, for a maximum download speed of 20Mbsec. One goal of this project to
establish a 10Gb network connection to the Edgar Facility using a combination of
leased fiber from the FrontRange GigaPOP and 10Gb P2P wireless communication to
connect the final half-mile that spans rugged terrain. A second goal is to
create robust cyberinfrastructure within the Edgar Facility, allowing
connections to instrumentation and providing redundant network pathways within
the mine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.