* 1925731
* Leveraging 2D and 3D interactions to understand structural transitions in model and cell membranes from molecular to micron scales
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Sarah Keller, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 900,000.00

All cells are surrounded by a cell membrane, and this project will directly
measure the distributions of molecules within models of cell membranes. The
results of this research will be important and of benefit to society because the
distribution can determine how a protein in the membrane functions and whether a
cell lives or dies. Additional societal benefit is that the project will
generate new designs for microfluidic devices and new protocols for visualizing
membranes on nanometer scales by cryo-electron microscopy. The designs and
protocols will be made widely available in scientific publications. This project
will also prepare student researchers for challenging careers in science and
engineering. Graduate and undergraduate researchers will produce samples, test
hypotheses, analyze their data, present their results at conferences, and
publish their results. The project includes additional activities designed to
inspire, train, and mentor the next generation of scientists and citizens
through outreach projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
types of biophysical membranes spontaneously demix into micron-scale liquid
domains enriched in specific lipid (and protein) types. The systems range in
complexity from "simple" model membranes composed of only a few lipid types, to
complex membranes derived from cells, or organelle membranes in yeast. The
research will answer the following biologically-motivated questions: How do
changes in membrane physical parameters affect the size, shape, and transition
temperatures of liquid domains in membranes? How do interactions of membranes
with bulk solutions affect membrane shapes and miscibility transitions? How does
membrane demixing affect peptide structure and partitioning? Beyond answering
these questions, the goals of the project are to translate the resulting
discoveries to the biology community by showing how physical phenomena suggest
new approaches for understanding complex biomembrane systems. The tools that
will be employed include fluorescence microscopy, microfluidics, and cryo-
electron microscopy. The project will be a vehicle for training graduate and
undergraduate students for challenging careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.