* 1925044
* NRI: FND: Knowledge-based Robot Sequential Decision Making under Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Shiqi Zhang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2023
* USD 367,374.00

This project focuses on promoting the progress of science and technology
development by developing computational frameworks needed to advance research on
robot decision-making. The key activity is building intelligent agents that are
able to perceive the environment through sensors and act upon that environment
through actuators. This project aims to bring in computational methods of
different modalities toward a generally applicable, robot decision-making
framework that can significantly promote the development of intelligent agents
in the real world. Example application domains include robotics (as mostly used
in this proposal), finance, urban planning, healthcare, games, transportation,
e-commerce, and many more. A key focus of this project is on incorporating
robotic projects into K-16 education, including education of undergraduate
students through the University Undergraduate Research (UUR) programs, which aim
at exposing scientific research experiences to undergraduate students in early
years, outreach education to regional high/middle schools, and education to the
general public through public media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust robot
decision-making in the real world is challenging for reasons such as imperfect
perception capabilities, incomplete domain knowledge, non-deterministic action
outcomes, and limited experience of interacting with the working environment.
The focus of this proposed project is on a robot sequential decision-making
framework that simultaneously supports learning to perceive the environment,
reasoning about declarative contextual knowledge, and planning to actively
collect information for task completion. Under the umbrella of artificial
intelligence, there are at least three very different ways of realizing robot
decision-making, namely supervised learning from robot experiences in the past,
automated reasoning using declarative knowledge, and probabilistic planning
toward accomplishing complex tasks that require more than one action. The
research aims include developing algorithms that simultaneously allow logical-
probabilistic reasoning and planning under uncertainty for robot decision-making
in stochastic worlds; developing algorithms for simultaneous world state
estimation via recurrent neural networks, representing and reasoning with
declarative knowledge, and multi-modal perception control using decision-
theoretic methods; and developing a principled integration of logical-
probabilistic knowledge representation and reasoning (KRR) with reinforcement
learning, enabling agents to simultaneously reason with declarative knowledge
and learn from interaction experiences. This work has the potential to enable
visionary robot decision-making while leveraging the extensive interaction
experiences as well as contextual knowledge from
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.