* 1925742
* I-Corps: Embedded Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Drone Vision
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Rodney Boehm, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it will
enable artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) solutions to be
implemented in embedded and remote devices. It provides the means to make any
camera, remote sensor, or detector truly intelligent and capable of discernment
and prediction; any device that has already been electronically equipped will
have the potential to utilize decision making intellect. It will be a catalyst
in making AI/ML truly ubiquitous and a commodity of the human experience.
Intelligent sensors will help make the world safer, cameras will be able to
detect anomalies and alert authorities before tragedies, and detectors will be
able to predict emergencies instead of simply telemetering data. Economically,
through human assistance, embedded AI/ML will enable society to be more
efficient and produce greater yield. This has the potential to be a
transformative technology that impacts multiple levels of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops an
implementation of artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) directly
as a hardware circuit. AI/ML have revolutionized several technical industries
such as voice recognition, image processing, healthcare, and personalized
advertisements. AI/ML operates by training a mathematical model, often a
combination of non-linear functions, to make inferences about the model's
environment. However, AI/ML has been primarily restricted to cloud-based
applications with large quantities of computing resources. In contrast, this
technology implements the AI/ML model as hardware circuit that fits within a
single integrated circuit. This project builds off previous technical
accomplishments that implemented software design principles, such as
extensibility, service-oriented architecture, modularity, and loose coupling, in
hardware design through software assisted compilation. Creating a software aid
to automatically restructure the hardware design enabled the hardware to change
much more dynamically according to a series of parameters. By applying similar
techniques to AI/ML, the technology will be able deconstruct and analyze the
AI/ML model, and through a series of algorithms construct a matching hardware
circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.