* 1925267
* CC* Compute: Improved Computing for Advanced Research and Education (ICARE)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Erin Landguth, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 394,895.00

University researchers and educators require access to high performance
computing, high bandwidth connections, sharable storage, and high-throughput
data transfers. Unfortunately, institutional cyberinfrastructures can be silos
of dissimilar and unconnected computing resources, with limited functionality,
and inconsistent service delivery. The Improved Computing for Advanced Research
and Education (ICARE) team addresses these issues and advances discovery and
understanding by serving as a shared high-throughput computing site. Information
Technology (IT) professionals and the scientific research community work
together to coordinate campus-level cyberinfrastructure improvements based on
project-driven needs. These include scientific research projects that improve
natural disaster forecasting, produce innovative modeling tools used for
maintaining biodiversity, impact the design of nuclear receptor drugs used to
treat many diseases, develop deep learning approaches to DNA sequencing, and
explore genomic responses to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
feature of ICARE is the UM Shared Computing Cluster (UMSCC). UMSCC is configured
with 8 computing nodes, 3 GPU nodes, and 2 storage nodes. Open source software
solutions and participation in the Open Science Grid (OSG) facilitates data
intensive research and extends computing resources to internal and external
research groups, graduate and undergraduate researchers, and the nation. This
effort strengthens collaboration between diverse groups of researchers and
provides a vehicle for ongoing discussion and planning between IT professionals,
educators, and researchers. A special aspect of this project is the direct
relationship between IT professionals and the campus scientific research
community, which is providing sound IT solutions that are critical for future
competitiveness in grant funding and academic
contribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.