* 1925482
* CC* Integration: Rutgers University Next-Generation Edge Testbed (RU-NET)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Thu Nguyen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,015,014.00

The technological landscape of computing is changing at a phenomenal rate with
recent advances in big data, deep learning, data mining, cloud services, and
cybersecurity, along with many novel consumer and scientific devices. Research
universities, especially IT support, are challenged to be agile in this
landscape, as they must keep pace with the needs of the research and user
community. To bolster researchers working on these technologies, this project
seeks to support two key network-centric requirements: incorporating user-owned
devices at the edge of the network and moving bulk data between data collection
nodes and data processing nodes over the network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will design, implement, test, and utilize a novel research testbed, the
Rutgers University Next-Generation Edge Testbed (RU-NET). RU-NET is a campus-
wide platform designed to simplify the deployment of new and emerging edge
technologies, while preserving the stability of the campus network. RU-NET will
allow integrating user-owned devices in laboratories at the edge of the network
with Rutgers's three campus networks into a unified 100 Gbit/s network managed
using programmable switches and host devices. The RU-NET design is multi-
layered, constituting researchers' applications, RU-NET-owned physical
resources, and orchestrator software mapping applications to resources and
isolating different research applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RU-NET will
serve as a catalyst to position Rutgers University researchers at the forefront
of scientific discovery and to improve compute and network infrastructure that
benefits the University community as a whole. The project plans to develop
course material to educate undergraduate and graduate students about novel
network-centric technologies, training students from Rutgers's diverse student
body. The project also plans to share best practices with academic institutions
and enterprise communities that are planning similar distributed computing
environments, with the possibility of this project serving as a template for
similar future efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.