* 1925543
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Dynamical Symmetries for Extreme Wave-Matter Interactions in Elastodynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Fred Ellis, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 342,199.00

This interdisciplinary project brings together a mechanical engineer, an
experimental physicist, and a theoretical physicist to create a new class of
engineered materials and structures, which derive their properties from
geometric arrangements - in this case, symmetry arrangements - rather than the
material composition alone. These novel materials will be capable of responding
to propagating mechanical waves or vibrations with response times faster than
possible with bulk materials. The new material systems will spawn emerging
technologies addressing imminent national civil and defense needs. Examples
include extremely sensitive sensors of structural integrity, or conversely,
structures that are made essentially insensitive to fabrication defects or
adverse environmental variations through the use of these novel material
systems. These engineered materials and structures will enable extreme control
of propagating sound or elastic waves, with applications to one-way mechanical
wave propagation and vibration or sound and switches, which can be reconfigured
on-the-fly. In addition to the work's relevance for a variety of physics and
engineering frameworks, ranging from mechanical and electromagnetic to matter
and quantum waves, the collaborative interaction among student peers from
prominent engineering and liberal arts environments will instill them with
interdisciplinary skill-sets in designing structures, mathematical modeling,
fabrication, and experimental characterization. The team will offer a video-
course on "Engineering Mechanical Waves", inviting participation from local
community college students as well. Interactive animations demonstrating basic
concepts of this course will be posted online and advertised to local high-
school students to attract potential summer interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
symmetry violations central to the proposed designs are associated with
dynamical symmetries (e.g. time-reversal, parity, chiral, or any combination)
and are typically connected with non-Hermitian spectral singularities. These
singularities, where both eigenfrequencies and the corresponding eigenmodes
coalesce, are known as exceptional points. Three distinct approaches for
implementing these symmetries will be exploited: (a) spatial arrangements, (b)
phase arrangements, and (c) time-periodic modulation arrangements. Adopting a
bottom-up strategy guided by experimental realities, the team shall first focus
on developing strategies that implement these extreme response points in basic
mechanical structures. Next, combinations of these units into large-scale
systems shall be designed to enable additional forms of exceptional point
control. This leads to disparate functionalities such as robustness to
fabrication imperfections via topologically protected configurations, highly
non-reciprocal transport, or super-sensitivity to small perturbations.
Applications envisioned include monitoring structural integrity, reconfigurable
wave transport, self-induced vibration filters, and active surface acoustic wave
devices. The project?s emphasis in elastodynamics aims to capitalize on the
subtleties of mode interaction available in continuum mechanics as well as the
team?s diverse experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.