* 1925644
* CCRI: ENS: Collaborative Research: Enhancing R for Scalability and Deployment
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jan Vitek, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,799,705.00

Data analytics software systems are integral to the fabric of science. The
ability to acquire, process, and analyze complex data is at the core of
disciplines that range from high-energy physics, astronomy, chemistry, and
biology. While scientists can exploit repositories of tools optimized and
refined over the years, significant new challenges are posed by the rapidly
evolving characteristics of modern scientific datasets. New analyzes rely on
interactive computer programming languages that are open source and that allow
rapid, interactive, data exploration. This project aims to strengthen and
enhance the R software infrastructure. R is the language and environment with
the largest collection of free and reusable data analytics software packages.
This project will help R adapt to the evolving needs of researchers in diverse
fields. The technical enhancements, embodied by new and updated software
components, will open opportunities for researchers to contribute to the
community infrastructure and enable a number of new research directions building
on R as a platform. Lastly, this project's engagement and outreach plans address
both outreach to user- and developer-communities and create a pipeline of future
contributors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed enhancements to the R
infrastructure address four key needs and are enablers to research. In terms of
scalability, the R environment needs support for both scaling up computation to
support out-of-core data and scaling down computations with compact data
formats. In terms of deployment, the R language needs to support multiple
deployment formats. This project envisions addressing this need by supporting
separate compilation of a subset of R to both native binaries and to WebAssembly
where the former would have the benefit of performance and could be linked as a
library, while the latter would benefit from the ubiquity of JavaScript, running
in any browser. In terms of robustness, the R language needs tools to verify and
validate native code. This project will extend existing checkers with a detailed
understanding of R semantics and to automatically check for a variety of errors
statically, and optionally insert run-time checks for cases which cannot be
proved statically. In terms of community outreach, there is a need for a
pipeline for training potential R developers. This project will create
educational material and operate two yearly summer
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.