* 1925764
* CC* Team: SWEETER -- SouthWest Expertise in Expanding, Training, Education and Research
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* JoAnn Browning, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,432,000.00

The efficacy of an interdisciplinary research team is frequently limited by a
researcher's ability to draw together a cohort of collaborators with needed
scientific expertise. SWEETER: South West Expertise in Expanding Training,
Education and Research is a network of resources, both training and personnel,
that collaborate and foster cooperation across the boundaries of disciplines and
institutions. SWEETER unites not-for-profits, community colleges, minority
serving institutions, research-intensive universities, and industry from
multiple states to develop this research network. The collaboration leverages
expertise in several facets of computational sciences to address long-standing
issues encountered in sharing resources by employing a model of resource sharing
where each institution is a provider and receiver of
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research specialists from various sites will
support domain scientists at site workshops, SWEETER annual events, and online
avenues. To encourage these relationships, SWEETER offers a web-portal and
shared cyberinfrastructure that will help remove resource barriers faced by
community colleges and smaller institutions. SWEETER strengthens efforts for
researcher preparation by offering remote and in-person training opportunities,
and propagating elements of its learning environment to formal curricular
efforts. Importantly, SWEETER employs an innovative evaluation strategy to
assess its successes in the aspects of research, training and education. By
fostering diverse partnerships developed through existing efforts, SWEETER will
significantly broaden the involvement of traditionally underrepresented
populations in computing at the K-12, undergraduate and graduate levels of
learning. In all, SWEETER offers a flexible, portable and scalable framework to
develop communities of practice that will inform the design of future research
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.