* 1925558
* CC* Compute: Triton Stratus
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2019,09/30/2021
* Mary Thomas, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 399,514.00

The University of California, San Diego, deploys Triton Stratus, an addition to
its existing high performance computing system that allows campus researchers in
many schools and departments to apply computational methods to their scientific
research. Triton Stratus helps researchers advance their scientific aims by
providing improved facilities for accessing emerging computing tools and scaling
them to commercial cloud computing resources. Researchers, especially data
scientists, are increasingly using tools such as Jupyter notebooks and RStudio
to implement computational and data analysis functions and workflows. Jupyter
notebooks provide a web-browser-based environment that permits the assembly of
text, graphics, and computing functions into a living laboratory notebook,
promoting research documentation and reproducibility. RStudio is another tool
growing in popularity which provides a graphical environment for the R
statistical language, widely used for data analysis. These tools are part of a
general trend in research computing towards web-based and graphical interfaces,
especially for attracting newer generations of researchers and data scientists.
Triton Stratus runs JupyterHub server and RStudio server, addressing the
interactive computing needs of scientists from various domain
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project delivers a productive research
computing capability serving investigators in different scientific domains.
Triton Stratus permits exploration of the emerging hybrid model of on-premise
cluster computing resources coupled with commercial cloud computing services and
will help answer questions such as the right balance of on-premise and cloud
resources, best modes for scaling or bursting to cloud resources, and
investigating new models of interactive research
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.