* 1925391
* I-Corps: Interactive Statistical Decision Trees for Application in Real-world Contexts
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2019
* H LeBlanc, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves
improvement in the time and cost associated with training needed to prepare data
analysts working in research fields outside of academia. Knowledge of
statistical methods often does not translate to application to current research
questions. The proposed project aims to reduce the time corporations and large
and small organizations need in training new data analyst employees.
Additionally, the project aims to reduce errors in judgment regarding the
application of appropriate statistical tests to particular problems.
Commercially, the project may replace libraries of statistical reference manuals
utilized to make decisions about application of statistical models.

This I-Corps project leverages academic research in statistics to application in
real-world research contexts such as data analysis in medical research centers.
The project is designed to assist quantitative data analysts in moving from
hypothesis to interpretation of statistical results through a simple series of
decision steps, using parameters known to analysts across a variety of contexts.
The prototype was built using a puzzle/maze typology. Current market available
tools are limited in scope of statistical tests, and do not provide
demonstration of the test in action with hypothetical data. The current project
prototype covers 28 different parametric and non-parametric statistical tests
appropriate across all four quantitative data types: categorical, ordinal,
interval, and ratio-level data. Additionally, the current prototype provides
demonstration of all 28 tests via video-link using sample data, provide output
results, and demonstration of appropriate reporting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.