* 1925723
* CCRI: Planning: Collaborative Research: A Software-defined Wireless Communications Network Research Infrastructure for the Industrial Internet of Things(IIoT)Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Kim Kwang Raymo Choo, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 30,000.00

The Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) is the application of Internet of
Things (IoT) technology to industrial systems and is being employed in a number
of industry sectors. Specifically, in the manufacturing sector, IIoT systems are
often deployed in harsh and complex environments and have to satisfy system-
level dependability, timing performance, energy-efficiency, and security
requirements. Moreover, IIoT technology can be leveraged to optimize the quality
of products and the productivity of manufacturing lines and avoid process
anomalies and faults that can lead to subpar performance and safety issues.
However, these unique opportunities brought by IIoT pose challenges in their
communication fabric design, distributed data management, analysis and decision
making, and security protection. This CCRI planning proposal describes the
planning activities underpinning the design of an innovative software-defined
IIoT infrastructure to be jointly deployed at the three participating
institutions, which will serve as a unified test-bed for a broad range of
Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) researchers. It is
envisioned that this proposed infrastructure will enable and support a large
number of IIoT related research projects in the broader CISE community. It will
vastly advance the adoption of IIoT technology, accelerate the transformation of
legacy communication infrastructure to advanced networking and computing
infrastructure, and boost the nation's economic growth and
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed novel IIoT community
infrastructure is motivated by the observed limitations of existing IIoT test-
beds in the research community. These limitations include (i) a lack of
deployment in real-life manufacturing environments and (ii) the inability to
support heterogeneous network structures and scalable network management and
data analytics. To address these limitations, this project will utilize
established community outreach venues to reach out to the relevant CISE research
communities to best understand the community needs and their expectations for
the proposed infrastructure. The proposed IIoT community research infrastructure
will be the first of its kind that (a) combines software-defined networking
(SDN) backbone and software-defined radio (SDR)-based real-time wireless edge
networks into a hybrid communication fabric to emulate a variety of industrial
networking environments; (b) provides a hierarchical real-time computing
platform for real-time IIoT system monitoring, analysis and decision making; and
(c) organizes the edge computing facilities deployed at individual sites into a
multi-site IIoT Blockchain network to support research on distributed data
management technologies. The flexibility and configurability of the proposed
infrastructure at both device and system levels will enable diverse communities
of CISE researchers to access the test-bed, deploy their protocols, algorithms
and applications, and experimentally validate new ideas and
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.