* 1925016
* RAPID: Neutron Monitors in the Twenty-First-Century
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2019,11/30/2022
* John Clem, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 11/30/2022
* USD 165,983.00

A neutron monitor is a ground-based instrument that measures the number of high-
energy particles striking Earth's atmosphere from space. Because the intensity
of cosmic rays hitting Earth is not uniform, it is important to place neutron
monitors at multiple locations to form a complete picture of cosmic rays in
space. Neutron monitors are capable of detecting Solar Energetic Particles
(SEPs) as well as background neutrons produced by the ever-present Galactic
Cosmic Rays (GCR). They produce decades-long records of stable and reliable
cosmic ray intensity measurements. Furthermore, observations from wide-spread
networks of monitors can be analyzed to provide high-time resolution
measurements of the most energetic and powerful of solar particle events, Ground
Level Enhancements (GLEs). The University of Delaware (UD) neutron monitors have
suffered from lack of external funding over the past few years, and they are
currently minimally supported through institutional funds (from the UD and the
Bartol Research Institute). However, this funding will end in July of 2019, and
plans are in place to dismantle the stations beginning of June, 2019, unless
external funding can be secured. The purpose of this one-year RAPID project is
to restore the North American network to a functional condition and support
operation for one year until longer term support can be
secured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The historic neutron monitor data have shown that
at each station the count rate varies with the solar activity cycle. This is the
phenomenon of solar modulation of galactic cosmic rays. To investigate the
origin of the phenomenon, one cannot rely on the count rates of one neutron
monitor: hence, one needs to derive the cosmic ray intensity as a function of
particle energy or particle rigidity. Since each neutron monitor is sensitive to
primary cosmic rays above some geomagnetic cutoff rigidity, one can combine
measurements of stations at different latitudes. The reliability, stability and
robustness of multi-decade measurements is critical for understanding the
variability of the Sun. Of particular interest is the fact that the GCR
intensity during the last two solar minimum is the greatest over the period
covered by the observations by a significant factor. This would not have been
known without neutron monitors. The current network of North American neutron
monitors, combined with Russian operated stations are strategically located to
provide precise, real-time, 3-dimensional measurements of the cosmic-ray angular
distribution. Because of the combined effects of Earth's magnetic field and
atmosphere, high latitude sites have superior directional sensitivity relative
to low latitude sites. At the high latitude sites, where the UD's neutron
monitors are located, the SEPs are in-focus, while cosmic rays arriving at low
and mid latitude stations arrive from widely dispersed directions. The complete
network of high latitude neutron monitors allows a complete picture of when,
where, and from what direction SEPs strike Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to space weather forecasting, data from neutron monitors, such as those
to be collected during this one-year RAPID project, are also used in support of
other science investigations, beyond studies of cosmic rays and heliospheric
physics. One use of neutron monitor data is to monitor the flux of neutrons
produced by cosmic rays for a broad range of practical applications, including
detecting nuclear threats for homeland and national security, calculating the
radiation dose to airplane crews and passengers, understanding the rate of
single-event upsets (soft errors) in microelectronic devices, measuring soil and
snow moisture content, and calculating the production rate of cosmogenic
radionuclides used for atmospheric tracers and nuclear treaty verification. For
all these applications, neutrons and other secondary particles produced in the
atmosphere and surface materials by galactic cosmic rays (and occasionally by
solar particles) are either the source of the effect or an important
background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year RAPID project will provide an
educational experience for an undergraduate student to help maintain and
calibrate the neutron monitor station in Newark, Delaware. The research agenda
of this RAPID project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.