* 1925484
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Building a Science DMZ for Data-intensive Research and Computation at the University of South Carolina
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Neset Hikmet, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 498,525.00

The University of South Carolina (UofSC) is establishing a new network, namely a
Science DMZ, operating at 100 Gbps. The Science DMZ supports current research
moving terabyte-scale data between UofSC and national laboratories (e.g.,
Argonne, Fermi, Oak Ridge, Savannah River, Los Alamos), university
collaborators, and the national network of supercomputer centers (XSEDE). The
project serves the national interest, as it addresses the need to connect UofSC
to the national "cyber-highway" system to share big science data, hence
promoting collaboration and national competitiveness, aligned with NSF's
mission. The new cyberinfrastructure also permits researchers to exchange large
datasets with collaborators geographically distributed across the world.
Examples include nuclear physics results from the Paul Scherrer Institute in
Switzerland and observation files from the Cryogenic Underground Observatory for
Rare Events (CUORE) in Italy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elements of UofSC's
Science DMZ include: i) data transfer nodes (DTNs), built for sending/receiving
data at a high speed over wide area networks; ii) high-throughput, friction-free
paths connecting DTNs, instruments, storage devices, and computing systems; iii)
measurement devices to monitor end-to-end paths; and iv) security policies
tailored for high-performance environments. The proposed Science DMZ
substantially increases the bandwidth to compute and XSEDE resources, permitting
their use on digital image correlation, semiconductor material development,
DNA/RNA sequencing, and other areas. Additionally, UofSC hosts key national
resources and centers including the first U.S. deployed Time of Flight-
Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer, NOAA's National Estuarine Research
Reserves database, McNair Aerospace Center, and Baruch Institute. These
resources are now more efficiently used by researchers and
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.