* 1925130
* NRI: INT: Agile and Dynamic Interactions for Mobile Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Oliver Kroemer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,506,887.00

This grant supports research into developing robots that can safely and
efficiently work alongside people in crowded spaces, such as warehouses, homes,
hospitals, and stores. The goal of the project is to improve quality of life,
especially for the elderly, and advance national prosperity. Working in crowded
spaces means that the robot comes into direct physical contact with humans and
objects, such as doors, shelves, and wheelchairs. Safety is therefore of
paramount importance, and the robot needs to give way to humans while also
helping them. The robot's interactions with people and objects are often dynamic
in nature. For example, a robot may need to physically support a stumbling
person while guiding them by the hand, or it may need to use the weight of its
own body to open a heavy door. Dynamic interactions like these are beyond the
current capabilities of robots. The project uses a new type of robot that
balances on a single ball while being able to safely interact with people. The
award performs fundamental research into dynamic interactions, by humans and
robots, for accomplishing challenging tasks in an efficient, robust, and safe
manner. The project provides a deeper understanding of how humans interact with
their surroundings, which can also be used in the future for improving ergonomic
designs and prosthetic arms. The research team is also developing new
algorithms, designs, and controllers for collaborative and assistive robots,
which have the potential for widespread societal benefits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robots capable of safe dynamic interactions, with
continuous adaptation and fast reactions, represents a paradigm shift from
current approaches. The research provides an end-to-end study of full-body
dynamic interaction tasks. The research contributes a series of human subject
studies that will provide knowledge of human dynamic interactions. It also
develops new dynamic interaction models and novel methods for planning, machine
learning, and real-time control of dynamic interactions. To make this research
possible, the research team will be utilizing a unique dynamically stable and
agile mobile manipulator: the Carnegie Mellon University ballbot. The person-
size ballbot locomotes on a single ball wheel, providing omnidirectional motion
with intrinsic compliance, and is equipped with two human-scale 7-degree-of-
freedom arms with hands. Research contributions to dynamic interaction,
planning, learning, and control are demonstrated on this robot platform and
rigorously evaluated through a diverse set of integrative tasks, including
cooperative carrying, maneuvering a manual wheelchair, cooperative task
teaching, sit-to-stand maneuvers, and dynamic navigation in cluttered
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.