* 1925052
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Raining Drones: Mid-Air Release &amp; Recovery of Atmospheric Sensing Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Adam Houston, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 643,600.00

Understanding and forecasting weather is critical to nearly every industry and
is even more important as weather patterns continue to change from their
historical norms. Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs) are capable of collecting
valuable data in the lower kilometer of the atmosphere, which is under-sampled
by traditional atmospheric sensing systems. However, a single UAS can only
collect information from a small slice of the atmosphere at a time. This project
will develop the systems and techniques to enable a UASs to carry, deploy, and
recover smaller UASs and parachute-based weather sensors to create snapshots
across atmospheric airmass boundaries. This will lead to the characterization of
a much larger region of the lower atmosphere, consequently improving the
understanding and forecasting of the weather. Carrying, deploying, and
particularly recovering the systems, are critical to allow operations in remote
locations and reuse of expensive sensors. Achieving these objectives requires
new techniques to enable rich mid-air interactions between aerial robots. These
techniques span from sensing and planning to control and run-time verification,
all working together for the effective, efficient, and safe deployment of such
teams of aerial robots. While this work is developed in the context of
atmospheric sciences, the techniques are broadly applicable to many problems in
distributed and collaborative robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
contribute techniques and systems to enable the development and deployment of
teams of UASs that perform mid-air capture and release of other systems. More
specifically, the expected outcomes of this work include: 1) Sensing, planning
and control methodologies for UASs intercepting airborne targets that have
stochastic full six degree of freedom motion, 2) Foundational elements for
matched maneuvers between heterogeneous classes of aerial robots to perform
aerial docking, 3) Strategies for rapid aerial deployment-capture-redeployment
cycles for teams of UASs to enable observations over large geographic scales, 4)
Run-time inference and enforcement of protocols orchestrating the interactions
between distributed, heterogeneous robotic systems, and 5) Improved atmospheric
sensing and monitoring capabilities that will enhance understanding and
forecasting of atmospheric phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.