* 1925588
* SaTC-CCRI: Collaborative Research: Sharing Expertise and Artifacts for Reuse through Cybersecurity CommunityHub (SEARCCH)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Nicol, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Cybersecurity research experiments are frequently performed in ad hoc ways,
which severely retards scientific progress. Most researchers use a combination
of methods and infrastructure to conduct experiments using one-off, painstaking,
and error-prone processes that are never shared for reuse and validation. The
lack of repeatable, reproducible, and reusable processes and other artifacts
limits one's ability to build upon the work of others or to compare solutions.
Enabling the community to share and reuse experiment artifacts is crucial to
transforming the way cybersecurity research is conducted.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEARCCH creates a collaborative, community-driven platform
that lowers the barrier to sharing by aiding researchers in packaging,
importing, locating, understanding, and reusing experiment artifacts. The
artifacts organized by the platform, including tools, methodologies,
documentation, and data, can be deployed to community testbeds for performing
new experiments. Concurrently, SEARCCH engages in outreach activities to build
an active, diverse, online community around the hub to enable direct sharing of
expertise and crowdsourcing research ideas and experiment design. Through a
process of continuous learning and improvement, the hub will grow over time to
include collections of artifacts covering a broad range of cybersecurity
research topics and add support for newly identified community needs. These
activities together will transform the way cybersecurity research is conducted
in the cybersecurity community, improving the overall scientific quality of
cybersecurity research through validation, repeatable sharing and reuse, and a
collective approach to building on research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.