* 1925546
* Rebuilding a kinesin-based meiotic drive system from defined components
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* R. Kelly Dawe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,057,412.00

This project aims to understand how some genes can be transmitted to progeny at
higher frequencies than others. The flow of genetic information from parents to
offspring is usually a fair process that allows genes from each parent to have
an equal likelihood of being passed on. However, in some cases known as meiotic
drive, genes cheat the system and have a higher likelihood of being passed on. A
classic example of meiotic drive is found in maize, where a family of molecular
motor proteins known as kinesins bind to specific chromosome regions and direct
them to the egg cells. Work under this award is focused on two kinesin motor
proteins known as Kindr and Trkin, which are similar, but cause meiotic drive at
different chromosomal regions. Most of the experiments are designed to determine
how the two kinesins bind to different regions. The ultimate aim is to engineer
new kinesins that will bind to novel DNA sequences on chromosomes to test if
they will show the same properties and cause meiotic drive. The project will
integrate the research with education by engaging students at a predominantly
undergraduate institutions in experiments to test the function of the maize
kinesins in brewer's yeast. Together, the research outcomes will yield new
insights into chromosome segregation, and in the long term, may allow
researchers to control and improve the transmission of valuable
traits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kinesins function to move cargo within cells and
organize spindles during mitosis and meiosis, where they help to ensure normal
chromosome segregation. Two kinesins encoded on maize Abnormal chromosome 10
(Ab10), called Kindr and Trkin, are remarkable exceptions that evolved as
selfish genes to favor their own segregation. To do this they have acquired the
novel feature of binding to specialized repeat arrays called knobs and
converting them into motile neocentromeres. Genetic evidence suggests that at
least one of the kinesins (Kindr) does not bind directly, but through an
intermediate factor tentatively called Smd13. A goal of this work is to identify
Smd13 and understand how Kindr interacts with it to bind DNA. Other experiments
are designed to understand how Trkin binds to DNA and interpret its role in
meiotic drive. A final aim is to engineer new versions of Kindr and Trkin that
bind to synthetic repeat arrays built into the maize genome and test whether the
synthetic components promote meiotic drive. A yeast-based neocentromere system
will also be developed to test whether kinesins can be used to move chromosome
in a heterologous host. The results will expand our understanding of plant
kinesins and their roles in meiosis and explore the utility of using kinesin-
mediated chromosome movement to manipulate chromosome
segregation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was jointly funded by the Genetics
Mechanisms, Cellular Dynamics and Function, and Systems and Synthetic Biology
Programs in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.