* 1925609
* CCRI: Medium: Cilk Infrastructure for Next-Generation Parallel-Programming Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Charles Leiserson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project is developing a new open-source software platform and ecosystem,
called OpenCilk, which is based on the award-winning Cilk parallel-computing
technology. As Moore's Law comes to an end, application performance will cease
to improve - denying science, the national defense, and society the fruits of
increasing performance - unless software can be engineered to run fast,
especially through the use of parallel computing: the running of applications on
multiple processors. OpenCilk provides an easy-to-modify software platform to
enable parallel-programming researchers to explore new ways to compute on modern
parallel hardware. Since parallel-programming research provides the technology
that allows domain experts to program computationally intensive applications -
including emerging national priorities such as artificial intelligence, machine
learning, and computational engineering and science - this project fosters next-
generation research in both parallel computing and computationally intensive
application domains. This project also supports Cilk Hub, a community-driven
organization charged with maintaining and enhancing OpenCilk, as well as
developing educational materials for parallel
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OpenCilk is a complete, robust, open-source, and
easily accessible task-parallel programming system. It provides a technology-
transfer conduit to enable research contributions created by the parallel-
computing research community to advance parallel programming as practiced by
application developers. Over time, this project aims to consolidate proven
parallel-computing research results from the areas of languages, compilers,
runtime systems, productivity tools, libraries, and application benchmarks, and
then integrate them into OpenCilk. The Cilk Hub organization develops and
releases OpenCilk software, upstreams parallel-computing technology to
mainstream codebases, and provides teaching materials and ancillary
documentation. It offers workshops and tutorials for researchers and developers,
evaluates community satisfaction with the OpenCilk technology, and manages the
integration of community-proposed enhancements to
OpenCilk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.