* 1925368
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Leveraging Environmental Monitoring UAS in Rainforests
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Carrick Detweiler, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 722,804.00

Rainforest canopies are important ecosystems for diverse plant and animal life,
however validating predictions for scientific decisions about these environments
is difficult due to a lack of efficient data collection methods. Access is
limited due to remoteness, dense foliage, and venomous wildlife, which constrain
research to trails and vegetation near the forest floor. Currently, most data is
collected within 50 meters of trails and 5 meters from the ground due to these
limitations. Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs) have been used for sensor deployment
and monitoring, but only recently has the ability to collect soil samples at
precise locations in the ground been developed by the project team. The proposed
work will contribute transformative soil, water, and leaf sampling technologies
as part of a UAS sampling system to expand the reach of scientists in
challenging environments. It will increase the perception abilities of the
robots in challenging terrains and the ability for people to interact with and
control the UASs. This effort has the potential to benefit a range of
organizations that monitor sensitive environmental regions by providing
complementary technologies that fulfill a gap through capabilities to sample
previously inaccessible areas at a resolution not previously possible while
reducing risk to both humans and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal presents a vision aimed at advancing heterogeneous multi-UAS
technologies, practices, and understanding to increase the reach of human
sensing in challenging, hard-to-access environments. The proposed work will
advance the NRI 2.0 Co-Robotic agenda by focusing on scalability of both systems
and teams, inspired in the context of UAS-based forest canopy monitoring. The
vision addresses key goals in co-robotic system development with regards to the
available attention of the humans involved, site selection for complementary
sampling, and improvements in robot design and decision making for sample
collection. These goals will be developed in local, well-understood environments
before being refined in yearly tests in the harsh, cluttered forest contexts,
all while contributing to progress in fundamental co-robotic challenges. The
proposed activities will result in: 1) Timing rules and motion-based
communications for conveying multi-UAS intention and knowledge to end-users, 2)
Perception algorithms that map the environmental knowledge and domain expertise
of a scientist into a fleet of vehicles to support semi-autonomous collection of
samples above and below the canopy, 3) Platform innovations to improve
mechanisms and algorithms for sample collection in new contexts, and 4) Improved
data collection in forest canopies to advance the science of plant hydraulics
and streamflow generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.