* 1925751
* Stereocontrolled and Aerobic Oxidative Reactions at High-Valent Nickel Centers
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Liviu Mirica, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 382,968.00

With funding from the Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Liviu
Mirica of the Department of Chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis is
investigating the role of nickel compounds in important chemical
transformations. These include reactions that couple two different molecular
partners ("cross-coupling") with improved selectivity, as well as reactions
related to the activation of inert organic substrates with oxygen. Cross-
coupling reactions sped up by metal-containing compounds have become
indispensable in the synthesis of a large number of important chemicals,
pharmaceuticals, and materials. While palladium-based catalysts are the most
commonly used, Dr. Mirica is synthesizing and studying nickel (Ni)-based
catalysts as they may be able to react with a wider variety of target molecules
and with more specificity. In addition, Professor Mirica has established a
collaboration with Professor Tim Hubin from Southwestern Oklahoma State
University (SWOSU), a regional university in Oklahoma that has an appreciable
amount of students that belong to underrepresented groups. Professor Hubin and
his students collaborate on the synthesis of some of the targeted catalysts,
visiting the Mirica lab, and performing reactivity studies using their chemical
systems. This experience exposes the undergraduate students to an R1 research
institution, and inspires them to pursue advanced degrees in chemistry.
Professor Mirica and his group continue to work closely with collaborators from
Spain and South Korea. This collaborative experience is an excellent training
ground to prepare them to work in a true international environment, very similar
to a multinational corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While palladium (Pd)-based
catalysts are arguably the most commonly used in cross-coupling reactions, Ni-
based cross-coupling catalysts have been developed recently. Given their ability
to engage alkyl electrophiles and nucleophiles in stereospecific or
stereoselective transformations the Ni-based catalysts are of interest. By
comparison to the Pd-mediated transformations that generally employ diamagnetic
intermediates, the Ni systems can more easily undergo one-electron redox
reactions and lead to additional reaction pathways. The presence of paramagnetic
Ni(I) and Ni(III) species makes reactivity characterization more difficult. Dr.
Mirica's laboratory is synthesizing isolated organometallic Ni(III) and Ni(IV)
complexes supported by flexible multidentate ligands and studying in detail
their involvement in important chemical transformations such as stereocontrolled
C-C bond formation reactions and aerobic oxidative reactions mediated by high-
valent Ni intermediates. This work has direct relevance to C-H functionalization
and C-C / C-heteroatom bond formation reactions. Dr. Mirica is also recruiting
graduate and undergraduate students from different backgrounds and providing
them with an interdisciplinary training that spans inorganic, organic, and
physical chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.