* 1925767
* CCRI: ENS: Enhancing a Millimeter-Wave Massive MIMO Platform to Support the 5G V2X Networking and Automotive Sensing Research Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Gabriel Rebeiz, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This proposal aims to develop an open-source platform called M3 to facilitate
research in 5G vehicular networking and automotive sensing. M3 enables
experimental research on millimeter-wave (mmWave) technologies--the cornerstone
for 5G wireless communication and automotive radar sensing. mmWave radio/radar
electronically steerable directional beams, generated by large antenna arrays,
as communication/sensing medium. Programmability is critical for mmWave
experimental research, especially in real-time vehicular networking/sensing.
Yet, to date, programmable mmWave devices are either too costly, or lack a
reasonably-sized antenna array which is critical for real-time beam-steering
operations. M3 will fill this gap with a low-cost software radio/radar featuring
a large antenna array. By designing a novel radio/radar architecture, M3 brings
the per-node cost down by an order of magnitude, and increases the phased-array
size by an order of magnitude, compared with the state-of-the-art. The research
team will deploy an open-access experimental testbed on the UCSD campus
comprised of the M3 radios/radars. The researchers will also bring M3 to the
broader research community, through online Q&amp;A forum, hands-on
workshops/tutorials, remote access, and hardware loans/replication services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to develop a programmable open-source
massive Multiple-Input/Multiple-Output (MIMO) millimeter-wave (mmWave) platform
called M3 to facilitate experimental research in 5G vehicular networking and
automotive sensing. The project comprises three major research thrusts: (i)
Develop software/firmware to enable a partially programmable 802.11ad mmWave
radio with 288-element phased-array, allowing users to reconfigure the codebook
entries and beam patterns, and access real-time per-beam channel state
information (CSI). (ii) Develop a mmWave massive MIMO software-radio, comprising
4 radio frequency (RF) chains and 144 antenna elements in total. The software
radio will integrate the OpenAirInterface 5G physical layer and core network
stack. (iii) Develop a programmable MIMO mmWave phased-array radar, with 4 RF
chains and 144 antenna elements, used for exploring high-resolution automotive
sensing. M3's cost is an order of magnitude lower compared with the state-of-
the-art mmWave software-radio, but its phased-array is an order of magnitude
higher. The surprisingly low cost is attributed to a novel radio architecture
design, which repurposes a commodity phased-array antenna as a programmable
phased-array. This project will bring M3 to the broader research community
through hands-on workshops/tutorials, and provide user services including
hardware loans, replication, and restricted remote access to a testbed comprised
of M3 radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.