* 1925878
* NSF Student Travel Support for the 2019 IEEE Visualization Doctoral Colloquium (IEEE VIS DC)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* David Gotz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Visualization, or the use of interactive graphic representations to support data
analysis, understanding, and communication, is an increasingly integral enabling
technology across a wide array of application areas. This grant provides support
for approximately 18 U.S.-based graduate students to participate in the IEEE VIS
Doctoral Colloquium to be held in conjunction with the IEEE Visualization
Conference (VIS 2019), October 20-25, 2019, in Vancouver, Canada. IEEE VIS is
the premier annual international forum for advances in the science and
engineering of visualization across academia, government, and industry. IEEE VIS
brings together the world's leading researchers and practitioners with a shared
interest in techniques, tools, and technology for interactive data analysis,
data exploration, and data communication. The focus of the VIS Doctoral
Colloquium is advancing PhD students' doctoral dissertation research through
mentoring and networking with global research leaders in the science of
visualization. Students participating in the Doctoral Colloquium are selected
chiefly on the grounds of research excellence, meaning that supported students
are advancing the state-of-the-art in the field of visualization. The Doctoral
Colloquium provides an opportunity the students' projects to be shaped and
improved through intellectual exchange, and for the students themselves to
present and communicate the character of their work to a key group of their peer
professionals. Since the students and mentors are a diverse group (nationality,
gender, ethnicity, scientific discipline, and research specialization), the
students' horizons are broadened at a critical stage in their professional
development. Supporting participation of U.S. students in the VIS 2019 DC is
important for the development of the next generation of researchers,
practitioners and educators in this important scientific field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IEEE VIS was established in 1996 and has become the
worldwide largest and most important conference on Scientific Visualization,
Information Visualization and Visual Analytics. The IEEE VIS conference
regularly draws over 1,000 participants from dozens of countries to a week of
research presentations, tutorials, workshops, panels, demonstrations, posters,
exhibitions and scientific discussions. The IEEE VIS Doctoral Colloquium was
initiated in 2006, and has been highly successful in providing mentorship
opportunities to leading PhD students at a key time in their scientific
development. Students at the Doctoral Colloquium present their doctoral
dissertation research and receive feedback from senior professionals in the
visualization community. This event provides key feedback that shapes the
students' research and professional development, helps the participants build a
professional network both among themselves and with senior researchers in the
field, and prepares them to emerge as future leaders of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.