* 1925823
* SBP: Identifying best practices for inclusive physics learning environments
* EHR,DUE
* 02/07/2019,06/30/2019
* Rachel Scherr, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Turley
* 06/30/2019
* USD 49,358.00

This significant project will share examples of university physics departments
that effectively support women and minorities; learn what physics faculty know,
believe, and value that could help them create inclusive learning environments;
and provide evidence-based guidance to physics faculty who want to include more
women and minorities in physics. The intellectual motivations of this project
are captured by the American Physical Society's Joint Diversity Statement: "To
ensure a productive future for science and technology in the US, we must make
physics more inclusive...Underrepresented groups constitute a largely untapped
intellectual resource and a growing segment of the U.S. population"
Unfortunately many faculty remain convinced that traditional instruction,
assessment, and admissions reliably identify the "best students", in spite of
evidence that these practices discriminate against underrepresented groups. To
make physics more inclusive, physics teaching should be transformed to increase
its effectiveness for women and minorities; physics assessments should
accurately reflect student learning without discriminating against disadvantaged
groups; and physics departments should enact admissions, mentoring, and advising
practices that support all students' intellectual and professional growth. In
this project physics education researchers, social justice professionals, and
physics professional societies will work together to (1) identify physics
faculty and departments that are already striving for inclusive physics learning
environments through specific teaching efforts or departmental practices,
providing examples of practices, values, knowledge, and programs that support
equity in physics; (2) learn what knowledge, beliefs, values, and priorities
physics faculty share that could support them in creating more inclusive
learning environments; and (3) produce pilot resources for physics faculty to
change their instruction and their departmental practices to better support
inclusion of women and minorities. These pilot resources will include lessons
about physics teaching and learning based on short episodes of video
illustrating physics classrooms' best-practices and guidance for faculty on
analyzing demographic data on student assessments.