* 1925919
* Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Christian Ratsch, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2025
* USD 20,000,000.00

The mission of the Institute for Pure and Applied Mathematics (IPAM) is to build
new inclusive interdisciplinary research communities, to foster the interaction
of mathematics with a broad range of science and technology, to promote
mathematical innovation, and to engage and transform the world through
mathematics. Mathematics is becoming increasingly central to todayâ€™s science and
technology, with applications as diverse as search engines, cryptography,
medical imagining, artificial intelligence, and many others. Future
developments, from sustainable energy production to autonomous vehicles, to
quantum computers, require further mathematical innovation and application of
existing mathematics. IPAM's overall goal is to foster the interaction of
mathematicians with doctors, engineers, physical scientists, social scientists,
and humanists to enable such future technological and social progress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IPAM fulfills its mission through workshops and long
programs that connect mathematics and other disciplines or multiple areas of
mathematics. These activities bring in thousands of visitors annually from
academia, government, and industry, at all career stages. IPAM also has programs
that encourage the inclusion of women and members of minorities underrepresented
in the mathematics community, that serve specific needs of government agencies,
and that inform the public about the excitement of modern mathematics and the
important contributions that have come to society through mathematics. Student-
focused programs highlight the value of mathematics degree and the many career
paths available to mathematics majors. Through these activities, IPAM serves the
national interest. IPAM promotes the progress of science by stimulating the
mathematical developments that are needed for this progress; advances the
national health, prosperity, and welfare through programs that address current
scientific and societal challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.