* 1926134
* Collaborative Research: Petrological controls on continental uplift: static- and reactive-transport modeling of hydration-driven de-densification
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Emily Chin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2023
* USD 80,845.00

The geological processes that form broad, high-elevation plateaus in otherwise
stable and low-lying continental interiors are poorly understood. Yet, such
uplift can have profound effects on many aspects of the whole earth system,
including atmospheric circulation and biodiversity. Ultimately, the causes of
plateau uplift are driven by deep-seated processes within the Earth's crust and
lithosphere, but due to inaccessibility, such processes remain enigmatic. A
recently proposed hypothesis suggests that the addition of hydrous fluids and/or
water to nominally dry lower crust could cause mineral reactions that result in
significant changes in density and volume, leading to expansion and therefore
surface uplift. However, the magnitude of these changes as functions of rock
composition, proportion of fluid added, and depth below the Earth's surface are
unquantified. The proposed study addresses this knowledge gap by performing
laboratory analysis on rocks collected from the Colorado Plateau, USA, and
computational modeling to produce a new predictive toolbox that can constrain
the topographic effects of crustal hydration in any geological scenario
worldwide. This research will train one new PhD student, two undergraduate
students from underrepresented backgrounds, and promote new collaboration
between two US-based early-career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tectonic
effects of crustal hydration are poorly understood, owing to the absence of
realistic modeling frameworks for quantifying the petrophysical effects of
fluid-rock interaction at middle- to lower-crustal metamorphic conditions. This
research aims to directly address this issue by employing recently developed
algorithms that quantify the evolution of open and closed petrological systems
using equilibrium thermodynamics. Both 1-D and 2-D algorithms will be produced
that quantify the relationships between pressure, temperature, bulk-rock
density, hydration state, and surface uplift, which can be applied to any
crustal environment where fluid-rock interaction takes place. This will also
address both closed- and open-system geological scenarios, considering small-
scale and short-term fluid influx (e.g. crystallizing magmas) to large-scale,
continuous fluid influx (e.g. devolatilization of a subducting slab).
Predictions made for intercontinental plateau formation will be ground-truthed
by measuring mineral compositions and water contents within natural samples
exposed from different levels of the Colorado Plateau crust, as determined by
electron probe microanalysis, electron backscatter diffraction, and secondary
ion mass spectrometry. The results of this work will assist in deciphering the
driving force for its uplift during the Cenozoic and the extent to which fluids
released from the subducted Farallon slab were partitioned between the
intermediate lithospheric mantle and the lower/middle continental
crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.