* 1926163
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community Ecology of Living and Fossil Cercopithecid Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Kaye Reed, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2021
* USD 16,609.00

Old World monkeys are found across Africa and Asia today with various physical
and behavioral adaptations that allow them to survive and coexist in a range of
habitats. Fossils from Africa show a similar pattern of Old World monkey
diversity and coexistence in the past, although not all of these fossil species
survived to the present. This doctoral dissertation project will examine how Old
World monkey communities change in response to local environmental conditions
and why some species within these communities are more successful than others.
Dental features associated with dietary adaptations will be used to reconstruct
the ecologies of living and fossil Old World monkeys and to compare across
communities from different temporal and geographic settings. This will provide
long-term context for understanding the present-day diversity of Old World
monkey communities and for predicting potential responses of these communities
to ongoing and future environmental change. This project will directly engage
undergraduates in research, including students from traditionally
underrepresented groups in STEM. Photographs and measurement data will be made
freely available online to other researchers; they will also be used to create
written articles and educational materials shared with local schools and
museums, and posted online for the general public on the
AskAnAnthropologist.asu.edu website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A range of climatic,
ecological, biogeographical, and phylogenetic hypotheses have been proposed to
explain how and why present-day primate communities contain certain combinations
of species and adaptations. This project uses a broad temporal and geographic
sample of Old World monkey communities in Africa and Asia today and in the
African fossil record to systematically test hypotheses linking species
diversity, adaptation, and extinction with local environmental phenomena. Dental
metric data will be used to create a multivariate model of the Old World monkey
ecomorphological niche, from which the researchers will calculate and compare
community niche volumes, positions, and overlap. Model selection will then be
used to evaluate the relative influence of climate factors, habitat structure,
mammalian competition, and dispersal barriers in leading communities to have
similar or distinct ecomorphological niches. As Old World monkeys are well-
represented in the fossil and present-day communities, they provide an ideal
model for understanding complex patterns of diversity and extinction in the
past, present, and future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.