* 1926627
* Research Coordination Network: In situ Studies of Rock Deformation (ISRD)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2025
* Wen-Lu Zhu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2025
* USD 398,524.00

Earthquakes, volcanoes, and impact craters demonstrate the dynamic processes
active within the Earth and other bodies in the solar system. Observations of
these events alone are not enough to the underlying physics at play. Laboratory
experiments on Earth materials are essential to better understand geological,
geophysical, and geochemical observations. This Research Coordination Network
(RCN) provides the means for the researchers with a broad range of backgrounds
in Earth science and engineering to explore new technologies that are available
through high-energy X-ray facilities. This RCN will foster international
collaborations from different scientific communities and engage the next
generation of scientists. The broader impacts of the project include the
participation of women and under-represented groups in STEM fields. It will also
lay the foundation for new experimental infrastructure in rock deformation.
These efforts have wide-reaching applications in basic and applied research,
from topics like hazard mitigation to energy resources and space
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN will facilitate the integration of
beamline technologies with deformation experiments and create new directions for
experimental rock deformation research. Predictions and inferences of geodynamic
processes require extrapolation of lab-calibrated rheological models to
geological time and spatial scales that are many orders of magnitude larger than
in the laboratory. The complexity of rock deformation processes together with
the uncertainties inherent in using existing techniques make extrapolating
laboratory-derived rheological models to larger-scale deformation challenging.
Through the network, U.S. researchers will 1) identify knowledge gaps in rock
deformation that hinder our understanding of geological and geophysical
processes; 2) provide training and education opportunities for a diverse group
of experimentalists to gain necessary knowledge about beamline technologies, and
for beamline scientists to recognize the needs and constraints associated with
deformation research on geomaterials; 3) promote the discussion of expanding the
infrastructure for experimental research; and 4) foster collaborations across
disciplines to develop new experimental methodologies for studying dynamic
processes at various time scales. The RCN will also lay the foundation for new
experimental infrastructure development for rock deformation within national
radiation research centers. New data streams from these efforts will have wide-
reaching applications in basic and applied research, on topics ranging from
hazard mitigation, to energy resources, to space exploration, and beyond. This
project is supported by the Geophysics, Tectonics, GeoPRISMS and Instrumentation
and Facilities programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.