* 1926818
* NCS-FO: Integrative Approaches to Study the Role of Early Life Sleep Disruption in Brain Development and Autistic Behaviors
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hung Cao, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,027,000.00

Early life sleep disruption (ELSD) has been shown to affect the development of
complex social behaviors in animals, impairing social bonding between prairie
voles in a manner reminiscent of autism in humans. In order to understand the
underlying changes in brain development, there is a dire need to develop
innovative tools that can measure neurotransmitter levels in real-time during
complex social interactions among two or more animals. In this project, the
research team will design, implement and test novel integrated biosensor
microprobes that will simultaneously record two key brain neurotransmitters
(L-glutamate, an excitatory neurotransmitter, and Gamma Aminobutyric Acid
[GABA], an inhibitory neurotransmitter) in real time during complex social
interactions using this vole model of autism. The biosensor system will be made
wireless and will also be combined with electroencephalography (EEG), as a
measure of brain electrical activity. This highly collaborative project advances
neuroengineering by developing a much-needed method to measure
Excitation:Inhibition (E:I) balance in the brain in real-time, which will inform
fundamental questions about the brain control of social interactions in healthy
and autistic individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific tasks of this study
are as follows: Task 1) Develop and test wired, enzyme-based flexible integrated
dual-sensor probes to assess L-glutamate and GABA levels in prairie voles in
order to examine E:I balance in the brain during complex social interactions.
Task 2) Develop and test a wireless system with an integrated L-glutamate and
GABA flexible dual-sensor probe to study changes in the E:I balance the brain
during complex social interactions. Task 3) Develop and test a wireless dual
sensor probe integrated with EEG as a way to investigate effects of ELSD on EEG
gamma oscillations as a functional readout of E:I balance during complex social
interactions. The microprobes and systems developed in this project can be
generalized to other studies of neurological disorders using rodents or larger
animal models. The outcomes would help reveal how neural processes may go awry
in neurodevelopmental disorders, as well as enable the next generation of neural
prostheses, therapeutics and brain machine interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.