* 1926008
* Measuring the AMOC and meridional ocean heat transport at 26.5N: Extension of the RAPID-MOCHA Array
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* William Johns, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,085,630.00

The project will continue the US contribution to the RAPID-MOCHA oceanographic
mooring array at 26.5N in the Atlantic Ocean for an additional 18 months,
bringing the length of data record to 17.5 years. This time series monitors the
Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) and meridional heat transport
in the Atlantic Ocean. The RAPID-MOCHA array has yielded results that have
changed widely held views about the deep ocean circulation and movement of heat
across the ocean basin. Continued monitoring of the ocean structure and currents
will allow oceanographers to better determine the relevant dynamics that control
heat transport and to improve representations of the ocean role in climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AMOC is known to be an important component of
the climate system and it is believed that better understanding of the ocean
dynamics that control heat transport in the AMOC will lead to better fundamental
understanding of the Earth?s climate system and improved climate prediction. The
18-month extension of the RAPID-MOCHA will allow for longer term planning and
reconsideration of the mooring array configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.