* 1926484
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Open Library of Pollinator Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services Scenarios
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Rachael Winfree, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 179,366.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research has a goal to develop a user-friendly open
library of biodiversity and ecosystem service models for pollinators that
stakeholders can use to deliver local and global predictive maps, based on
different environmental scenarios, in particular, those associated with climate
change. Motivation for the project comes from the fact that the loss of
biodiversity, in particular with regard to pollinators, negatively impacts food
security, agricultural and economically important plant productivity, and human
well-being. Work will include the co-development of modelling software with key
stakeholder communities and the comparison of results from different modelling
approaches presently used to generate scenarios and impacts of evolving
conditions on pollinator abundance and diversity. Broader impacts of the work
include international collaboration between US scientists and those from
Argentina, Spain, and The Netherlands. They also involve a strong potential for
improving food security and crop productivity, world-wide, through a better
understanding of the impacts of ecosystem changes on pollinators and how these
might be impacted by climate change. Other impacts include the provision of
science-based findings that can be used by decision and policy makers as well as
non-governmental organizations and public administrators faced with declining
pollinator abundance and biodiversity. The work also builds infrastructure for
science by generating new co-developed predictive models with key stakeholder
groups to provide increased utility and provides public outreach via social
media and generation of short videos showcasing the project and its work. This
project includes workforce training of a graduate student and broadens
participation of underrepresented groups in sciences by supporting an
investigator whose gender is underrepresented in the sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US researchers participating in a
project competitively selected by a coalition of 26 funding agencies from 23
countries through the Belmont Forum call for proposals on "Scenarios of
Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a multilateral initiative
designed to support research projects that contribute to the development of
scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for understanding and solving
critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the competition was to improve
and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance research relevance and its
acceptance and to address gaps in methods for modelling impact drivers and
policy interventions. It was also to develop and communicate levels of
uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data accessibility and fill
gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, the funded project addresses the
issue of pollinator biodiversity and abundance and its socio-enviro-economic
impacts related to crop pollination. This research examines various scenarios of
pollinator population response and impact on ecosystems services using modelling
and data collection/aggregation, the development of scenarios tied to drivers
related to land-use changes, changes caused by human intervention, and changes
in climate and the environment. Scenarios predicting the future of biodiversity
and its associated services are a powerful tool to inform conservation and
agricultural resource planning. The research compares three families of models.
These are based on (1) data mining, (2) statistical relationships and (3)
mechanistic models. All will be parameterized using newly collected and formerly
collected data available from four different countries located on three
continents. The output of the independently developed models will be used to
identify gaps in knowledge and provide insights about the residual uncertainties
in the predictive capacity of the various models. The research employs the open
source environment, k.LAB, which is a platform designed to give access to an
integrated network of web-accessible models, to co-develop a user-friendly open
library of modelled pollinator scenarios in collaboration with key
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.