* 1926598
* MSA:  Spatio-temporal scaling of avian diversity change
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Marta Jarzyna, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 370,834.00

Biodiversity -- the variety of all forms of life, from genes to species, to
ecosystems -- serves many functions to humans and its loss is one of the most
pressing environmental issues of our time. Evidence of biodiversity change,
however, remains limited and inconsistent. This impedes predictions for the
consequences of change to future ecosystems and human well-being, and further
hinders conservation actions. Contradictory reports on the state of biodiversity
result largely from a failure to recognize that biodiversity change is complex
and takes place across many different scales. For example, if measured at local
sites, biodiversity might show no change through time because new species can
enter a region as others leave or go locally extinct. Declines at the global
scale are expected because global extinctions cannot be offset by colonizations.
Furthermore, the metrics by which biodiversity is defined and measured can
affect conclusions regarding its change. For example, even if species counts
remain constant at a given site -- giving the impression of no net change -- the
diversity of functions and traits (such as, diet type) might decline if species
leaving the site provided particularly unique ecological functions. To address
disparities in evidence for biodiversity change, the researchers will evaluate
massive databases of bird diversity collected across multiple spatial and
temporal scales in North America. The project also will quantify the role that
climate change has played in biodiversity change at each of the scales. Results
from the project can be used to assist resource management in decision-making
and to inform conservation missions. The project will provide opportunities for
broadening participation in science by involving undergraduate students and
postdoctoral researchers from groups typically underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage data collected at different
spatial and temporal scales from a number of sources: The National Ecological
Observatory Network, eBird, Breeding Bird Survey, and Christmas Bird Count.
State-of-the-art modeling techniques will be used to integrate these different
types of data and develop dynamic species' abundance distributions at spatial
resolutions from local to continental, and temporal intervals from a week to a
decade. By stacking species' abundance distributions together, dynamic estimates
of taxonomic, functional and trait, and phylogenetic diversity will be
collected. The project will quantify change in those biodiversity facets over
the course of 50 years and use novel cross-scale modeling techniques to
determine the spatial and temporal scale dependence of that change as well as
the effects of climate change. By providing the first empirical assessment of
spatiotemporal scaling of multi-faceted bird diversity change of the North
American avifauna, these efforts will help resolve ongoing debates about the
magnitude of biodiversity change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.