* 1926881
* SBIR Phase II:  Laser-Enabled Massively Parallel Die Transfer for microLED Displays
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Matthew Semler, Uniqarta, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/28/2021
* USD 297,251.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable a new display technology that,
among other benefits, reduces the power consumption associated with public
displays, TVs, mobile devices, wearables. MicroLED display technology has the
potential to reduce display power consumption by 90% relative to today's
displays, representing a large opportunity to impact the world's power
consumption profile.

The proposed project will advance the Laser Enabled Advanced Placement (LEAP)
technology to a level where microLED displays can be produced efficiently,
reliably, and in volume. MicroLED displays are widely considered to be the next
generation of display technology, but the lack of methods for placing the
millions of required microLEDs per display is one of the major obstacles to
their commercialization. LEAP solves this problem by rapidly scanning a laser
beam diffracted into multiple beamlets across the source wafer to transfer
microLED arrays in rapid succession, achieving placement rates orders of
magnitude higher than current methods. The tasks in this project include the
development and optimization of the entire LEAP process, including the
development of critical-to-the-process materials, preparation of microLEDs for
transfer, laser placement of microLEDs, and microLED interconnection on the
device substrate. The goal is to demonstrate a placement rate in excess of 100 M
units per hour with a placement precision of <10 microns (3-sigma) and a yield
of >99.5%. The project will conclude with a demonstration of a microLED display
assembled with the newly developed processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.