* 1926734
* Testing Hypotheses of Near-Equilibrium Kinetics For Silicate Minerals with an Innovative Silicon Isotope Tracer Method
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Chen Zhu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2023
* USD 410,556.00

The assessment of the safety of storing nuclear wastes and carbon dioxide in
geological repositories requires projections into a distant future. For example,
would the interactions between these wastes and surrounding minerals and rocks
cause the release of harmful materials into the environment in 10,000 years or
100,000 years? Reliable predictions over such a time span require a greater
understanding of the fundamentals regarding the rates or speed of chemical
reactions during these interactions. But these subjects have been a challenge to
study. For example, 90% of Earth's crust is made of silicate minerals, for which
silicon (Si) and oxygen are the main chemical elements, and their reactions are
slow and difficult to detect. The proposed research uses an innovative
experimental method, the isotope tracer method, to measure reaction rates in the
laboratory under conditions not possible before. These new rates will be
eventually incorporated into safety assessment models for society's general
environmental projects. In addition to scientific innovations, this project also
aims at human resources development. The underlying fundamental sciences are
thermodynamics and kinetics, which are difficult learning subjects for students.
Despite its significance, courses in thermodynamics and kinetics are
disappearing from the geology curriculum and most experts on thermodynamics are
either retired or near retirement age. To train the next generation of experts,
this project will develop a webinar series on thermodynamics and kinetics and
work with Indiana University's Center for Innovative Teaching and Learning for
broadcasting and recording. Finally, the grant will leverage Indiana
University's Minority-Serving Institution STEM initiative and the Center of
Excellence for Women in Technology to recruit underrepresented faculty and
potential doctoral students to summer research at Indiana University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will focus on geochemical kinetics
at near-equilibrium conditions and test various hypotheses using unidirectional
dissolution rate data obtained from the isotope tracer experimental method. The
key hypothesis is that the scatter and conflicts of near-equilibrium data are
caused by unaccounted-for secondary phase precipitation. Eliminating or
accounting for this possibility is a critical first step toward testing other
hypotheses of near-equilibrium reaction mechanisms and interfacial processes. In
the proposed experiments, a rare Si isotope (29Si or 30Si) is added to the
experimental solutions, which reacts with natural silicates having mostly 28Si.
The reaction rates are tracked by 29Si/28Si ratios of reacted solutions using
High-Resolution Multi-Collector ICP-MS technology. In contrast, the conventional
experimental method measures rates based on Si concentrations. Because isotope
ratios are used instead of concentrations to calculate rates, the precipitation
of Si-containing secondary phases, which consumes Si concentrations while having
a negligible effect on Si isotope ratios, does not interfere with dissolution
rate determination. The huge isotope disequilibrium introduced by overwhelming
the system with 29Si makes Si isotope fractionation during dissolution and
precipitation (2-4?) unimportant for rate determination. Currently,
extrapolation from far-from-equilibrium to near-equilibrium conditions is
necessary to translate laboratory experimental data to models of geological and
environmental processes. But little confidence can be placed on these
extrapolations because of the lack of near-equilibrium data and unsupported
assumptions. The project will fill this significant knowledge gap. The isotope
tracer method is general and novel and can be expanded to using Barium, Calcium,
and Magnesium isotopes to study sulfate, carbonate, and other minerals, and
applied to the fields of chemistry, chemical engineering, and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.