* 1926737
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: The evolutionary origins of leadership in chimpanzees: from individual minds to collective action
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Zarin Machanda, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 379,193.00

Leadership is crucial for effective cooperation, especially in large and complex
groups. Yet there is an empirical and theoretical gap in our understanding of
the individual-level processes underpinning leadership and the group-level
consequences of leadership. How does the cognition of individual leaders
translate into coordinated group action in the real world? This project proposes
using chimpanzees as a new model of human-like leadership to better understand
the evolutionary origins of our own leadership patterns. We will bridge the gap
between individual- and group-level phenomena by conducting matched research
with semi-free ranging chimpanzees living in a sanctuary where we can do
detailed assessments of cognition, and with chimpanzees living in the wild where
we can look at complex group behavior in a natural setting. By matching datasets
across these two contexts, we will be able to see how individual cognitive
process translate into group action. While humans are thought to be uniquely
able to establish leadership through prestige and collaboration instead of just
pure physical domination, chimpanzees are our closest living relative, also show
variation in how individuals obtain and maintain status in their groups. This
project will therefore illuminate the evolutionary origins of human leadership,
and also set a new agenda in evolutionary cognitive science for studying
cognition in the wild. Training, education, and outreach from elementary school
through to graduate school will be integrated throughout the project both
domestically and abroad. As part of this proposal, we will develop a leadership
module for children, using animal models to demonstrate different forms of
leadership. We will implement this module through outreach at local schools and
museums in the US and in 16 primary schools in Uganda. Undergraduates and high
school students in the US will gain hand-on research experience through
internships and in coursework. Two postdoctoral researchers and a graduate
student will further gain international research experiences in the course of
the project. This integrated approach to research and education will train a new
generation of evolutionary cognitive scientists and disseminate primate research
to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three specific aims. The
first aim is to identify individual leaders (those with outsized influence) in
natural social groups across multiple contexts of behavior including dominance
rank, initiation of group movements, resource acquisition, within-group
mediation and inter-group aggression. The second aim is to create leadership
profiles by characterizing individual variation in the cognitive, behavioral,
and physiological mechanisms of leaders across these contexts. At the sanctuary,
100+ chimpanzees across 5 social groups will be assayed for cognition (including
social cognition, cooperation, and executive function); temperament; behavior
(aggression and affiliation), and physiology (hormones and body size) to predict
leadership. At the field site, similar assessments will be made of temperament,
behavior, and physiology, drawing on a longitudinal database with 30 years of
data on 150 wild chimpanzees. These data will be used to test the hypothesis
that there are distinct pathways to leadership in chimpanzees, with
intimidation-based and cooperative strategies being the most important, but
knowledge and motivation anchoring some forms of leadership. The final aim is to
understand how variation in leadership styles shapes the outcomes of collective
action by examining several short-and long-term metrics of leadership success,
including group cohesion, rewards received, and biological outcomes like
reproductive success that can only be studied in the wild. This project will
bridge individual-level and group-level perspectives on cognition, behavior, and
physiology by leveraging the strengths of two natural populations of
chimpanzees. The project will match experimental and observational techniques
across sites on a scale never previously done, and will develop chimpanzees as a
new model for human leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.