* 1926480
* Research Initiation: Improving Engineering-Related Social Cognitions through Teaching Practices
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sarah Orton, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 211,312.00

Success in engineering requires not only technical knowledge and skills but also
belief in the ability to succeed in the challenges one may face in engineering
studies and engineering careers. Furthermore, these beliefs have been found to
be important factors in the success of women and underrepresented racial/ethnic
groups in engineering. Colleges and universities can help address this need by
creating engineering programs enhance these beliefs through modified teaching
practices. This not only improves the engineering education of all students but
also would address a national need for greater representation in engineering. In
this project, researchers will work with engineering faculty to develop
instructional activities that target these beliefs and attributes, and then
measure how these teaching practices are related to changes in two specific
types of beliefs: self-efficacy and outcomes expectations. The ultimate benefit
of the project would be to find a link between certain teaching practices and
improved beliefs about one's self. Such a finding would lead to improved yet
easily integrated teaching practices that may have a real impact on engineering
education as well as the retention and success of underrepresented groups in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;This project will give evidential support on the
relationship between social cognitive based teaching practices and improvement
in self-efficacy (the belief in one's abilities to successfully accomplish tasks
in a given domain) and outcome expectations (the beliefs about the consequences
of performing particular behaviors) by examining the impact of these practices
on the social cognitions among students in classes targeted for these practices
as compared to a control group. Furthermore, we will investigate the
differential impact of teaching practices based on gender and assess if the
improvements persist in later semesters. In addition, we test a model that
examines the associations of engineering-related self-efficacy, positive outcome
expectations, and negative outcome expectations on students' intentions to
persist in engineering. Social Cognitive Career Theory recognized for its
potential in expanding the involvement of underrepresented groups in STEM
careers, serves as the theoretical framework for the proposed study. The
research seeks to provide data to answer the following questions: Can
engineering-related social cognitions among engineering students be improved
through teaching practices? Does Social Cognitive Career Theory explain the
relations among self-efficacy, positive outcome expectations, negative outcome
expectations, and persistence intentions? An engineering faculty learning
community will be established where 6 faculty members will learn about social
cognitions and implement and document social cognitive-based teaching
instructional strategies in their courses to improve the social cognitions of
their engineering students. The impact of the teaching practices will be
documented through student surveys before, during, and after the subject courses
are taken, as well as outcomes compared to control group students taught by the
same faculty. The data from this project will serve as preliminary data to
analyze and develop social cognitive based teaching practices that will aid in
the retention and success of engineers from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.