* 1926454
* Collaborative Research: MSA: Incorporating canopy structural complexity to improve model forecasts of functional effects of forest disturbance
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jaclyn Matthes, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2021
* USD 29,622.00

Disturbances such as fire, storms, and insect outbreaks change the physical
structure of forests and affect growth rates. Severe disturbances often reduce
forest growth rates; these events are well-studied but rare. Most disturbances
are more moderate and can boost growth rates by reshaping forest canopies to
increase light capture and carbon uptake. Ecosystem models often fail to predict
forest responses to moderate disturbances. This is partly because they rely on
simplistic concepts of forest structure. Remote sensing methods can detect
disturbances and measure impacts on forest structure. This project combines
these methods to improve model predictions of forest responses to moderate
disturbance. Better model predictions will help improve forest management
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will leverage decades of Landsat
satellite imagery to map recent (&lt;5 years old) disturbances at forested NEON
sites. LiDAR from the NEON Aerial Observation Platform (AOP) will characterize
canopy structure at these sites by calculating several structural metrics with
demonstrated links to ecosystem functions. We will identify structural
signatures of several forest disturbances by comparing canopy structure in
disturbed areas to nearby undisturbed areas. The range of disturbance types and
severity, in combination with a wide diversity of forest types will provide a
macrosystem-level understanding of disturbance consequences for forest
structure. We will use the resulting maps of disturbance and canopy structure to
test the skill of the Ecosystem Demography (ED2) model at capturing the
structural and functional outcomes of disturbance. Using model experiments, we
will quantify the improvements in Net Primary Production and Net Ecosystem
Production by assimilating NEON AOP structural data into
ED2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.