* 1926817
* Changes in Biomass Burning Aerosol Radiative Properties Due to Atmospheric Processing of Wildfire Plumes Over the Northwestern United States
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Rajan Chakrabarty, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 410,856.00

This study will provide new insights about the chemical and physical properties
of wildfire smoke. Ground-based measurements using state-of-the-art optical
instrumentation will provide data on the aerosol optical and physico-chemical
properties from wildfires and prescribed burns in the northwestern United States
as part of an interagency collaborative field campaign (FIREX-AQ) funded by NOAA
and NASA. A better understanding of the properties of smoke aerosol will improve
both air quality and climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the summer in
2019, a dual-cell, multi-wavelength integrated photoacoustic-nephelometer
spectrometer and a portable asymmetry parameter monitor will be deployed to
Boise Idaho for 4 weeks to characterize and constrain aerosol spectral optical
properties as a function of fire phase, wildland fuel type, and daytime and
nighttime aging of smoke. Controlled heterogeneous oxidation experiments of
organic aerosol will be performed during select smoldering phase episodes using
a Potential Aerosol Mass (PAM) oxidation flow tube reactor, which creates a
highly oxidizing environment that simulates atmospheric oxidation processes on
timescales ranging from a day up to several weeks in a short period of a few
minutes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some of the research questions that will be
investigated as part of this study include the following: (1) How do the aerosol
optical properties, scattering and absorption cross-sections, single scattering
albedo, Angstrom exponent, and asymmetry parameter evolve with varying oxidation
states, size, hygroscopicity, wildland fuel type and fire phase? (2) How do the
wavelength-dependent complex refractive indices of light absorbing organic
aerosol change with different degrees of atmospheric processing? (3) What is the
contribution of the water-soluble organic carbon to absorption by organic
aerosol? (4) What are the enhancement factors for mass absorption and scattering
cross-sections of black carbon upon various degrees of internal mixing with
organic aerosol? (5) Could mechanistic insight and simpler parameterizations
using the concept of scaling laws be obtained for integration in process-based
models? And (6) Can generalized inferences be deduced regarding distinctive and
differentiating properties of organic aerosol microphysical and optical
properties from real-world versus laboratory burns?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project includes several outreach activities, such as summer teacher training
workshops for middle and high school teachers on air
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.