* 1926652
* SBIR Phase II:  LookingBus: Improving Public Transportation Services for the Blind
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Yariv Glazer, ILANS, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2023
* USD 946,704.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop an industry-ready service to
improve public transportation for riders with disabilities, specifically visual
impairments. The LookingBus technology helps drivers accommodate the needs of
certain riders, while limiting distractions from their primary roles of driving
safely. Individuals with visual impairments depend heavily on public transit as
an essential service for daily life, social activities, and employment. However,
they often face challenges with (1) finding the correct bus stop, (2)
determining which bus to board, and (3) departing the bus at the right stop. By
developing an advanced notification service for alerting bus drivers, LookingBus
will address the societal and market needs to mitigate these challenges. The
product will promote independent, confident use of public transportation for
riders with visual impairments, which may also promote a greater opportunity to
pursue and maintain employment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
further develop and commercialize LookingBus, an industry-ready service to
enhance public transportation experience for riders with disabilities, such as
visual impairments. LookingBus provides an advanced notification system alerting
drivers about riders at upcoming stops and their planned destinations. The
proposed system will integrate a beacon at the bus stop with a display on the
bus connected to an app on the user's mobile phone. This assures that riders
with disabilities can safely utilize fixed-route public
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.