* 1926510
* Collaborative Research: Towards a Generalized Microkinetic Description of Lignin Liquefaction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Manuel Garcia-Perez, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 140,000.00

Lignin is an abundant natural resource whose higher carbon content, when
compared to cellulose and hemicellulose, makes it a very attractive renewable
feedstock for producing fuels and chemicals. Lignin liquefaction is a promising
process for converting this underutilized resource into monomeric phenols that
can be easily upgraded to fuels and chemicals, but the underlying chemical
kinetic processes are not well understood. This collaborative research project
aims to develop a rational framework that integrates modelling and experimental
tools to explicitly account for lignin and its oligomeric intermediate chemical
structures at relevant liquefaction conditions in the presence or absence of
solvents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lignin liquefaction can be conducted in aqueous
environments (hydrothermal liquefaction), in organic solvents (solvolysis), in
ionic liquids or in solvent free conditions (pyrolysis). Assigning a realistic
chemical formula to lignin and its oligomeric intermediates is one of the major
challenges to rationally describe and control lignin liquefaction reactions. The
mechanisms by which solvents and additives impact liquefaction reactions are
also poorly understood. Because of this, lignin liquefaction remains an art
rather than a science. The main goal of this project is to develop a rational
micro-kinetic framework based on detailed micro-kinetic models describing
depolymerization and repolymerization reactions and intermediate products
removal mechanisms during lignin liquefaction. The practical goal is to use this
mathematical model and experimental tools to identify suitable lignin
liquefaction strategies in the presence of solvents and acid-base catalysts to
maximize mono-phenol production which will facilitate further bio-oil upgrading
in existing infrastructure. In addition to training two graduate students the
principal investigators plan to host female and underrepresented minority high
school students in their laboratories as summer research interns through the
Summer Research Opportunity Program at Northwestern University and the Pacific
Northwest Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.