* 1926852
* SBIR Phase II:  All-Carbon, Chemically Cross-Linked 3D Nano Assemblies for Liquid Chromatography
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Balaji Sitharaman, Millennial Materials and Devices Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2022
* USD 779,175.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development of high-performance all-carbon
reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) column packing
material. Customers of the $1.3 Billion/year HPLC column market include life
science, biochemical, industrial, nutritional safety, environmental,
agricultural, process engineering, academic and governmental organizations.
Reversed-phase columns account for the majority of the HPLC column market.
Chromatography technology plays a vital role in the development of life-saving
pharmaceutical products and medical therapies, ensuring the safety of our food
and water, protection of our environment, and guarding public health. The
project will focus on the scale-up, and market validation of all carbon powder-
packed reverse phase HPLC columns. The successful outcomes of Phase II will: a)
Lay the foundation for scale-up manufacturing of initial product and accelerate
its commercialization. b) Engage pharmaceutical end-users for beta testing to
validate the value proposition, and c) Provide scientific insights that will
serve as the guiding principles for the synthesis of column packing materials
for other chromatography applications such as preparative chromatography, and
Ultra-high HPLC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to
focus on crucial technical steps that will allow the commercial deployment of
chemically-crosslinked all carbon powder packed reverse phase column packing
material. Upon market entry, the technology will attract customers whose
analysis requirements fall outside the capabilities of current silica-
(Hydrophobic alkyl chains typically comprising of 18 carbon atoms (C18) bonded
to silica support) or graphitic carbon-based columns as well as those who are
seeking faster more efficient analysis at a lower cost. It will also attract
customers seeking next-generation performance capabilities for separation of
structurally similar compounds, biologics, biobetters, or biosimilars. Molecules
would include geometric isomers and diastereoisomers (e.g., chiral drugs such as
thalidomide), biogenic (e.g., catecholamines or other hormones that are
modulated in many neurologic disorders such as Alzheimer Disease).
Macromolecules include structurally similar compounds (e.g., hemoglobin variants
in sickle cell anemia) and many drug metabolites (e.g., glucuronide in opioid
metabolites).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.