* 1926605
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Identity as a Moderator of Stress Physiology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Quinn, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

In this doctoral research project, the investigator will examine biological
pathways through which exposure to social stress can affect physiological well-
being. The research will focus on Native American populations who are
historically understudied yet experience high levels of stress-related
disparities. Stress physiology will be assessed using various biomarkers,
including salivary cortisol, blood pressure (BP), and additional biometric data.
Semi-structured interviews, demographic questionnaires, psychometric measures,
and identity scales will be used to assess how cultural identity, psychosocial
stress, historical trauma, health status and stress physiology interact. The
results of this research will advance understanding of how seemingly unrelated
psychological mechanisms and social environments may contribute to disparities
in physiological well-being among minority populations in the United States. The
project will also support student training and science outreach activities,
including among groups underrepresented in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the relationship between
psychosocial stress, stress physiology, and physiological disparities by
assessing: 1: the prevalence of diagnosed and suspected stress-related
conditions in an Indigenous Community in the Pacific Northwest (ICPN); 2:
allostatic load (chronic stress) in members of ICPN, as defined by an Allostatic
Load Index (ALI) comprising neuroendocrine, metabolic, cardiovascular, and
immune system biomarkers; and 3: the relationship between variation in HPA-axis
regulation (stress physiology) and allostatic load, and stress-related disease
occurrence, Indigenous ancestry, historical trauma, and cultural identity in
ICPN. This project moves away from a research focus on purely biological factors
in understanding racial disparities, toward a holistic understanding of how
unequal social and psychological environments negatively impact physiological
well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.