* 1926949
* SBIR Phase II:  The Data Context Map
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Eric Papenhausen, Akai Kaeru, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 759,343.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that it will help scientists gain a better
understanding of the underlying relationships in their data and as a result help
humans make better decisions from data. The advantage of big data is that it
allows for the possibility of identifying truly meaningful relationships.
Exposing these relationships can provide great benefits for many different
problem domains, and therefore has high commercial appeal in applications such
as fraud detection in credit card or insurance data, drug discovery, and
identifying threats to national security in homeland security data. Identifying
previously unseen relationships also plays a big part in scientific research and
discovery. Great scientific discoveries come from a deep understanding of the
world around us. Data can capture these relationships, but this is only useful
if a researcher can identify them. This motivates the need for sophisticated
tools that can present these relationships in a comprehensible way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will address the problem of mining and visualizing very high dimensional
and time varying data sets. Modern data sets can have many thousands of
attributes which can introduce a significant amount of noise and conflicting
relationships. This problem is compounded in time varying datasets as some
relationships can be inconsistent and disappear over time. There is hence a
great need to find and explain temporally consistent and reliable relationships
in large data sets. This Phase II project will accomplish this by developing a
set of novel interactive visualizations that will find these consistent
relationships and explain how they change over time. It will use causal analysis
and also extend it to the temporal domain in which causes with delayed effects
will be identified (e.g. smoking causes cancer after many decades). Finally, as
these data mining techniques can be very computationally expensive, this Phase
II project will develop useful optimizations to make them more efficient. The
company expects that the results of this research will enable scientists and
consequently end users to identify previously unseen relationships, leading to
new discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.