* 1926793
* NCS-FO: Developing engineering solutions to investigate microbiome-to-neuron communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The goal of this project is to create an engineering solution to measure and
predict the molecular communication across the gut-microbiome-brain axis. This
platform has the potential to facilitate the fundamental understanding of gut
microbiome communication with the nervous system. The project will quantify
release patterns of key molecules involved in this cross-talk and identify their
influence on neural activation and behavior. The gut-microbiome-brain axis,
comprising a vast network of nerves innervating the gut and propagating signals
to the brain, is a major influencer of behavior and cognition. The
neurotransmitter serotonin is a key molecule in this pathway; gut epithelial
cells sense luminal conditions and release serotonin to stimulate nearby
neurons. The gut microbiome has been shown to mediate this serotonin release, a
process that is also linked to the co-occurrence of gastric and neural
disorders. The technical underpinnings of this work involve designing and
constructing a device that enables researchers to assemble the essential
components of the gut-microbiome-neuron tissue interface. The device is
fabricated with sensors to obtain information that is currently inaccessible -
collecting molecular information at the length and time scales of the cells and
tissues under investigation. The data extracted from this platform will enable
temporal correlation and prediction of microbial, gut, and neural signaling
patterns. This work provides opportunities to bring together researchers and
stakeholders from various disciplines including electrical and computer
engineering, bioengineering, molecular biology, neuroscience, and data science
to develop a system-oriented approach. Further, this project promotes the
participation of women, historically underrepresented in engineering, and
undergraduates through programs such as Women in Engineering Research Fellowship
and First-Year Innovation and Research Experience (FIRE).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multidisciplinary engineering methods are essential to
building an in vitro discovery platform capable of directly monitoring chemical
transduction patterns along the gut-neuron axis. In TASK 1, electrochemical
sensors will be directly fabricated on a porous cell culture substrate, allowing
direct access to cellular and molecular mechanisms of an in vitro model gut
epithelium. Impedance monitoring of the cell layer will detect physical changes
over time (e.g., barrier integrity). Potentiometric monitoring will detect real-
time serotonin released from gut cells due to bacterial metabolite stimulation.
In TASK 2, the neural effect of gut serotonin signaling will be studied by
exposing this cell-released serotonin to an isolated ex vivo crayfish nerve cord
with connected and innervated hindgut. Neurobehavioral activation patterns will
be recorded during hindgut peristalsis in motor and sensory neurons that
bidirectionally connect the central and enteric nervous systems. Machine
learning approaches will identify key variables to quantify discrete serotonin
release and neuronal activation patterns. In TASK 3, the mucosal layer of the
gut epithelium will be colonized with specific gut microbes to assess bacterial
influence on barrier integrity, serotonin release patterns, and resulting
neuromuscular activation. Classification via machine learning will quantify the
wholistic and synergistic effects of different microbial combinations on time-
dependent serotonin release profiles and downstream effects. There are multiple
novel aspects of this work. First, this is a new platform implementing extensive
integrated cell-interfacial sensors for direct access to real-time cell and
molecular data. Second, the use of this technology to investigate the interplay
between gut and nervous system can give unprecedented insight into the vast and
relatively inaccessible gut-brain transduction pathways. Third, machine learning
analysis can identify meaningful patterns of serotonergic communication and
predict the expected impact of gut bacteria on neural
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.