* 1926078
* Quantifying the Effect of Surface Heating and Aerosols on Sea-Breeze Forced Deep Convection
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Francis Robinson, Sacred Heart University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 252,060.00

In the tropics, deep convection is largely controlled by surface temperature
variations. Islands in ocean regions exert significant control on the setting of
the surface temperature variation. The initiation of deep convection is often
controlled by sea breezes, which force large upward vertical air motions.
Numerical weather forecast models have difficulty to incorporate air
circulations caused by island sea breezes with various sizes and topographies
and their role in enhancing aerosol emissions. The interaction between aerosols
and convective vigor particularly over islands is poorly understood. Convection
over islands could contain relatively high aerosol concentration compared to air
flows over sea, which provides nuclei for water to condense on in forming
clouds. The study is to determine the occurrence, mechanisms, and environmental
conditions of sea breeze convection initiation, the effect of orography on sea
breeze forced convection over islands, and the effect of aerosol-sea breeze
interaction on convective vigor over islands. The project will involve
undergraduate students to participate in the cutting-edge research by learning
high performance computing and developing a rigorous approach to problem solving
and scientific analysis. Furthermore, because cloud formation and precipitation
forecast remain one of difficult problems in weather forecasting, the knowledge
gained from this study may shed light on convective cloud processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will use a hierarchy of cloud resolving
numerical models, forward modeling satellite simulators, and satellite/radar
observations to investigate the following physical hypotheses: 1) sea-breeze-
aerosol interactions control both initiation and intensity of deep convection;
2) heated island air that contains island aerosols triggers deep convection
principally via sea-breeze or cold-pool dynamics. The numerical result will be
used to simulate satellite observations by applying the Satellite Data Simulator
Unit (SDSU); comparisons of actual satellite data with SDSU simulated outputs
will provide a bridge between the observational and modeling components of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.