* 1926197
* Oscillatory Diffusion - A New Diffusion Mechanism for Particulates in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Marshall, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,091.00

A bacterial biofilm is formed of bacteria embedded in a network of a secreted
material called extracellular polymeric substance (EPS). Bacteria living in
biofilms are responsible for many human infectious diseases, including cystic
fibrosis, tuberculosis, sinusitis, tooth decay, heart disease, urinary tract
infections, and infections from contaminated medical devices and implants.
Bacterial biofilms play a central role in food contamination, water
purification, greenhouse gas generation, and breakdown of environmental
contaminants. Methods for treating biofilms involve nanoparticles or antibiotic
liquids that can be encapsulated in small protein capsules called liposomes,
which can penetrate into the biofilm and release a chemical onto the bacterial
colonies. The research team has found that exposure to ultrasound can enhance
the rate of penetration of nanoparticles into a biofilm. This award will support
a detailed experimental and theoretical investigation of the underlying
hydrodynamic mechanisms responsible for enhanced penetration. The investigators
propose that the combination of oscillatory flow produced by the ultrasound plus
hindered motion of the particles by the porous medium through which they travel
results in a novel type of diffusive transport termed oscillatory diffusion. The
award will support experiments to measure the effect of ultrasound on diffusion
enhancement of nanoparticles in a hydrogel, which is a model of a biofilm, and
to examine the detailed motion of individual particles. A mathematical model
will be developed to connect the results of these two experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve understanding of
the oscillatory diffusion phenomenon, in which acoustic excitation is observed
to enhance diffusion of particulates in a porous medium. The target application
involves the use of ultrasound to enhance diffusion of nanoparticles and
liposomes in a biofilm. The primary mechanism for transport of particles and
chemicals in biofilms is diffusion, which regulates supply of minerals and
nutrients to bacterial colonies and bacteria gene regulation response via cell
population sensing (quorum sensing). The oscillatory diffusion phenomenon was
recently discovered by the investigators using moderate-intensity ultrasound to
inject liposomes filled with antibiotic chemicals into a biofilm for biofilm
mitigation. Ultrasound was also shown to enhance penetration of nanoparticles
into an algar hydrogel, which models a biofilm protein matrix. This award will
support two experimental components and one modeling component. A nanoparticle
bulk diffusion experiment will measure ultrasound-induced nanoparticle diffusion
coefficient and acoustic streaming velocity in a hydrogel. An individual
particle tracking experiment will track motion of individual particles in a
porous bed subject to an oscillating flow field to better understand the
phenomenon at the individual particle level. The data from these experimental
studies will be used to improve and validate a stochastic model of oscillating
diffusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.