* 1926928
* IIBR RoL:  Collaborative Research:  A Rules Of Life Engine (RoLE) Model to Uncover Fundamental Processes Governing Biodiversity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ana Carnaval, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,690.00

An unprecedented opportunity to advance understanding of the biological rules
that govern the diversity and dynamics of life now exists thanks to the large
quantity and variety of data that are becoming increasingly available. This goal
of understanding biodiversity dynamics is enabled at a critical moment when
human systems are disrupting those very dynamics. However, the scientific and
computational tools needed to derive understanding from data are still missing.
Such tools need to be accessible to a broad community of users, thereby
catalyzing involvement and innovation. This project will (1) build a
computational model for multiple aspects of biodiversity-species abundance,
genetic, functional, and phylogenetic; (2) use and refine this model by testing
major hypotheses about the generation and maintenance of biodiversity in three
exemplar systems; (3) make the model accessible to the scientific community by
building an open-source platform to prepare diverse data sources and run the
model; and (4) create pedagogically effective courses and workshops to enable
students, researchers, and stakeholders from many backgrounds to understand
biodiversity theory and the data science tools needed to test those theories
with data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rules of Life Engine (RoLE) model will be a
mechanistic, simulation-based hypothesis-testing and data synthesis framework
enabling scientists with multi-dimensional biodiversity data to generate and
test hypotheses about the processes driving biodiversity patterns. The RoLE
model will apply new techniques in machine learning to fit models to high
dimensional, cross-scale data. The model will simulate eco-evolutionary
community assembly building from individual-based ecological and genetic neutral
models with added non-neutral, trait-based competition and environmental
filtering. New species and traits will arise through long time scale evolution
in the meta-community and rapid evolution in the local community. Population
genetics and species abundances in the local community will be modeled through
birth, death, immigration, and mutation. The project research team will refine
and illustrate the use of the RoLE model by testing four hypothesized rules of
life across three bio-geographic systems for which multi-scale biodiversity data
are now available. The hypotheses address the relative roles of immigration
versus speciation in community assembly, how species interactions influence
diversity, how different assembly histories determine the strength of species
interactions, and whether/how systems come to equilibrium. The project leaders
have established a network of 14 collaborators, including the National
Ecological Observatory Network, who will use the RoLE model in their diverse
systems and propagate wider adoption. In order to further reduce barriers to
use, the RoLE model framework will be made available as open source software,
including an R language Shiny App interface with standardized metadata outputs
to promote reproducibility and sharing. The insights gained from the RoLE model
are of direct relevance to conservation, e.g., whether or not communities are
assembled primarily by speciation or immigration strongly determines their
response to anthropogenic pressures and optimal conservation management. To
encourage participation in quantitative biodiversity research, the project
leaders will develop a massively open online course through the Santa Fe
Institute?s Complexity Explorer program using the RoLE model as an interactive
teaching tool. In conjunction with Data Carpentry and Software Carpentry, the
research team will also provide an in-person data science training workshop.
Results from the RoLE project can be found at https://role-
model.github.io.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.