* 1926043
* Standard: Promoting Ethics in STEM with Transparency Initiatives that Work: An Interdisciplinary Investigation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Yulia Tsvetkov, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 384,332.00

The production of valid scientific findings in STEM fields depends crucially on
the ethical practices of scientists. Research integrity is receiving increased
attention because of recent instances of data-fabrication, growing complaints
about failure to replicate published results, and studies showing that
researchers admit to engaging in questionable practices that undermine the
validity of scientific results. To promote ethical practices, many universities
and research institutions encourage researchers to be more transparent in the
research process. Transparency initiatives include encouraging researchers to
pre-register their studies - that is, to submit a study plan prior to beginning
the research - or provide public proof of compliance with ethical standards.
Little is known about how well such transparency initiatives work in terms of
preventing questionable research practices. The current project explores when
transparency policies work, when they may backfire, actually encouraging
unethical behavior, and how to improve their design to make them more effective.
It is crucial to investigate how initiatives designed to promote integrity
interact with human behavior and to understand the contexts that cause people to
bend rules while still thinking of themselves as honest. The current
interdisciplinary project combines insights from psychology, behavioral
economics, and machine learning to advance an understanding of how policies
designed to promote transparency in research affect individuals' propensity to
commit violations of ethical conduct. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a
unique combination of machine learning analysis of real-world data, survey data,
and online experiments to explore the predictors and causes of unethical
scientific conduct. One study examines pre-registered research plans from a
large public database of clinical studies. Selected research plans are matched
to the academic journal articles that resulted from the pre-registered studies,
and articles that are retracted - withdrawn from the journal because of
scientific problems with the work - are noted. The pre-registrations of
publications that were vs. were not retracted are compared using computational
methods at the intersection of natural language processing and machine learning.
The goal of this analysis is to identify features of a pre-registered study plan
(for example, being shorter or using more vague language) that predict that the
resulting article will later be retracted. This analysis identifies when a well-
intentioned intervention (pre-registration) fails to promote responsible
research conduct. Another study surveys STEM researchers about causes of
scientific misconduct and perceptions of transparency initiatives aimed at
preventing it. This work is complemented by online experiments aimed at
investigating the psychology of misconduct in a task where individuals have
incentives to misreport information for private gains, which is analogous to the
incentives scientists experience to tease significant results out of their data.
These experiments investigate the conditions under which transparency policies
that encourage individuals to provide evidence of ethical conduct might have
unintended effects, increasing rather than decreasing individuals' tendency to
violate ethical standards. A final set of experiments tests behavioral
interventions that directly address the psychological drivers of misconduct
identified in the previous studies. Taken together, this interdisciplinary
project informs the design of transparency initiatives that work in promoting
ethical conduct in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.