* 1926684
* SBIR Phase II:  3D Photonic Filters for Full Duplex, Interference Free Network Links
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Brian Mattis, GenXComm Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2022
* USD 714,874.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project include the ability to
meet the requirements of cable infrastructure while opening additional markets
in spectrum allocation by solving key technical problems. There is a massive
need for improved connectivity for both fixed and mobile applications, in both
urban and rural communities, within the nation. Wired infrastructure has
struggled to keep up with the needs of users due to the large capital involved
in deploying fiber to communities. Additionally, new applications like Internet
of Things (IoT) and autonomous vehicles are entirely reliant on wireless
technologies. Mobile data usage has been experiencing exponential growth, 92%
CAGR from 2006-2016. Current mobile infrastructure cannot support next
generation applications like remote healthcare, vehicle-to-vehicle and vehicle-
to-infrastructure communication for self-driving vehicles and next generation
connected farming. These applications are constrained by the available
bandwidth, low reliability and high latency of today's mobile networks. The
industry is looking to expand reach and capacity of existing infrastructure to
enable these applications with the potential to drastically communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
will build upon the existing low-loss photonic integrated circuit (PIC) Finite
Impulse Response (FIR) filter technology developed under Phase I by
demonstrating a commercially viable three-dimensional (3D) PIC filter and
canceler. The intellectual merit centers around the 3D PIC architecture with
fast layer switching and ultra-low-loss waveguides for creating highly
adaptable, tunable true time delays and detailed characterization of interfering
signals in complex, dynamic multi-path reflection environments in cable and
wireless solutions. The 3D PIC system aims to achieve under this project: total
interference cancellation of &gt;100 dB; small die footprint for a multi-tap
cancellation FIR filter; high-speed switching; demonstration of full duplex
communication links; and demonstration of band leakage and PIM interference
cancellation in a laboratory environment. The improved designs will allow
targeting additional markets in wireless communication involving complex
interference cancellation scenarios that today severely limit spectrum
utilization and network throughput. The proposed 3D PICs not only enable full
duplex operation (co-channel self-interference) but also adjacent channel
cancellation (guard band elimination) and passive intermodulation distortion
(PIM) cancellation for higher throughput backhaul.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.