* 1926804
* NCS-FO:Collab:Multimodal sampling of neural ensembles: A high-density opto-electro-chemical neural interface for simultaneous electrical recording and optical imaging of cell-types
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Maysamreza Chamanzar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 375,773.00

This project develops novel devices and methods to record the electrical
activity of large numbers of neurons while simultaneously identifying their
specific cell types. Specific cell types have precise computational roles in
neural information processing systems, but in most cases cell types are not
identifiable from electrical activity alone. In cortical regions responsible for
decision making, the difficulties posed by intermingled cell types are further
complicated by layers, recurrent connections, and the multitude of interneuron
types. In order to understand how neural information processing systems mediate
decision making, it is necessary to (1) record simultaneously from many neurons
to quantify high-dimensional activity, (2) identify and ascertain the precise
computational roles of the cell types within those ensembles, and (3) chemically
perturb neural ensembles to determine causal functionality. This project will
for the first time enable all 3 of these capabilities simultaneously. The
proposed neural interface will incorporate recording electrodes, neurochemical
stimulators, and flat optical imager waveguides all in the slim form factor of
an implantable micro-needle. This device will be used to study the detailed
circuit-level functionality of specific cell types involved in the population
activity of neurons. The collaboration between a team of engineers and
biologists provides a unique interdisciplinary environment for training graduate
and undergraduate students working on this project. The PIs will also design a
new course on neurotechnology to teach students about the needs in neuroscience
research and opportunities in engineering to design next generation neural
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates an integrative
approach based on innovations in technology (nanotechnology, photonics, and
neurotechnology) as well as advancements in fundamental neurobiology and
transcriptional profiling of cells based on optical tagging to shed light on the
role of specific cell types on collective actions of neurons during behavior.
Building on a recently developed polymer-based optical waveguide platform with
embedded micromirror ports, the investigators will design a novel flat imager
that can be monolithically integrated with micro-electrodes to optically image
the cell identities, while simultaneously recording their electrophysiology
activity. The proposed neural interface (i) is compact and flexible, (ii)
combines high-density electrical recording with chemical stimulation, (iii)
contains electrically actuated nanocomposite polymers, and (iv) enables on-shank
fluorescent imaging using a novel micro-imager array based on parylene polymer
photonic waveguides. The utility of this technology platform will be
demonstrated for studying cell types involved in encoding sensory sensations in
rats during whisker stimulation. The developed multimodal probes will also be
disseminated to different neurobiology labs to be used in other experimental
contexts to amplify the impact of the proposed project. The outcome of this
cross-field research will be (i) a new technology platform that can be used to
test various neuroscience hypotheses on the role of specific cell types in
encoding and transforming information in brain and (ii) a valuable dataset that
can enhance existing mathematical models of neuronal population activity by
adding new dimensions to the existing large-scale data based solely on
electrophysiology, and will enable an entirely new class of neurobiology
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.