* 1926209
* STANDARD: Ethical Approaches to Empower Disabled Graduate Students in STEM
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Kristen Shinohara, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 281,900.00

This award supports a project that will investigate how academic culture and
relationships systematically disadvantage disabled students; specifically, it
will focus on disabled graduate students in computing. The researcher will
investigate manifestations of ableism, the act of privileging nondisabled people
over those with disabilities, which is understood for the purposes of the
investigation as an ethical issue. She will determine how ableist academic
culture contributes to unethical systemic obstacles for achievement at the
graduate level. To do so, she will interview graduate students with disabilities
in computing and related fields. She will recruit current and former graduate
students with a diverse representation across disabilities in computing and
related fields from different institutions. She will also interview faculty who
have advised such students, and representatives from different university
disability services offices. She will use this data to develop a set of
guidelines on how to address accessibility barriers in research are to be
developed on the basis of the outcomes of this project. The guidelines will be
disseminated to students, faculty advisors, and university disability services
offices so they can begin to adopt anti-ableist language and strategies and
actively incorporate inclusion in their work. Those who stand to benefit from
the outcomes of this are not limited to those in computing; they will also be
applicable to students and researchers in adjacent
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a research project to addresses a
fundamental research question: How do academic expectations and relationships
contravene ethical conduct and create barriers for disabled graduate students,
and what guidance and resources effectively empower students and allies to
engage equitable and anti-ableist practices to enable students to achieve
success? To address this research question, we propose to use a qualitative
research approach to analyze public-facing institutional disability service
policies, and to interview disabled graduate students, faculty advisors, and
disability services staff to understand how resources and attitudes toward
disability create barriers for disabled students at the graduate level. The
researcher will then critically analyze this qualitative data with an ethical
anti-ableist lens and engage participatory design efforts to develop toolkits
with guidelines and strategies that incorporate anti-ableist approaches for
graduate students, faculty advisors, and disability service offices. The project
will contribute knowledge about academic culture that may persist ableist
barriers to success for disabled graduate students. Contributions of this work
include empirical findings about how ableism manifests as barriers for graduate
students, and a toolkit with guidelines that incorporate anti-ableist strategies
for academic success for disabled students, faculty advisors and disability
services offices. She will deploy toolkits to students, faculty and disability
service offices and evaluate the effectiveness of the toolkits to provide useful
anti-ableist strategies to empower students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.