* 1926348
* Standard: STEM Training in Ethics of Publication Practices (STEPP)
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Amy Koerber, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 12/31/2023
* USD 345,702.00

STEM Training in Ethics of Publication Practices (STEPP) is a research and
training program that prepares STEM scholars and other key stakeholders to
navigate a scholarly publishing terrain that presents more options than ever
before, but also greater ethical pitfalls. It addresses the critical need for
greater understanding of predatory publishing - an exploitive publication
business model often involving charging publication fees to authors without
checking articles for quality and legitimacy. Predatory publication practices
cause concern because the core of the academic mission - to generate credible
knowledge - is only fully realized through ethically sound communication of this
knowledge, both to peer scholars and society at large. The STEPP program deepens
understanding of the ethical challenges arising from predatory publishing
through empirical research that solicits input from key stakeholders, including
emerging and established scientists, administrators who serve as gatekeepers in
academic hiring, tenure and promotion, and science journalists responsible for
ensuring that the public receives accurate reporting on scientific research. The
training component then designs, delivers, and assesses a program that is
broadly relevant across the STEM disciplines but that can also be customized
according to differences across these disciplines. Training modules will be
pilot tested, and final versions will be made available to a diverse global
audience through partnerships with organizations such as the Online Ethics
Center for Engineering &amp; Science, Think. Check. Submit., and Author
Aid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM Training in Ethics of Publication Practices
(STEPP) is a research and training program that prepares scholars and other
stakeholders to better operate within the current publishing environment, which
is often characterized by predatory publishing practices. Phase 1 involves a
comprehensive review of other individuals' or organizations' previous efforts to
develop whitelists, blacklists, guidelines, or ethical codes intended to help
authors navigate the current, ethically fraught terrain of predatory publishing.
The goal of this thematic analysis is to identify and synthesize common points
and major differences among these initiatives. Phase 2 involves interviewing key
stakeholder groups to enhance understanding of the challenges and the culture
surrounding ethical dimensions of scholarly publishing in STEM disciplines. The
goal is to ascertain stakeholders' understanding and awareness of existing
lists, criteria, and standards examined in Phase 1, and the ways in which
participants have previously consulted or employed such resources, if at all.
Phase 3 entails developing a training program to be made available online to
communicate the results to various stakeholders who can apply this knowledge to
the everyday challenges they face in pursuing publication
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.