* 1926899
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced alkaline electrolyzer stack for hydrogen peroxide onsite production
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Ming Qi, Peroxygen Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2021
* USD 799,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is a significant advance in the production of hydrogen
peroxide. It is anticipated that this project will yield an on-site generation
method that substantially reduces the cost of peroxide production compared to
the traditional centralized chemical process. By reducing cost, hydrogen
peroxide can be used more widely as an oxidizer in bleaching, drinking water and
wastewater treatment, and other processes, ultimately lowering chlorine
pollution by replacing chlorine-based oxidizers. The pulp/paper and textiles
industry will benefit from lower cost bleaching chemicals and reduced treatment
costs. This method reduces environmental pollution and eliminates the need for
transportation of explosive high-concentration hydrogen peroxide. The new design
may have applications in other industrial systems.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to demonstrate a scaled-up high efficiency
alkaline hydrogen peroxide electrolyzer system. The end result will be a
commercial demonstration-ready prototype. The electrode manufacturing process
will be optimized for high-volume manufacturing on roll-to-roll coating lines.
Electrolyzer prototypes will be built and tested at medium scale with a moderate
cell count, then improved and scaled to full-size cells with a high cell count.
Durability testing will be performed, including development of accelerated
testing protocols, to facilitate screening of electrode materials and assess
manufacturing variations implemented in roll-to-roll coating. These individual
project goals will culminate in a commercial pilot-ready autonomous system for
on-site generation of hydrogen peroxide.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.