* 1926050
* MSA:  Macrosystems EDDIE:  An undergraduate training program in macrosystems science and ecological forecasting
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Cayelan Carey, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Ecologists are increasingly analyzing big environmental datasets to make
forecasts about the future health of ecosystems. However, the data analysis and
modeling skills needed to successfully develop ecological forecasts are rarely
taught in undergraduate classrooms. To overcome this challenge, this project
will expand an existing, successful training program (Macrosystems EDDIE:
Environmental Data-Driven Inquiry &amp; Exploration) to teach students
fundamental ecological concepts as they create forecasts for lakes and forests
across the United States. Through Macrosystems EDDIE, students and instructors
will learn how to use models, assess forecast accuracy with observational data,
and communicate forecasts to managers and decision-makers. These skills will be
embedded in stand-alone teaching modules that will be widely applicable to
multiple disciplines and student experience levels. Macrosystems EDDIE provides
an innovative new approach for teaching macrosystems ecology and has the
potential to advance undergraduate science education across the U.S. By
strengthening both students' quantitative skillsets and understanding of
macrosystems ecology, this project will help develop a diverse, globally-
competitive scientific workforce and enhanced infrastructure for macrosystems
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biosphere is changing at
unprecedented rates, requiring ecologists to use macrosystems science approaches
to make forecasts about the future state of populations, communities, and
ecosystems. Macrosystems EDDIE will provide the training needed to make
ecological forecasting accessible to all ecologists, from undergraduates to
senior researchers, by distilling complex topics and skills to an introductory
level via interactive tools and visualizations. The teaching modules will
analyze aquatic and terrestrial data from the National Ecological Observatory
Network (NEON) and Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON) to explore
how the predictability of ecological dynamics varies among ecosystems and across
different spatial scales. All teaching modules will be rigorously assessed,
revised, and disseminated broadly for maximum impact through the Science
Education Research Center (SERC). Beyond undergraduate classrooms, module
teaching materials will be used by Ecological Forecasting Initiative
researchers, thereby supporting collaborative, interdisciplinary science across
multiple institutions. By teaching ecologists at multiple experience levels how
to retrieve, analyze, and visualize NEON and GLEON data, our goal is to enable
widespread use of computational research approaches while advancing macrosystems
ecology and ecological forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.