* 1926872
* AF: Small: Collaborative Research: Boolean Function Analysis Meets Stochastic Design
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Anindya De, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2023
* USD 294,487.00

A central goal in the field of optimization is to develop effective procedures
for decision-making in the presence of constraints. These constraints are often
imposed by real-world data, but it is frequently the case that the relevant data
is not completely known to the agent performing the optimization; it is natural
to model such settings using probability distributions associated with the data.
In such analyses, the constraints associated with the optimization problem are
now themselves "stochastic," and a standard goal is to maximize the likelihood
of satisfying all the constraints while incurring minimum cost. (As a motivating
example, an airline may wish to operate as few flights as possible while
ensuring that with 99% probability, no passenger is bumped.) Apart from modeling
uncertainty, optimization with stochastic constraints also provides a way to
succinctly model constraints whose standard description is very large; design
problems in voting theory, where there are very many voters, are examples of
this kind. This project studies both of these kinds of problems, called
stochastic design problems, from a unified new perspective based on techniques
from computational complexity theory. The project also trains graduate students
who will achieve fluency both in complexity theory and in optimization, and will
promote cross-disciplinary activities between operations research and
theoretical computer science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The motivating insight
which underlies this project is that Boolean function analysis -- a topic at the
intersection of harmonic analysis, probability theory, and complexity theory --
provides a useful suite of techniques for stochastic design problems. The
investigators will study two broad topics. The first one is on chance-
constrained optimization: In problems of this sort, one is given a set of
stochastic constraints and the aim is to satisfy all the constraints with at
least a certain fixed threshold probability. While previous work on such
problems has typically achieved computationally efficient algorithms by relaxing
the actual set of constraints, the investigators will focus on algorithms which
exactly satisfy the original given set of stochastic constraints. This line of
work will address the chance-constrained versions of fundamental optimization
problems such as bin packing, knapsack, and linear programming. The second broad
topic is that of inverse problems in social choice theory: Game theorists use
so-called "power indices" to measure the influence of voters in voting schemes.
A basic algorithmic problem is to design efficient algorithms for the inverse
problem, in which, given a set of prescribed power indices, the goal is to
construct a voting game with these indices. The investigators will study
questions such as (a) to what extent is a given voting scheme specified by its
power indices? (b) what is the complexity of exactly reconstructing an unknown
target voting game given its power indices? (c) when and to what extent is
reconstruction possible in a partial information
setting?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.