* 1926388
* NEON RCN: The Ecological Forecasting Initiative RCN: Using NEON-enabled near-term forecasting to synthesize our understanding of predictability across ecological systems and scales
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Jason McLachlan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The 21st century is characterized by major environmental changes that alter the
ecosystems society depends on for supplying clean water, storing carbon, and
supporting plants and animals. Predicting and forecasting the future of these
systems can help resource managers anticipate and respond to these changes.
Ecological forecasts also advance scientific understanding by developing and
testing models and testing alternative views of how ecological systems operate.
To harness the power of forecasting, a community of practice is needed. This
community will establish standards for developing and communicating forecasts.
It will share best practices for generating forecasts with known uncertainties.
The group will create tools and educational materials to enable ecologists to
begin forecasting. The Ecological Forecasting Initiative Research Coordination
Network award will build this community of practice around forecasting data from
the continental-scale National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). By
focusing on data from NEON, the community will be challenged to develop and
evaluate forecasts for a diversity of environments that exist across the United
States. The award will train hundreds of early career researchers and graduate
students in ecological forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ecological
Forecasting Initiative Research Coordination Network will use a set of network
workshops, conferences, and collaborative software development events to address
the following objectives: (1) develop best practices for archiving and sharing
NEON-enabled ecological forecasts, (2) increase the number, diversity, and
quality of NEON-enabled forecasts, (3) train the ecological community to produce
NEON-enabled forecasts by developing open tutorials in ecological forecasting
methods, (4) facilitate and support collaborative interactions dedicated to
forecasting knowledge transfer among ecologists, (5) cultivate connections
between the academic ecological forecasting community and mission-driven
agencies that use forecasts to guide decision-making, and (6) synthesize
existing forecasts and new NEON-enabled forecasts to evaluate limits to
forecastability across ecological systems and scales. Overall, these objectives
are focused on solving the grand challenge of understanding the predictability
of nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.