* 1926245
* RAPID: Blast Testing to Investigate Resin-Injection Treatment for Liquefaction Mitigation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Kyle Rollins, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 03/31/2021
* USD 191,355.00

Earthquake shaking can cause loose sands below the water table to liquefy and
behave like heavy liquid, causing buildings, bridges and ports supported on the
sand to settle, slide or tip over. Direct and indirect economic losses resulting
from liquefaction are substantial costs to society. To deal with this hazard,
engineers can compact all the liquefiable sand in place or use deep foundations
that penetrate through the liquefiable sand, but these methods are very
expensive, especially for residential areas. A more economical strategy, being
intensively studied around the world, is to compact a surface layer 12- to 20-ft
thick that can safely support a building even if liquefaction still occurs in
the deeper layers below it. To investigate this approach, without waiting for an
earthquake, we will compact a surface layer 20-ft thick and use an array of
small explosive charges to liquefy the sand below. The field test site will be
in Christchurch, New Zealand, where liquefaction damage caused over 10,000 homes
to be condemned. Settlement from liquefaction will be compared with an identical
test at an adjacent untreated area. The results from these tests will allow
engineers to determine if this economical solution is actually safe to employ in
practice. The soil compaction will be peformed using an innovative approach in
which expanding polyurethane is injected into the ground. Unlike most soil
improvement techniques, this method can be safely used under existing
structures. The New Zealand government is paying the cost of the soil
improvement while the US National Science Foundation will pay the costs of the
liquefaction test. Leveraging funding from both countries expands the scope of
work beyond what either country would accomplish independently and increases the
impact of the research internationally. These benchmark case histories will help
engineers to design safe, yet cost effective foundation solutions to minimize
earthquake damage. In addition, U.S. graduate student will gain significant
international experience by participating in this study.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquefaction of loose saturated sands results in
significant damage to civil infrastructure in nearly every earthquake event.
Direct and indirect economic losses resulting from liquefaction are substantial
costs to society as was recently demonstrated in New Zealand. Over 10,000 homes
were damaged as a result of liquefaction and the economy is struggling to
recover. Engineers in New Zealand are experimenting with ground improvement
methods that thicken and stiffen a non-liquefiable surface crust to minimize
differential settlement from liquefaction below the crust. An innovative, new
liquefaction mitigation method known as resin-injection was recently developed
and tested in New Zealand at three sites where 18 other ground improvement
methods were previously tested using blast induced liquefaction in 2013 as part
of a $5 million study. Polyurethane resin is injected from the bottom-up through
vertical pipes installed in a triangular grid pattern. The low-viscosity resin
penetrates the surrounding soil through planes of weakness or by
hydrofracturing. Expansion of the resin densifies the surrounding soil and
increases the lateral earth pressure. This method can be used to treat soils
below existing structures and is effective in silty sands that are difficult to
densify with vibratory methods. An extensive set of post-treatment in-situ tests
demonstrate that this new technique is very effective relative to previous
methods; however, none of the resin injection test sites has been subjected to
blast testing to evaluate the performance of the improved ground overlying the
liquefiable sand at depth. This makes it impossible to compare the overall
system performance of this treatment method with the other systems previously
evaluated in the 2013 trials. To remedy this deficiency, we will conduct blast
liquefaction tests at one of the resin injection sites and an adjacent untreated
area. Prior to blasting, instrumentation will be installed to measure pore
pressure generation and dissipation, soil settlement vs. time and vs. depth,
shear wave velocity vs. pore pressure ratio, lateral earth pressure vs. pore
pressure ratio, and blast-induced shear strain. This project will: (1) provide a
direct comparison of excess pore pressure and soil settlement in the resin-
treated layers with an untreated site, (2) add to the database defining the
effect of surface crust thickness and stiffness on the settlement and distortion
of buildings on the crust, and (3) provide fundamental in-situ measurements of
lateral earth pressure and shear modulus variation with the generation and
dissipation of pore pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.