* 1926086
* Optimizing the Research Intern Experience to Build Inclusion and Diversity in the geosciences workforce: June 27-29, 2019: Woods Hole, MA
* GEO,RISE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Paul Joyce, Sea Education Association
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2022
* USD 99,116.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will support efforts to build diversity and
inclusion in the geosciences? workforce, by facilitating the replication and
success of URM STEM research internship programs. The workshop will also
continue and support the effort to strengthen collaborations between HBCUs and
the geosciences research community, notably including the six public and private
science institutions in Woods Hole.&lt;br/&gt;Further, the workshop will provide
an important career-building opportunity for graduates of URM geosciences
research internship programs who participate and present, showcasing their
successes and strengthening their relationships with colleagues. The workshop
will produce a clear summary of best practices and next steps in the effort to
connect undergraduate research programs with HBCUs to provide a supportive
internship experience in a research community that is new to the students and
often new to the faculty and advisors as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop promises to articulate a new, clearer
understanding of how undergraduate internships can serve individual students of
talent and how these programs can be more closely coordinated with and be truly
collaborative with institutions like HBCUs. The goal of the proposed workshop is
to strengthen undergraduate programs that seek to increase diversity in the
geoscience?s workforce. Specific workshop objectives are (1) to review
experiences, outcomes, successes, and shortcomings over the past ten years of
URM Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs) programs, and the Woods Hole
Partnership Education Program (PEP); (2) to identify best practices from these
programs, in order to support their sustained success and replication; (3) to
summarize these best practices in a report that will provide guidance to
academic and other research institutions that seek to establish similar
programs; and (4) to engage and connect program alumni with each other, and with
peers and professionals in the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.