* 1926952
* STTR Phase II:  Developing High Carotenoid Orange Corn for Large-scale Commercial Adoption
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Torbert Rocheford, NUTRAMAIZE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,288,400.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be the development and commercialization of a novel
variety of corn that is high in carotenoids and orange in color, and with yields
that are competitive with today's commercial hybrids. In the diets of Americans,
two important antioxidant carotenoids, lutein and zeaxanthin, are in low
abundance. This deficiency has been associated with higher risk for degenerative
diseases such as age-related macular degeneration, and potentially, dementia.
The ultimate goal of the proposed research is to provide a way for Americans to
consume more lutein and zeaxanthin, which will be achieved by increasing
significantly the levels of these antioxidants in the U.S.'s most widely grown
staple crop: Corn. Since corn is used in a wide variety of popular processed
food formats, improving the carotenoid content of corn provides an opportunity
to significantly increase the amount of health benefiting antioxidants that
Americans consume, without changing consumers eating habits. However, in order
for this strategy to be economically feasible, corn varieties that are high in
carotenoids must be developed that also are high in grain yield.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes to use genetic markers
to select for favorable alleles of genes associated with carotenoid biosynthesis
and stability in corn bred for commercial production. There is considerable
genetic variation in genes associated with carotenoid biosynthesis and
stability, however, the most favorable alleles are typically not found in
varieties that are commercially relevant to US corn production. Thus, the use of
genetic markers developed previously will enable favorable alleles to be moved
from lower yielding germplasm that is not well adapted to the US Corn Belt into
elite inbreds suitable for the production of yield-competitive commercial F1
hybrids for the US market. The primary goal of this Phase II research is to use
the user-friendly genetic markers associated with favorable alleles for 18 key
genes associated with carotenoid biosynthesis and stability developed in Phase I
to rapidly develop fixed inbreds for use in the production of yield-competitive
high carotenoid F1 hybrids suitable for large-scale commercial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.