* 1926981
* SBIR Phase II:  Sustainable alternative protein cultivation from fungal mycelium for human consumption
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Justin Whiteley, Emergy LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,250,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is a new source of human-grade protein that it can be
produced at an estimated half the price of wholesale chicken and 2000 times
higher protein yields per acre compared to soy with a fraction of the input
requirements. The new protein addresses pain points in industry of potential
allergens, amino acid composition, poor flavor and texture, and limited
processability. If successfully commercialized, Emergy's potential impact is the
ability to provide high quality protein to millions of people at 50% the price
of animal protein, while saving the world greenhouse gas emissions, all with a
significantly reduced land footprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II
proposes to use the efficiencies of biological organisms to produce high
quality, economical, and sustainable protein for human consumption. To achieve
this goal, Emergy grows filamentous fungi biomass as a human-grade protein
source. The fungal biomass has one of the highest protein contents of any raw
source available on the market (60% by weight) and is one of the only complete
proteins. Emergy has developed fermentation parameters and used directed
evolution to produce a fungal process/strain that provides several inherent
advantages over traditional protein production methods. Advantages of production
include, low resource requirements, high yields, safe and toxin free, and low
unit costs. While this process has been demonstrated at the benchtop level, the
technical hurdles include scaling production to industrial systems while
maintaining the proper texture and quality. Emergy Labs plans on executing these
goals by optimizing growth conditions in scaled bioreactors, defining industrial
operating parameters, designing and proving a scalable manufacturing process,
and demonstrating commercially relevant scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.