* 1926075
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Deep Ancestry of the Indigenous People of North America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* John Lindo, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 296,600.00

In this project, the investigators will utilize the latest advances in DNA
sequencing technology and population genetics to elucidate the evolutionary
history of Native Americans, on both a regional and continental level, and
establish genetic reference panels specific to indigenous Nations. The project
will expand collaborative efforts between researchers with an interest in
studying important events in Native American history and will continue research
collaborations with tribal community members. Results will be shared with
participants from seven Native American Nations throughout North America and
also made available via a dedicated analysis server. The project also will
enhance the successful Summer internship for INdigenous peoples in Genomics
(SING) workshop by creating an alumni conference to take place in the summer of
2021. This conference will include a public event with a focus on presentations
of social and ethical aspects of genomics research with indigenous communities,
as well as a workshop to tackle relevant issues, such as the development of
mutually beneficial agreements between researchers and
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The comprehensive study design of this project
will utilize genome-level data from participating indigenous communities
throughout North America, which will advance our understanding of ancient
migrations and adaptations to local environments, ranging from the Subarctic to
the Sonoran Desert. Comparative analyses between tribes will provide a unique
perspective on the local evolutionary history of the Americas, with an
additional emphasis on the effects of European colonization, which resulted in
devasting population declines from a variety of factors, including disease and
warfare. These findings will be contextualized in a broader demographic
framework to provide a richer characterization of the evolution of these
adaptations, while elucidating nuanced demographic histories complicated by
disease and colonization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.