* 1926792
* Robust Risk-based Decision Analytics for Enhancing Seismic Resilience of Water Pipe Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mohsen Shahandashti, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 484,540.00

Water utilities in the US need to make difficult rehabilitation decisions about
the water infrastructure system. There are deep uncertainties in these decisions
because of aging and typically buried water pipe networks and their ability to
sustain disasters, such as earthquakes. These decisions are further complicated
with the enormous lack of funding in many areas for infrastructure
rehabilitation. This research will create and empirically examine a robust
decision-making framework for managing the maintenance and remediation of water
pipelines subject to these uncertainties. This framework is expected to assist
water utilities to achieve the most value out of every dollar that they spend on
their water infrastructure system. This project will engage industry
stakeholders, such as water utilities and disseminate research results widely
through the creation of easy-to-understand and practical educational materials.
Undergraduate and graduate students-especially minority students-at the Hispanic
Serving University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) will participate in every step of
this project. This research will also engage K-12 students in research through
hands-on activities and make them familiar with the fundamentals of making
engineering decisions under uncertainty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will address fundamental limitations of existing models for making robust risk-
based decisions about water pipe networks by (1) characterizing the network
uncertainties and integrating them with seismic vulnerability assessment, and
(2) designing and integrating a risk-averse stochastic combinatorial
optimization algorithm with the seismic vulnerability assessment to identify
vulnerable locations in a pipeline. This project is at the nexus of two critical
disciplines: decision science and infrastructure vulnerability assessment. The
integration of network uncertainties in seismic vulnerability assessment of
water pipe networks is critically needed in a highly uncertain environment. The
project will transform existing models for selecting rehabilitation and
maintenance policies by integrating mechanisms borrowed from quantitative
finance to assure that selection risks are not too high. The novel introduction
of risk-averse stochastic combinatorial optimization models to the civil
engineering community equips infrastructure decision makers with proper scalable
models to optimize rehabilitation decisions with a controllable risk aversion
level in a highly uncertain environment. This project will create
computationally cost-effective algorithms to solve the formulated optimization
problems for large-scale city water networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.