* 1926806
* SBIR Phase II:  Infrared Image Analysis to Assess Beehive Health for Crop Pollination
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Ellie Symes, The Bee Corp
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,687,989.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project safeguards domestic food supply by improving honeybee health. Honeybees
pollinate 1/3 of domestic food supply and contribute more than $15 billion to
the U.S. economy. Although honeybee populations are at a 20-year high in the
U.S., the cost to keep them alive is at its historical peak. This project
reduces labor costs for commercial beekeepers, allowing them to devote more time
to restoring hives that show signs of poor health and infestation. The product
can be used to optimize hive placement, allowing growers to pollinate using the
smallest number of hives. As growers' demand for hives decreases, the number of
hives shipped across the country to pollinate crops will be reduced, resulting
in a more robust stock of commercial honeybees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed project expands on research developed in Phase I to grow the product
from its first version into a scalable product, which includes predictive model
improvements, additional data collection, mobile app development and additional
field testing. A major component of the Phase II grant will be improving
accuracy and performance of the hive strength model. Additional data collection
will be important in Phase II to improve the model to perform well in a wider
range of ambient conditions. By the end of Phase II, full automation of the
software allows for the product to be used at all times. A major component of
the Phase II work will be the development of a web-based mobile application that
can take infrared pictures using smartphone camera attachments, upload images
automatically to a database, and provide real time analytics on the images. This
project is a breakthrough in the crop pollination space using infrared imagery
that can be adapted to improve thermodynamic insights across many
verticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.