* 1926880
* Chemical Engineering in the 21st Century: Challenges and Opportunities
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Maggie Walser, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology (BCST) of the National Academies
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine will conduct a consensus study that will
survey the current state of the chemical engineering discipline and its
contributions to society and articulate a vision for the future of chemical
engineering. Chemical engineers not only draw from the traditional chemical
sciences, but from physics, mathematics, computation, and, increasingly, biology
to shape the technological infrastructure of modern society from energy and
consumer products to personalized medicine. One indicator of the impact of
chemical engineering to society is the 2015 American Chemistry Council estimate
that the breadth of chemical industries contributed nearly 26% of the US GDP,
while supporting over six million jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will be
conducted by an ad hoc committee with a range of expertise across academia,
National Laboratories, and the private sector, and will result in a report that
is freely accessible to the public. The study will also benefit from extensive
community input throughout its conduct. The primary objective of this study is
to provide a compelling vision and strategy for chemical engineering research,
innovation, and education for the next 10 to 30 years. The report will provide
guidance to research sponsors, as well as to the research communities in
academia and industry. The report's recommendations will focus on science needs
and priorities rather than specific funding or organizational aspects. The study
will address the changing needs of the chemical industry in the 21st century,
develop ways to more effectively engage with and learn from related fields,
discuss approaches for anticipating potential unintended as well as intended
consequences that affect society and the environment, develop ways to strengthen
diversity within the chemical engineering community, and point the way to a
modern chemical engineering curriculum. The broader impacts of the study will
extend beyond the chemical engineering community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.