* 1926360
* NSF-BSF: Impact of Electric- and Flow-Fields on Surfactant-Stabilized Emulsion Properties During Oil/Water Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Eric Hoek, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2023
* USD 449,964.00

The separation of emulsified oil from waste water streams remains a significant
industrial challenge. Membrane filtration is one of the few methods that can
remove emulsified oil drops. However, the filtration of these drops is
complicated by severe membrane fouling, where fluid passage through the membrane
is slowed by particles or solutions at the surface. Developing an energy-
efficient separation process for removing emulsified oil from water with minimal
membrane fouling would benefit many industrial users, including oil and gas
producers, food processors, and the shipping industry. The investigators will
develop such a process using electrically-conducting ultrafiltration membranes
that deliver an electric charge directly to the membrane/water interface. The
application of this charge, combined with an appropriately placed counter-
electrode, generates electric fields that impact the shape, behavior, and
interfacial properties of emulsified oil drops. The affected oil drops no longer
contribute to membrane fouling, allowing water to pass through. The first goal
of this project is to understand how emulsified oil behavior during membrane
filtration with applied electric- and flow-fields influences separation
performance and fouling. The second goal focuses on dramatically increasing the
conductivity of the ultrafiltration membranes, which will lower the energy
requirements of applying an electric field. Completion of the project will
develop the fundamental knowledge necessary to design and implement a pressure-
driven, membrane-based, oil/water separation process that mitigates membrane
fouling by electrically modifying both the membrane surface and emulsified oil
drops. The research team will also provide an important STEM pipeline for
disabled military veterans through their Research Experience for Veterans
Program. They will partner with the University of California, Los Angeles's
Center for Accessible Education to identify and recruit disabled veterans
seeking a summer research internship. These veteran students will participate in
a 12-week summer program that will integrate them into the investigators'
laboratories and provide them an opportunity to do graduate-level research in
hopes of encouraging them to pursue an advanced degree in a STEM field.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the combination of
electrofiltration and emulsified oil dynamics, with the goal of developing a
fouling-resistant oil/water separation process. Since many emulsifying agents
carry an electrical charge, it is expected that they will respond to an external
electrical field, which will impact the interfacial properties of the emulsified
oil drops themselves. Understanding how these complex systems respond to
external fields (both electrical and flow) will help elucidate fundamental
emulsion properties, with the potential of improving multiple processes where
emulsified oils are used. The project will also explore how increasing the
conductivity of a percolating network of carbon nanotubes (using conducting
polymers, metal ion intercalation, or metal deposition) impacts the overall
surface and transport properties of carbon nanotube/polymer electrically-
conducting membranes. Maximizing conductivity and transport through the membrane
will enable efficient and uniform charge distribution along the membrane
surface, which will enable fouling-free operation while decreasing process
energy consumption. Developing fundamental knowledge of the impact of electrical
fields on the interfacial properties of oil drops accumulated along the membrane
surface coupled with highly-conducting porous polymeric materials has the
potential of transforming membrane-based oil/water separation processes. The
project involves two teams from the U.S. and Israel. Profs. David Jassby and
Eric Hoek, from the University of California, Los Angeles, are supported by the
Molecular Separations and Particulate and Multiphase Processes programs in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems.
Prof. Guy Ramon, from Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, is supported by
the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.