* 1926794
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO Biology and Function of Prosody: Integrative approach to individual differences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Below, Vanderbilt University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 606,605.00

College readiness and career opportunities are highly dependent on young adults'
reading proficiency. Yet, recent data indicate that almost two-thirds of tested
students, including many students with dyslexia, do not possess the fundamental
skills that are required to successfully master college-level reading material.
Prosody, defined as linguistically relevant fluctuations in intonation, stress
and timing, is an essential but underappreciated aspect of spoken language and
reading. Humans vary in their sensitivity to the prosodic structure of speech,
and there appears to be a strong link to individual differences in reading
skills. With the support of the Integrative Strategies in Neural and Cognitive
Systems program, this project will take bold steps towards investigating the
biology and function of prosody with a creative array of approaches and research
settings. With the first-ever dataset of its kind, the project intends to make
critical progress towards integrating knowledge from a large population sample
about the neurobiological basis of prosody across methods and levels (genetics,
neuroimaging, and behavioral task performance). Beyond scientific advancement,
the activities outlined in the proposed project will allow the research team to
contribute to improving STEM education and educator development, addressing
neurodevelopmental disorders such as dyslexia, increasing public engagement with
science and technology, and enhancing big-data partnerships across academic
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying biology of prosody is poorly
understood at the neural and genetic level, despite its important function in
humans' communication skills. Innovative combinations of multi-disciplinary
approaches for novel data collection in large samples and use of existing large-
scale resources are needed to yield significant knowledge of the biology and
function of prosody. The first aim of this proposal will include a series of
studies using a combination of EEG, eye tracking and standardized behavioral
tasks to explore the time-dynamic processes of attending to prosodic cues in
ecologically valid situations of speech perception and reading, and to examine
the contribution of prosody sensitivity to individual differences in reading.
The second aim will be a genome-wide association study of prosodic sensitivity
and will be conducted through a diverse sample of individuals recruited online
throughout the United States and in-person in the Middle Tennessee area in local
community and educational settings. Cutting-edge genomic methodologies
(PrediXcan and Gene Set Enrichment analysis) will be used to identify the
genetic markers and novel neural endophenotypes (imputed gene expression in
brain tissue) that give rise to individual differences in prosody. This series
of studies builds essential groundwork for future planned studies that seek to
disentangle shared versus separate genetic architecture of prosody and other
aspects of language function and could reveal transformative knowledge about the
biological mechanisms driving individual differences in reading and language
skill. The collaborative research project leverages the team?s diverse
backgrounds in Cognitive Neuroscience, Psycholinguistics, Communication
Disorders, and Human Genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.