* 1926280
* Standard: Cultivating Foundations for Responsible Innovation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Laura Carlson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 09/30/2023
* USD 295,787.00

Traditional research ethics training is premised on the idea that a researcher
is responsible only for the ethical conduct of their research. This project
supplements that foundation to add consideration of the social consequences -
and the ethical meaning - of introducing potentially disruptive innovations to
society. Increasingly, the public expects scientists and engineers to take into
account the potential social and ethical ramifications of the innovations they
develop. Whether in industry or academia, it is no longer considered enough to
focus narrowly on the technical breakthroughs and leave the rest of society to
deal with the implications - implications that often become apparent only after
the innovation has been deployed. But what might more thoughtful development
approaches look like in practice? And can they be made practical? Work on the
nascent concept of Responsible Innovation attempts to answer these questions.
This project furthers this research by testing and innovating on existing
concepts of RI while also providing training in Responsible Innovation to an
interdisciplinary cohort of graduate students and postdocs. In turn, this cohort
helps to guide a selection of actual emerging innovations as test cases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For each of its three years, this project recruits a
cohort of 9-12 graduate students and postdocs (organized into small teams of
3-4) drawn not only from the natural sciences and engineering, but also from the
social sciences and humanities. In the first half of each year, these recruits
are trained in existing frameworks for Responsible Innovation (RI) as well as
the skills, like anticipation, communication, and leadership, which enable it.
As they work through this literature from their different disciplinary
perspectives, they also critique and contribute new ideas and insights to this
emerging area, with each team arriving at their own working approach to RI. In
the second half of each year, the trainees are connected to a real-world
commercialization project through Notre Dame's technology transfer and
incubation hub, the IDEA Center. The teams then implement their Responsible
Innovation concept as consultants to an actual innovation project. This provides
a valuable service to that project while also serving as a practical test of
their ideas. In the final phase of each year, the teams write up their findings
from this experience for publication, contributing new ideas and reporting their
real-world experience with them. This approach allows four valuable goals to be
pursued simultaneously: 1. Train students and researchers in the latest thinking
on Responsible Innovation; 2. Put social scientists, humanists, engineers, and
natural scientists into conversation with one another about the social and
ethical impacts of science and technology research; 3. Contribute new approaches
and refinements of Responsible Innovation by engaging a wider array of
researchers who evaluate and test its real-world utility; 4. Help inform and
guide a selection of local, real-world innovation
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.