* 1926757
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Analysis, prediction, and control of synchronized neural activity
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Danielle Bassett, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,993.00

Understanding the relations between the anatomical structure of the human brain
and its functions in healthy and diseased states can not only lead to the design
of novel, targeted, non-invasive, and highly-effective treatments for
neurological disorders, but also inform the application of innovative
stimulation schemes to enhance cognitive performance and executive capabilities.
Leveraging data obtained with state-of-the-art sensing and imaging technologies,
this project pursues these objectives by innovatively studying the human brain
as a dynamic network system comprising neuronal ensembles and white-matter
fibers, and as governed by principles similar to social and technological cyber-
physical networks. This project develops and validates new rigorous theories and
tools to address an outstanding problem in network neuroscience. Namely, to
leverage the brain anatomical structure to characterize, predict, and control
patterns of synchronized neural activity, and to validate the methods with
realistic brain data. This project will not only contribute to the theories of
networks, controls, and neuroscience, but also to their integration, by
leveraging different levels of abstraction (brain representations from diffusion
imaging data, electrocorticography time series, mathematical models) and
distinct disciplinary approaches. In addition to new methods to study
synchronized activity in the brain and inform the next generation of
diagnostics, this project pursues far-reaching teaching and outreach activities,
including (i) a number of university-level initiatives at the graduate and
undergraduate levels, (ii) outreach activities that will engage young people
from the local communities in Philadelphia and Riverside, and (iii)
dissemination activities that will bring together traditionally separated
communities and promote multi-disciplinary initiatives to tackle some of the
most pressing problems in neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis of this project is that the interconnected structure of the brain
determines its performance and controls its transitions between healthy and
diseased states. Building on this hypothesis, this project addresses the
unsolved problems of characterizing, predicting, and controlling patterns of
synchronized neural activity in the human brain from sparse and coarse temporal
measurements and interventions. Additionally, to support the hypothesis and
validate the theories of neural synchronization, the project leverages three
unique and extensive multimodal neuroimaging datasets combining high-resolution
electrocorticography and diffusion imaging that will allow to assess the
relations between synchronization patterns and underlying structural network
architecture. Specifically, this project is organized around two main tasks.
Task 1, abstracts the problem of controlling patterns of neural activity as the
problem of controlling the degree of synchronization among interconnected
nonlinear oscillators, where oscillators represent brain regions and their
interconnections reflect the anatomy of the human brain as reconstructed by
diffusion magnetic resonance imaging. The idea is put forth that altered
synchronization patterns are the results of, possibly small, modifications to
the oscillators' interconnection structure and weights, and that desirable
patterns can be restored by minimal and localized structural interventions. Task
2 uses empirical data to obtain inferences complementing those acquired in the
formal theoretical and modeling work in Task 1. Because the focus here is the
analysis, prediction, and control of cluster synchronization, the empirical
efforts remain constrained to the study of functional neuroimaging data with
clear electrographic signatures of synchronization. Specifically, the project
uses electrocorticography data, which boasts markedly greater temporal
resolution than functional magnetic resonance imaging and does not suffer from
the issues of volume conduction that are more common in electroencephalography
and magnetoencephalography. The project blends and extends tools from control
and network theories, dynamical systems, data analysis, and network
neuroscience. While this project focuses on synchronization problems in neural
activity, the methods have broad applicability in engineering, for instance to
design optimized networks and sparse controllers, network neuroscience, and
network science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.