* 1926027
* Collaborative research: Mapping bed forces to granular flow properties
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Scott McCoy, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,092.00

Landslides, rock falls, volcanic eruptions, rapid flows of mud, rock, and
debris, snow avalanches, and sediment-laden floods are all deadly and costly
natural hazards. They all also exemplify what are called natural granular flows.
These events are hazardous in part due to their rapid and powerful nature, but
also because models used to predict and mitigate their impacts remain imperfect.
Seemingly simple questions still pose major challenges to scientists and
engineers such as: How large will these events be? How far will they travel?
What infrastructure is at risk? This project will investigate how granular flows
interact with the things they flow over, with a particular focus on impact
forces. The results will aid formulation of more accurate models of granular
flow mobility and hazards. Outreach activities will be developed to highlight
the excitement and utility of controlled laboratory experiments to study natural
hazards. The investigators will develop these in collaboration with pedagogy
experts, implement them in 4th-8th grade classrooms, and incorporate them into
annual workshops for teachers and as interactive exploration stations at two
science museums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is
to improve our understanding of the forces imparted by granular flows on their
beds. This work is motivated by the hypothesis that many geomorphic processes
and associated hazards are driven by the largest bed forces, rather than the
mean force. The study will build on advances in granular mechanics and apply a
novel blend of discrete element modeling, laboratory experiments, and field
measurements to improve our understanding of the full distribution of bed
forces. The results will be used to test hypotheses about the sensitivity of bed
force distributions to macroscopic flow properties and grain-scale interactions.
The findings will be integrated into widely used continuum flow models, and
thereby aid the formulation of more accurate models of granular flow hazards and
landscape evolution. This award is cofunded by the Geomorphology and Land-use
Dynamics (GLD) and Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events
(PREEVENTS) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.