* 1926052
* RAPID:  Is Carbon Starvation a Proximal Cause of Tree Mortality from Defoliation?
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Jonathan Thompson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 03/31/2021
* USD 99,340.00

A severe gypsy moth outbreak began in 2015 in southern New England. By 2018,
this outbreak had caused dramatic death of trees across thousands of acres of
oak forest. It has been more than thirty years since this invasive insect caused
such extensive tree damage and death in eastern North America. This event has
created a fleeting opportunity to address a fundamental question in ecology:
what are the immediate causes of tree death? Hardwood trees draw on stored
starches and sugars in the spring to produce new leaves. Gypsy moths eat leaves,
limiting a tree's ability to store enough sugars and starches, and if these drop
below a critical level, the tree can die. During last year's outbreak, the
researchers established a network of plots in oak forests that had experienced
differing severity and frequency of gypsy moth activity. If they act fast and
sample starches and sugars from oak trees that have experienced defoliation for
0 to 3 years before they leaf-out this spring, then follow these trees through
the next growing season, the researchers can determine if starvation directly
causes tree death. Better understanding of the timing and causes of tree
mortality will inform forest and landscape tree management. This research will
also provide student training in answering science questions and how to apply
scientific knowledge to solving forest management problems.

Temperate deciduous trees draw on stores of non-structural carbohydrates (NSC)
in the spring to produce new xylem and foliage. The carbon starvation hypothesis
posits that when NSC stores become depleted, secondary growth and flushing is
impossible or inadequate, and the tree dies. Defoliation, such as occurs during
gypsy moth infestations, is a straightforward mechanism for testing the carbon
starvation hypothesis. This study will evaluate NSC levels in relationship to
defoliation frequency and severity to determine if there is a critical NSC
threshold below which tree mortality occurs. The researchers will sample NSCs by
collecting small wood samples from the stem and root of oak trees with known
defoliation histories. This study has the potential to offer a mechanistic
understanding of tree mortality events and inform the models scientists and
policy-makers rely on to forecast ecosystem responses to global change.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.