* 1926781
* NCS-FR: Protecting the Aging Brain: Self-Organizing Networks and Multi-Scale Dynamics under Energy Constraints
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Steven Skiena, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,500,000.00

The brain's ability to use energy has been strongly implicated in age-based
cognitive impairment, which will dramatically affect a disproportionally aging
demographic. Globally, the number of adults aged 65 or older is estimated to
more than double by 2030, with dementia rates exponentially increasing from 1-2%
of the population for those age 65, to 58% for those age 94. This project probes
the hypothesis that age-based cognitive impairment reflects insulin resistance
(Type 2 diabetes) within the brain, limiting neurons' access to blood sugar, and
tests whether one can reverse aging effects through the use of an alternative
brain fuel: ketones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses individuality
and variation, leveraging the interdisciplinary team's expertise in
neuroscience, statistical physics, and machine learning, to tackle one of
neurobiology's most fundamental unanswered questions: what are the "rules" by
which the brain self-organizes in response to resource constraints? Unifying the
project across scales and disciplines is a computational model designed to
predict single-subject network trajectories in response to tightening and
releasing of energy constraints, a first step towards understanding
individuality and variation in brain aging. The project team have previously
shown that aging is associated with destabilization of brain networks, an effect
that the team's preliminary results suggest can be modulated by switching neuro-
metabolism from glucose to ketones. Others have shown that age-based cognitive
deterioration accelerates with insulin resistance. Thus, the team hypothesizes
that network destabilization may result from reorganization as the brain
attempts to optimize networks to conserve energy in response to neuron insulin-
resistance. Using insulin resistance to tighten energy constraints and ketones
to release them, the team plans to use animal (DREADD/patch-clamp/calcium
imaging) and human (31P/1H-MRS, 7T fMRI) data to characterize changes in
excitatory/inhibitory neuron firing dynamics and their implications for
connectivity. Techniques adapted from "optimization under constraint" problems
in statistical physics (e.g., Maximum Caliber) will then be applied to these
data to identify cellular automaton-like "rules" that neurons might follow in
guiding emergent self-organization. In so doing, the project considers
optimization based upon biological principles as well as developing generative
techniques for identifying constraints unbiased by the a priori hypotheses.
Using an iterative approach, in which each individual subject's network
trajectory provides feedback, informing the models, which then make predictions
that are tested against the next individual's data, models will eventually
converge in predicting human network trajectories based upon individually
variable parameters. These would provide first steps towards personalized
neurology, by being able to simulate - for a single individual - the potential
consequences of different initial conditions and/or clinical
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.