* 1926686
* Research in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Akshay Venkatesh, Institute For Advanced Study
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2025
* USD 7,557,978.00

The School of Mathematics (SoM) at the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS) seeks
to support basic research and the training and development of postdoctoral
researchers in mathematics. The School hosts approximately 70 researchers for
long-term visits each year. Approximately one-third of these researchers are
part of a special program focused on a particularly exciting field of
mathematics, and the remaining are unrestricted in field. This award supports
between 12 and 18 postdoctoral fellows and between 4 and 6 mid-career
mathematicians annually, as well as small group collaborations during the
summer. The School develops connections across career stages and mathematical
fields, and an active mentoring program is in place to support postdoctoral
fellows. The School also seeks to encourage researchers from underrepresented
groups in the mathematical sciences to participate in its activities. The IAS as
a whole brings together researchers from different institutions and fields who
would not ordinarily be afforded the opportunity to interact, thereby
strengthening the US scientific community as a whole. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
School of Mathematics seeks to achieve its primary goals – support of
fundamental research and fostering mathematical talent – by creating an
environment that encourages, both formally and informally, new collaborations
and new lines of research. Postdoctoral fellows are assigned two mentors – a
mid-career mathematician and a faculty member or visiting senior mathematician –
with whom they meet regularly. The School holds numerous specialized weekly
seminars across all fields of mathematics, some jointly with Princeton
University. A broadly targeted "Members Seminar" and an informal "Mathematical
Conversations" event are also held weekly. Each term there is a week-long
workshop associated with the special program (the topic of which is "Geometric
and Modular Representation Theory" in 2021-2022, and "h-Principle and
Flexibility in Geometry and PDEs" in 2022-2023). Overall, all SoM visitors
benefit from an environment where they can pursue research unhampered by
administrative duties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.