* 1926802
* The Evolution of Posterior Fate
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Nir Yakoby, Rutgers University Camden
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 857,394.00

The evolution of body shape and body axes relies on changes to regulatory
networks that control tissues' development across organisms. The grant will
examine how changes in the regulatory network of genes in one species can be
changed and lead to the formation of morphological novelties in other species.
Uncovering the natural changes underlying morphological diversity among species
will shed light on organ formation strategies. The preliminary results
demonstrate the successful use of a genome engineering technique in non-
traditional species, which will allow the principal investigator to establish
them as new model systems to study how changes in gene regulation control the
evolution of new morphologies. The studied signaling pathways and transcription
factors are conserved in other animals, hence the Drosophila community and other
developmental communities will gain knowledge on these pathways and benefit from
the generated genetic tools. A Postdoctoral trainee, a Ph.D. student, and 9
undergraduate students will be trained in fly genetics, molecular biology,
bioinformatics and genome engineering, with an emphasis on trainees from
underrepresented minorities in the STEM fields. The data generated will be
incorporated into the Genetics class curricula at the level of graduate and
undergraduate studies, which serves about 60 students annually. The principal
investigator will reach out to prospective biology students and their families
from the Camden, NJ area during the biology visiting
days.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Axis formation is a fundamental requirement during
animal development. This intricate process is regulated by a small number of
highly-conserved cell signaling pathways across animals. The principal
investigator (PI) will study the evolution of gene regulatory networks,
comprised of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), the Janus Kinase
(JAK/STAT), bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), and transcriptional regulators
that control the anterior posterior axis in Drosophila melanogaster. The PI
suggests that components of the network evolved from controlling axis formation
during fly oogenesis to also regulating the formation of a morphological
novelty, the dorsal ridge, on the D. nebulosa eggshells. The PI's laboratory
pioneered the molecular analysis of dorsal ridge formation by discovering the
dramatic changes in EGFR activation patterns among species. The PI hypothesizes
that changes in cis regulation of genes controlling the posterior fate in one
species evolved to guide the generation of a new morphology in other species.
The preliminary results demonstrate that the ETS-transcription factor Pointed
(PNT) controls the expression of the posterior determinant Midline (Mid).
Research goals are to, a) determine the network controlling patterning of the
posterior end, b) study the cis regulatory modules controlling mid expression
and 3), study whether changes in MID patterning control the evolution of the
dorsal ridge. Using a combination of immunostaining, genetic perturbations,
including CRISPR/Cas9, and reciprocal swapping of orthologous CRMs, the
function, requirement, and redundancy of these CRMs will be tested for
patterning and morphogenesis in both D. melanogaster and D.
nebulosa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.