* 1926172
* Collaborative: Standard: Institutions in Student Organizations Cultivating Cultures of Ethical Engineering
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Cassandra Rutherford, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 341,249.00

Recent studies demonstrate that extracurricular student activities can play an
important role in the ethical development of students; however, it is not known
which specific kinds of activities are most effective and why. This award
supports a research project that proposes to address this question by
identifying engineering student organizations, as well as institutional
mechanisms within these student organizations, that are effective in cultivating
ethical behavior. It will also test the effectiveness of informal practices
outside of the classroom in four student organizations. The results of this
research will contribute to the increasing scholarship in engineering education
which emphasizes ethical concerns, the importance of social justice, educating
globally competent engineers and critical thinking by focusing on contexts
outside of the classroom that contribute to cultivating ethical cultures in the
field of engineering. They will also serve to create a community of practice
with the goal of increasing the visibility of ethical engineering and knowledge
sharing among scholars in the field of ethical STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates the role that different student organizations play in
cultivating ethical behavior of engineering student in the U.S. and to identify
the precise institutional mechanisms within those organizations that foster
ethical behavior. Research shows that students are typically less interested in
understanding the ethical implications of their work at the end of their studies
than they were at the beginning. This gap between instruction and application
indicates a continued need for research to identify factors that are effective
in cultivating a culture of ethical STEM and promoting an awareness and
understanding of ethics among engineering students. The results from the
proposed research will directly affect student organizations within the studied
institutions and beyond. This study will involve a diversity of key players in
these organizations including leadership, mentors, and members to open
discussion regarding improving engineering ethics behavior. The project will
also test the efficacy of interventions and create a set of guidelines for
student organizations. This research promises to educate ethical engineers
within and beyond the university, and it is expected to have positive impacts on
the people and communities that are affected by engineering
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.