* 1926199
* Polymer Precursors for Interfaces, Binders and Adhesives for Ceramic Solid-State Battery Components
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Richard Laine, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 508,449.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The electrification of society mandates the
development of safer, high energy density methods of storing chemical energy.
One clear objective is the development of all-solid state batteries (ASBs),
especially those relying on ceramic electrolytes, as they offer the best
potential to realize safe, high energy density storage potentially eliminating
many of the short-comings of current state-of-the-art battery systems used
world-wide. Because ceramic electrolytes are typically sintered at temperatures
that exceed those needed to process anode and cathode materials; the assembly of
ASBs requires an approach that leads to well-defined interfaces between
components and good mating of surfaces coincident with effective ion transport
across the interface without also compromising the individual components.
Carefully designed polymers that act as adhesives have been developed that offer
all of the requisite properties to serve this purpose. Of further importance, on
heating to temperatures well below those used to form the cathode, electrolyte
and some anode materials, they form glassy or ceramic interfaces that function
as anticipated. Indeed, their performance exceeds similar interfaces produced
using high vacuum sputtering methods sometimes by orders of magnitude. The
reasons for this behavior are not known and yet offer exceptional potential to
realize superior ASBs using lower cost processing methods providing that the
basic science behind their behavior can be fully explored. This then is the
basis for the project described here. Over the course of the project, up to
three graduate students and several undergraduate students will be engaged in
research; diversity is a priority in the selection of students. Engagement with
local Detroit and Yspilanti schools is an ongoing priority to attract
underserved populations to science and engineering careers. Research results
will be disseminated via tradi-tional scientific journals, international
meetings especially with presentations by students, via workshops (where
appropriate) and through the creation of new training videos. If successful, it
is anticipated that the approach and methods under development could (i) reduce
reliance on scarce elements, and (ii) significantly impact how solid-state
batteries are assembled given its potential to simplify the assembly process
while also increasing energy densities and greatly improving battery safety
compared with state-of-the-art batteries currently used commercially.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Polymer derived ceramics (PDCs),
precursors to advanced ceramics, is an area first explored more than 40 years
ago. The principles concerning their design, processing and characterization for
properties optimization were developed by this group originally for structural
ceramics, e.g. SiC and YAG ceramic fibers for ceramic/ceramic composites. More
recently these principles were applied to designing and optimizing processing of
oxide superconducting fibers. This project extends these principles to develop,
optimize and especially establish structure-processing-properties relationships
to Li+, Na+ and possibly Mg2+ containing glasses/ceramics. Initial studies show
that polymers containing Li, P, O, N, H and Li (LiPON precursors) can be
formulated and used as coatings and adhesives for multiple thin film (under 50
um) ceramic electrolyte, cathode and anode components; i.e. LATSP, LLZO, LiA-
lOx, LTO, etc. The resulting materials provide Li+ conductivities up to 103x
superior to gas phase deposited LiPON. This project focuses on developing a
detailed understanding of the stepwise molecular and phase evolution of a set of
LiPON-like precursors in an effort to clarify the mechanism(s) whereby the
molecular to ceramic transformations enable the unexpected, exceptional ion
conducting behavior. One long term goal is to use the anticipated outcomes of
these studies to improve the utility of LiAlOx electrolytes to the point where
the complex processing needed to produce high quality, thin LATSP and/or LLZO
films is no longer a necessary part of the assembly of ASBs thereby resulting in
lower cost ASBs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.