* 1926542
* MRA:  Disentangling cross-scale influences on tree species, traits, and diversity from individual trees to continental scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ethan White, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,313,135.00

Trees are essential to ecosystems. They store carbon, reduce erosion, and serve
as habitat for other species. The factors influencing trees, and the spatial
scales at which they are managed, range from an individual tree to entire
continents. Since there are approximately three trillion trees in the world
collecting data on every tree over large areas is impossible using traditional
methods. Therefore, it is necessary to use new technology to measure and
describe individual trees over large geographic areas. This research will
address this fundamental challenge by combining high resolution remote sensing
data with field data on trees. Together, the remote sensing and field data will
be used to understand what influences the number of trees, their size, where
different species occur, and how this changes from spatial scales of local parks
to the entire United States. This project will also make it easier for other
scientists to study trees over large areas by developing software, producing
data products, and providing training and collaboration opportunities for
working with these novel datasets. This will help drive rapid advances in the
cross-scale understanding of tree ecology with broad applications in forestry,
management, and fundamental scientific understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) data from
airborne remote sensing and field data collection. These data will be used to
develop machine learning based approaches to identify, measure, and characterize
to species all of the canopy trees located within each forested NEON site. This
will yield data on approximately 50 million individual trees at about 40 sites
across the United States. These data from NEON will be combined with data from
the US Forest Service Forest Inventory and Analysis Project, which samples
millions of trees at over 100,000 locations across the United States. These
combined data will be used to develop joint models of the distribution,
abundance, and structural traits of trees, that explicitly incorporate the
concept of scale. These models will be used to understand how the processes
influencing tree distribution and traits change across scales by comparing the
importance of different factors at scales ranging from a few meters, where
individual trees directly interact, to the entire United States, where large
gradients in climate and land use are important. This research will address
three broad questions in ecology: 1) what processes govern species distribution
and abundance at different scales and how do they interact? 2) how are landscape
and regional process of species coexistence connected to local biodiversity? 3)
how do changes in the processes influencing tree traits across scales impact
estimates of biomass and carbon storage?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.