* 1926036
* Standard: Collaborative Research: Changing Ethical STEM Culture through Interdisciplinary Dialogue and Analysis of Humanitarian Information and Communication Technology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Omar Abou-Samra, National Headquarters American Red Cross
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 08/31/2022
* USD 407,740.00

The humanitarian sector has been engaged in ethical STEM activities for many
decades since success in humanitarian practice is based on the ability to
deliver aid according to moral and ethical principles. Humanitarian STEM work
can thus expose tensions between the ethical imperatives of humanitarian
missions (e.g., accountability to those being assisted), and the typical goals
of STEM design, development, and use (e.g., efficiency). This project examines
the implementation of STEM within a humanitarian environment to offer new
understandings, priorities, and directions for changing ethical cultures within
the broader STEM arena. It will focus on understanding how humanitarian ethical
imperatives are addressed in the design, development, and implementation of
STEM, and how understanding of these processes can be translated into frameworks
for successfully achieving more ethically-centered STEM cultures. To do so, the
Red Cross Global Disaster Preparedness Center will partner with University of
Washington to systematically evaluate the Red Cross's efforts to design and
develop STEM in alignment with humanitarian ethical imperatives. This human-
centered approach will integrate perspectives from practitioners, STEM experts,
and aid beneficiaries to reveal practical challenges and solutions for achieving
more ethical STEM cultures. This research will provide data and information for
improving how STEM technologies can be integrated into humanitarian work in a
more ethical manner, and for cultivating more ethical STEM
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how STEM information and
communications technologies have been implemented in humanitarian working
environments. The goal is to enhance understanding of how humanitarian ethics
can be built into the design, development, and implementation of ICTs, and how
lessons learned from case studies involving the Red Cross can be used to develop
new frameworks for cultivating more ethically-centered STEM cultures. This will
be accomplished through analyses of case studies where humanitarian ICT projects
have been used to support Red Cross humanitarian work through a combination of
literature reviews, secondary data analysis, and interviews with relevant
stakeholders across the design, development, and implementation process. Phase 1
involves collecting secondary data, identifying case studies, and developing
research instruments. Phase 2 involves analyzing the case studies. Phase 3
involves assembling a practitioner-academic consortium, sharing findings, and
facilitating dialogue at Red Cross Global Disaster Preparedness Center workshops
to create practical recommendations for ethical design of Humanitarian
information and communications technologies. Phases 4 and 5 involve preparing
ethically-centered STEM solutions, taking lessons to the humanitarian and
academic communities for application and assessment, and disseminating project
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.