* 1926906
* SBIR Phase II:  Tough polymer composite materials through iLAMB, or interlaminar modifications through master batching
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Haley Keith, MITO Material Solutions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,424,367.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to help usher in a new age of material
consumption. While metals have been used for hundreds of years, composites are
fairly new but can withstand even more wear and tear than steel. This project is
aimed to advance composites even further by making them last longer or shed more
weight. This will enable engines to have better fuel efficiency, allow lighter
prosthetics, or achieve dependable, durable composite automobile frames. MITO
hopes to aid all of these industries with the introduction of competitive and
proprietary resin modifying nanoaddtives that enhance durability and toughness,
reduce weight, and can be integrated into common composite manufacturing
processes, including infusion molds and pre-pregs. With these potentials, it is
estimated that this project could capture roughly 5% of the worldwide additive
market currently worth $3.8 billion dollars, positioning material science to
solve the composite industry's biggest problems with nano-sized
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will scale up hybrid nano-fillers based on graphene oxide (GO)
and polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) to kilogram quantities and
produce nano-fillers that have reactive moieties that are exactly compatible and
dispersible in various resins, which has never been attempted before. The Phase
I project successfully met all the technical goals. MITO additives will be added
to epoxy or vinyl ester or polyester matrices through a Master Batch process to
enhance the interlaminar fracture toughness of composite by more than 70% at
extremely low addition levels (~0.1 to 0.2% by weight) without any changes in
current manufacturing processes. It is proposed to scale up the existing hybrid
nano-fillers, develop novel hybrid nano-fillers with better compatibility with
epoxy, vinyl ester and polyester resins by introducing matching reactive groups
into the fillers and Master Batching so that interlaminar fracture toughness can
be improved by more than 100%. Flexure, Impact and SENB fracture tests, and XRD
as well as SEM characterization will be performed on the cured Master Batches
and composites. Flexure, double cantilever beam fracture and tension tests will
be performed on composite samples to optimize the nanofiller content and the
Master Batching process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.