* 1926368
* WORKSHOP: The IEEE Virtual Reality 2019 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Aleshia Hayes, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2022
* USD 17,000.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 5 promising graduate
students from educational institutions in the United States, along with senior
members of the academic and industrial research communities as mentors, in a
Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction with the IEEE Virtual
Reality 2019 conference that will take place March 23-27 in Osaka, Japan.
Additional international graduate students will also take part in the event,
however funding to support those students from non-US institutions is not
requested from NSF. Virtual reality is a multidisciplinary field involving
human-centered computer simulations that seek to imitate or augment real world
senses (usually sight, sound, and touch) and experiences. VR research includes
the development and assessment of methods and systems, and facilitating and
understanding user perceptions, beliefs, and behaviors. First organized by the
IEEE Computer Society in 1993 and held annually since 1995, IEEE Virtual Reality
is the premier international conference and exhibition in this field and
includes technical paper presentations, workshops, tutorials, research
demonstrations, and exhibits from industry. Based on prior year participation,
the organizers expect IEEE VR 2019 to attract approximately 350-400 attendees;
more information about the conference may be found online at
http://www.ieeevr.org/2019. The goal of the Doctoral Consortium is to provide a
unique venue for interactive, supportive, and prestigious mentoring for mid-
level graduate students in virtual reality, to afford these students a valuable
opportunity to get independent perspectives on their research from senior
individuals with a wide collective breadth and depth of knowledge, and to build
a cohort of young researchers within the VR community. Due to this year's timing
constraints, the DC student participants have already been selected; special
efforts were made to recruit participants from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the field of computer science, including women, persons of
color, and people with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's IEEE VR
Doctoral Consortium builds on the successful format of the previous such events,
which were also supported by NSF. The main activities of the workshop will take
place on Saturday, March 23. The full-day event will include morning and
afternoon sessions in which each student presents his/her work to the other
student participants and a panel of senior VR researchers, with sufficient time
set aside after each talk for discussion and constructive feedback that
addresses the strengths of the work, challenges and issues that may arise, and
implications of the results. A group working lunch attended by all the students
and mentors will be particularly valuable for unifying the individual goals and
projects presented within the group as part of a "big picture" envisioning of
the future of the field. Additionally, a dinner will be held on Saturday, March
23, to welcome the students and provide initial mentorship and tips for
networking at the conference. Beyond the main event and dinner on Saturday,
small groups of 2-3 students will meet on an additional day during the week for
mentoring lunches and other networking events with senior members of the VR
research community. DC attendees will also take part in a poster session, which
will give them more opportunities to network and discuss their research. The
conference organizers will generously provide as much financial support as
possible to the DC through the conference's budget, including meeting space,
audio-visual rental, and food and beverage during breaks for
free.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.