* 1926376
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Syntactic Description of a Language with Unique Patterns of Symmetrical Voice Alternations
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Gary Holton, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2022
* USD 18,575.00

The distinction between "Mary kicked the ball" (active voice) and "The ball was
kicked by Mary" (passive voice) is an important one for both speakers and
linguistic theory. In the active voice the focus is on Mary as the instigator of
the kicking. In the passive voice the focus is on the ball, and reference to
Mary can even be omitted, as in "The ball was kicked. " A key feature of the
active-passive distinction is its asymmetry: the active is the typical way of
saying something, while the passive stands out as different, moving the focus
away from the person initiating the action and adding "was" and "by" in the
passive sentence. Active-passive distinctions have been documented in hundreds
of the world's languages, leading many to assume the universality of this
construction. However, recently scholars have begun to challenge this
assumption, pointing to new data from previously undocumented languages
suggesting that symmetrical voice distinctions exist. In other words, neither
the active nor passive form is more basic. This project will investigate
symmetrical voice in an underdocumented language, Western Subanon (ISO 639-3
suc), which makes even finer distinctions between types of active voice. Such
distinctions are different from English in both the symmetry and the gradation
of types of active voice. Broader impacts include a public repository of
recordings and transcriptions, materials for use by community members and
promotion of linguistic sustainability and modern language documentation
techniques in the region. Other outcomes include the training of a doctoral
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CoPI, a doctoral candidate at the
University of Hawaii, will document and analyze Western Subanon, an endangered
and understudied indigenous minority Austronesian language spoken in the
southern Philippines. While Philippine languages are often taken as prototype
examples of symmetrical voice languages, most research has focused on just of a
few of the larger languages, such as Tagalog, ignoring the diversity which
exists within Greater Central Philippines, a family of nearly one hundred
languages. Subanon is unique in distinguishing multiple forms of active voice,
the marking of which interacts in complex ways with number, tense, and mood. In
order to better understand the factors motivating choice of voice the CoPI will
compile a comprehensive collection of recordings of natural language use. These
recordings will form the basis for a grammatical description of voice, while
also serving the needs of researchers working on related grammatical topics.
Given the lack of existing documentation of Subanon, the description of
symmetrical voice will be embedded within a reference grammar, thus ensuring
that this work is maximally accessible to other researchers. Moreover, in order
to better understand the factors motivating choice of voice forms this research
will compile a corpus of annotated recordings of natural language, which will be
archived and accessible for both researchers and community members. The outcomes
of this project will thus provide new data on a little-studied Philippine
language while also informing ongoing debates about the nature of symmetrical
voice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.