* 1926868
* Collaborative Research: Molecular-level Understanding of Small Molecule Transport in Glassy Polymers Exhibiting Configurational Free Volume
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bin Wang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 391,872.00

Many new membrane materials have been developed in recent years; however, very
few of them have made it to industrial applications, mainly due to lack of
durability and robustness under realistic operating conditions. This research
project aims to develop a molecular-level understanding of transport mechanisms
in membrane materials and to inform the development of the next generation of
membrane materials that can compete with traditional energy-intensive gas
separations technologies. The types of membrane materials that will be
investigated have a molecular structure that creates permanent, non-collapsible
voids (free volume) in the material. The free volume is available for selective
gas sorption, and the molecular structure around the voids helps the material to
maintain its free volume and separation performance, unlike current separation
membranes. The scientific knowledge generated by this research should enable
significant advances in separation membranes that will meet the needs for a
broad range of industrial applications. The research project serves as a
training ground for undergraduate and graduate students to perform cutting edge
research and will engage students from groups underrepresented in STEM fields.
The researchers will also engage in well-structured education and outreach
activities, including developing new courses, formulating educational and
research components for high school students, giving presentations at a public
"research night" event, and creating an educational video streaming for general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is to elucidate
how conformation- and configuration-based free volume contribute, individually
and synergistically, to the membrane transport properties. The research
hypothesis is that configurational free volume is much more stable than
conformational free volume, and thus it provides unprecedented resistance to
physical aging and plasticization even under harsh conditions, i.e., at high
temperature and in chemically challenging environments. Iptycene-based polymers
with specifically, yet systematically, varied free volume architecture will be
synthesized, and the effect of configurational free volume on molecular
transport will be studied. Fundamental transport properties (i.e., sorption,
diffusion and permeation) will be investigated experimentally and theoretically
under both ambient and harsh conditions. Finally, atomistic simulations will be
performed to elucidate the underlying transport mechanism in polymers with
configuration-based free volume and the effect of nano-confinement. The outcome
of this project will be improved membranes for industrial gas separations,
especially under harsh conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.