* 1926636
* SBIR Phase II:  Ion Mobility Spectrometer for Macromolecular Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* W Benner, Ion Dx, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2022
* USD 898,365.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of an analytical
instrument to detect protein changes across all stages of protein production.
The production of highly-engineered therapeutic proteins has outpaced the
development of analytical assays to guarantee effectiveness, purity, and shelf
life of the drug. A key control parameter during manufacturing is protein
conformation; currently, this is difficult to monitor with commercially
available technology. The goal of this project is to provide manufacturers with
a new generation of analytical technology that allows them to identify
variations between batches. This technology also provides information about
product stability so manufacturers can guarantee a longer shelf life for their
products, regardless of storage conditions. It is anticipated that this
instrument will increase efficacy at all stages, from discovery through scaled-
up production and formulation to pre-release
certification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project aims to improve
biotherapeutic drug production through the commercialization of analytical
technology that provides a new metric for the rapid QC/QA assessment of the
conformation of proteins. The gold standard for determining protein conformation
is x-ray crystallography - a time-consuming technique that requires high quality
crystals and a high-energy physics facility to produce coherent x-rays. The
proposed highly sensitive bench-top ion mobility spectrometer detects small
variations in the cross-sectional area of a protein and detects small
conformational changes. This provides a capability to determine protein
stability during discovery when only microgram quantities of recombinantly
expressed proteins are available. This process also indicates if a protein
refolded after it was subjected to a pH change during purification, and thus it
may be used to identify challenges to long-term shelf life. This instrument will
be used to demonstrate that for the first time, ion mobility will produce
highly-reproducible and biologically relevant measurements of the quality of
biomanufactured proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.