* 1926221
* Collaborative Proposal: MRA: The influence of climatic dipoles on plant and animal populations at continental scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Courtenay Strong, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 238,097.00

Changes in climate often result in the appearance of unusually warm and dry
conditions in one part of the world with cold and wet conditions thousands of
miles away. These lasting and predictable fluctuations in temperature and
rainfall are known as "climatic dipoles" and often emerge across years or
decades. A well-known example of this phenomenon is El Nino, where wet
conditions across the southern United States are associated with dry conditions
to the north. Most ecological studies collect data at local or regional scales.
As a result, the continental-scale effects of climatic dipoles on ecological and
environmental processes are largely unexplored. Climatic dipoles may provide
insight on important phenomena such as animal migrations, agricultural and
forest productivity, insect outbreaks, and the emergence of diseases. This study
will use long-term observations of bird movements from thousands of citizen
scientists, decades of seed production records in trees, and animal population
numbers collected throughout the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON).
The project will partner with and guide existing citizen science programs to
better predict the effects of climate on animals and plants. The team will
organize "ecoclimatology" workshops to provide training to early-career
scientists interested in both climate science as well as
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research poses a novel framework of methods
applied for space-time pattern discovery, used by climate scientists to analyze
variability, to identify climate-ecological dipoles across North America. The
overarching hypothesis is that many ecological phenomena are entrained at
continental scales by dipole modes of climate variability. Specific questions
include: 1) do atmospheric circulations and climatic dipoles synchronize seed
production in trees (known as masting) and avian irruptions at continental
scales?; 2) do unique modes of climate variability affect the population
dynamics for multiple taxa (seed-dependent birds, small mammals, and ticks) at
disjunct NEON sites and across multiple time lags?; and 3) how might historic
and future environmental change influence these climatic-ecological
relationships? Analyzing three decades of data from Project FeederWatch and a
recently compiled data set of tree masting at hundreds of sites, the research
will explore the use of empirical orthogonal functions to understand climate
variability impacting plant and animal communities during a time of rapid
environmental change. Ecological observatory networks, such as NEON, and citizen
science databases are increasingly rich in information. Employing these
analytical approaches from climate science will represent a key advance for
ecological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.