* 1926967
* SBIR Phase II:  Automated Closed Systems for Manufacturing Autologous Dendritic Cell Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Rossi, FLASKWORKS
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 08/31/2021
* USD 749,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in the development of new technologies to
manufacture personalized therapies for cancer and other diseases, based on a
patient's own cells. Such therapies have shown tremendous potential in the
treatment of previously intractable cancers. However, challenges in
manufacturing these completely personalized therapies are a significant
impediment to the ability to realize their full societal potential both in terms
of therapeutic efficacy and cost. This project aims to remove major
manufacturing barriers for therapies based on dendritic cells, which are an
important part of the human immune system and can be modified to target specific
diseases. No manufacturing systems currently available can perform all the
required steps of manufacturing personalized dendritic cell therapies. This
project will address this major unmet need by leveraging advanced concepts in
engineering and biology to design an integrated system for cost-effective
dendritic cell therapy manufacturing. Given the large number of personalized
cell-based therapies currently in clinical trials and recently approved, such a
system is expected to address a major societal need and have significant
commercial potential. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will
advance to commercialization an advanced bioreactor system for closed-system
manufacturing of autologous dendritic cell therapies. Multiple technological
challenges must be overcome to automate and integrate the unit operations
associated with the manufacturing of these therapies. Because of their low
abundance in blood and tissue, dendritic cells are typically generated from
leukapheresis-derived monocytes. Adherent monocytes must first be converted into
nonadherent immature dendritic cells via incubation inIL4 and GM-CSF, prior to
maturation and stimulation with tumor specific antigens. In order to achieve
automation and integration of these steps on a single platform, the proposed
system will build on successful Phase I work in perfusion-based dendritic cell
culture that enables reduction of process steps associated with cytokine
infusion and achievement of perfusion in a simple and cost-effective single-use
bioreactor design. In addition, an agile product development methodology will be
utilized in conjunction with computational modeling to rapidly and iteratively
create prototypes and test them in the hands of potential customers. Feedback
obtained from these users will be incorporated into the assembly of a pre-
production beta system to be launched commercially at the end of Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.