* 1926465
* Gated Synaptic Memory Devices with Adaptive Short-Term States for Neuromorphic Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Rashmi Jha, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 348,000.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques for big data analytics are becoming very
important. However, AI software algorithms are computation resource intensive
which imposes limitations on their practical applications as the currently
available data processors are not well-suited for these needs. For example,
training algorithms for AI can take several hours to days for completing the
training process. Additionally, some of the other challenges, such as the
requirement for huge training datasets, lack of real-time training and multi-
modal data fusion capabilities, and limitations for the system to make decisions
reliably with limited input data are well-recognized. Many of these problems can
be addressed if brain-inspired neuromorphic data processors can be developed.
However, it is a non-trivial task because of two primary reasons. First, the
cortical circuits in brain is not fully understood and still is a topic of
research in the neuroscience community. Second, artificial neuromimetic
components for integration in brain-inspired architectures are not yet developed
to match the computational efficiency and diversity of biological-brains. It has
been identified from current understanding of cortical circuits in biological-
brain that a synapse which is a reconfigurable connection between neurons, play
pivotal a role in learning and memory formation. The focus of this project is to
develop artificial nanoelectronic synaptic devices that can be integrated in
neuromorphic architectures. The project provides significant opportunities for
training graduate and undergraduate students in understanding and developing
neuromorphic processors for AI. A new course on "Neuromorphic Computers for AI"
at the graduate level will be developed. Efforts will be made to increase
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM by leveraging the program on
"Nurturing Educational Readiness and Development from the Start (NERDS)" and
through local Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) chapter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nanoelectronic synaptic device will be developed by
exploiting time-dependent trap dynamics in oxides in conjunction with the
transport of intrinsic or extrinsic dopants in a novel gated-Synaptic Memory
Device (gated-SMD) configuration. These dynamics will result in an analog
potentiation (increase in conductance) and depression (decrease in conductance)
as a function of the temporal sequences of voltage-pulses on gate that can be
explored for implementing bio-inspired learning algorithms. The objective of the
proposed research will be achieved by executing the following specific aims: (1)
fabricating gated-SMDs and studying the device characteristics, including
potentiation and depression of resistive states on different time-scales as a
function of gate-bias and modeling it; (2) understanding the scalability of
these devices by large-scale layout designs and comparing and benchmarking the
cell sizes against other candidate memory technologies; and (3) developing novel
real-time learning algorithms and implementing bio-inspired learning schemes
using gated-SMDs for neuromorphic architectures. The intellectual significance
of the proposed research lies in knowledge base and a device platform to provide
a solution of nanoelectronic synapses for neuromorphic circuits. If successful,
the project will yield the following outcomes: (i) a fundamental understanding
of gated-SMDs and device models benchmarked against experimental data, (ii)
strategies to control potentiation and depression rates of resistive states in
gated-SMD by engineering the device parameters, (iii) real-time learning
algorithms tailored for gated-SMDs, and (iv) large-scale integration routes for
gated-SMDs and scalability data. The achievement of these outcomes will have
transformative impact on developing neuromorphic data processors for
AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.