* 1926202
* Simulation of Interactive Cyclic Local-Global Buckling in Steel Members Using Nonlocal Hybrid Element
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Amit Kanvinde, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 321,914.00

Computer simulations are essential for predicting how buildings and other
infrastructure will perform under extreme situations such as earthquakes or
hurricanes. Under such conditions, steel structures often collapse due to
twisting and buckling of its parts (beams and columns). This type of failure is
challenging to simulate in computer models, because current methods cannot
represent the physical mechanisms of twisting and buckling or their interactions
in an effective manner. This award supports fundamental research to create a
method that represents the physics of these processes in a novel way, enabling
more accurate simulation of structural failure under extreme loads. The findings
and software technology from this research will enhance the resilience of
buildings and other infrastructure, benefiting the nation's society and economy.
The involvement of underrepresented groups, education of students with new
knowledge, and technology transfer to practitioners will result in broader
impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Steel members often fail under extreme loads due
to interactions between twisting and buckling under cyclic loading that occurs
in earthquakes. This process leads to loss in strength, ultimately leading to
structural collapse. Currently used methods for modeling this process do not
directly simulate the physical phenomena of warping, twisting and buckling, and
are therefore severely compromised in terms of their accuracy in predicting
failure. This research is a new scientific formulation in which the warping and
twisting of members is represented in a novel manner. This formulation also
allows for the incorporation of buckling through a 'nonlocal' approach such that
results are not mesh-sensitive (meaning that they are objective). The scientific
formulation will be implemented in an open-source numerical platform that is
popular among structural engineers and researchers. This approach (including its
implementation) will be informed and validated rigorously by extensive available
experimental datasets and finite element simulation, and broadly disseminated to
target audiences and user groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.