* 1926718
* RAPID:  The role of disturbance in maintaining behavioral variation in native species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Sarah Bengston, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2021
* USD 36,507.00

Significant weather events may have long-term effects on populations, but these
effects can be difficult to measure due to the ephemeral nature of severe
weather. Hurricane Harvey has provided the opportunity to precisely test how
populations respond to extreme weather. This study specifically looks at how
individuals of a common ant species who are repopulating decimated areas behave.
Because recent climate models predict severe storms will become more common,
understanding how these events affect the populations of native species exposed
to them will become increasingly important to understanding the future
trajectory of plant and animal survival and the population health of important
species. This knowledge can be used to shape effective conservation and
preservation strategies and to protect vulnerable species and habitat. This
project leverages the existing interest the public has in how ants respond to
flooding, such as fire ant rafting, to help explain how animals respond to
extreme weather events. It also provides a foundation for hands-on activities
and lesson plans to be distributed to rural Texas schools, including schools
associated with citizens of the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe. Last, the researchers
on this project have a strong commitment to recruiting underrepresented
minorities to participate in this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
disperse to and successfully colonize new habitats is predicated on a
disperser's phenotypic and life history traits. In animal populations, patterns
of space use and range expansion are inherently behavioral processes. As such,
many animals exhibit distinct morphological and behavioral polymorphisms
associated with dispersal and range expansion. However, few studies have focused
on patterns of recolonization in populations' native ranges after local
extinction events, despite the potential for long-term effects on population
demography. This study leverages the unique circumstances created by Hurricane
Harvey to ask whether re-colonizers of native, disturbed habitat bear behavioral
traits predicted to promote colonization in new, non-native habitats. Using ants
of the genus Temnothorax, this study tracks the risk-tolerance and life-history
phenotype of colonies recolonizing Big Thicket National Preserve in Eastern
Texas after the local extinction event caused by Hurricane Harvey flooding. This
is done by tracking the risk-tolerance of colonies re-establishing following
floods with a standardized aggression assay. Additionally, colonies are kept in
common garden conditions for one reproductive cycle to measure energetic
allocation toward reproductive and somatic maintenance; a proxy for life-history
strategy. This research provides significant insight into the role disturbance
has in maintaining behavioral variation and thus a population's ability to
recolonize after an extinction event.