* 1926690
* 4th International Conference on Packing Problems
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 05/31/2020
* USD 7,000.00

This award will support the 4th International Conference on Packing Problems
that will be held at Yale University June 3-7, 2019. The 4th International
Conference on Packing Problems will feature 37 invited speakers (with 40-minute
talks) from the U.S., Europe, India, China, Japan, and Australia, and at least
10 contributed 20-minute talks from junior scientists. The topics of the
Conference will include packing and flows in granular media, jamming and glass
transitions in metal alloys, colloids, gels, droplets, foams, and emulsions,
tissue morphogenesis, cell packing in tumors, and dense packing in proteins. In
contrast to the previous three Conferences, the 4th International Conference on
Packing Problems will have a significant focus on jamming and glass transitions
in biological materials. The Conference on Packing Problems will offer at least
10 contributed speaking slots for junior researchers to give 20-minute talks and
two 90-minute poster sessions, which will allow the junior researchers to
introduce their work and receive feedback on their work from the international
research community. The Conference will advertise to undergraduates, Ph.D.
students, and postdocs at the universities of the invited speakers and through
newsletters of several Units (DBIO, DCMP, GSOFT, and GSNP) of the American
Physical Society. To encourage attendance by URM undergraduates and Ph.D.
students, the PI will offer 5 travel grants for URM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How the structural and mechanical properties of
systems near jamming are affected by particle shape, deformability, and friction
needs further research. In addition, more recent work has identified jamming
like transitions that occur in developing tissues, cancer tumors, the bacterial
cytoplasm, and protein cores. The 4th International Conference on Packing
Problems will bring together experts in jamming and glass transitions and
packing problems and allow them to interact with the leading experimentalists in
soft matter and biological physics to determine whether concepts from ja mming
and glass transitions can be used to explain important open questions in their
research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.