* 1926935
* Collaborative Research: Pushing Students Away: Developing a Research Agenda for Broadening Participation of African Americans in Engineering and Computer Science
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Jeremi London, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2020
* USD 127,589.00

While there have been substantial initiatives designed to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups, producing a diverse workforce is
unlikely if the country continues to lose them at each of the major junctures
along the education-to-workforce pathway: K-12 education, undergraduate
education, graduate education, and workforce. While researchers have published
numerous studies on underrepresented groups over the past four decades, trends
have not significantly improved, suggesting a disconnection between research and
practice and a greater need to investigate the issue of broadening participation
at every major segment throughout the education-to-workforce pathway. As a
result, the investigators propose to conduct a research project that critically
examines the Innovation Cycle of Educational Practice and Research as it relates
to broadening participation in engineering and computer science. This study will
advance our understanding of the disconnect between research and practice,
identify barriers to progress, and set a national agenda for broadening the
participation of African Americans in engineering and computer science. The
agenda will unify the current literature on this topic, frame key issues, and
pose significant questions around the development of a diverse engineering
workforce. Aligned with current NSF broaden participation interests and
priorities, this agenda will provide: (1) researchers with a backdrop for
identifying problems that can be investigated empirically; and (2) practitioners
with practical strategies for addressing barriers present in their local
context. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design, guiding this study, will
enable us to synthesize the plethora of existing recommendations, while
obtaining feedback from researchers, practitioners and other stakeholders alike.
The research design will also serve as a model for subsequent studies on
broadening the participation of other underrepresented groups in STEM. Further,
to readjust current practices for addressing this persistent problem and figure
out what is pushing students away, this project involves systematically
reviewing the theoretical and scientific literature on barriers to participating
and proposing new solutions for each juncture of the education-to-workforce
pathway; interviewing subject-matter experts (n=60) to discuss their
professional experiences regarding broadening the participation of African
Americans and what can be done to gain momentum in African Americans
participation in engineering; and conducting a Delphi study (n=20) to reach
consensus on the key issues and gaps in our understanding, significant
questions, and breakdowns in the Innovation Cycle of Educational Practice and
Research. This project will produce the following outcomes: (1) a literature
review synthesizing and highlighting the current state of research and practice
on broadening the participation of African Americans and an Innovation Cycle of
Broadening Participation; (2) a conceptual model that depicts the current
relationship between research and practice in this context; and (3) an outline
of a national agenda for coordinating the efforts of stakeholders committed to
broadening participation of African Americans in engineering and computer
science.