* 1926662
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Strain Gadient Plasticity Modeling to Link Microstructural Non-Local Effects of Dislocation/Interface Interactions with Ductility and Springback
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Fullwood, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 09/30/2023
* USD 331,855.00

A key component in the strategy to lightweight vehicles for reducing harmful
emissions involves the introduction of advanced light alloys across a wide
spectrum of vehicle components. However, advanced alloys are typically less
ductile than their heavier predecessors and are liable to fracture during the
shaping and forming operations. On the other hand, various empirical
observations have demonstrated that careful selection of strain (deformation)
path during the forming process can significantly delay component failure.
Current simulation frameworks do not account for key phenomena at the
microstructural level needed to analyze and design better forming processes and
to guide alloy selection and development for optimal exploitation of current and
forthcoming lightweight materials. By combining novel developments in microscopy
and modeling, the critical issue to be explored in this Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project involves interactions
between mobile planes of atoms (dislocations) that facilitate shape change of
the component, and microstructural interfaces, such as precipitates and grain
boundaries. Barriers to dislocation glide cause atomic pileups, and related
backstress effects, that are not considered in traditional models, but can
potentially be manipulated to improve overall ductility via careful design of
strain paths that occur during forming. The research will be integrated into
industrial practice by the industrial partner, Aleris, to deliver potentially
transformational capabilities in vehicle lightweighting efforts. As a result of
this collaboration, the students involved will also gain an understanding of
industrial challenges and drivers. Knowledge derived from the research will be
integrated into course curricula for graduate and undergraduate students, while
a cloud-based App hosting the developed model will be made available to the
broader research community via Materials Resources, LLC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project, involving the
complementary expertise of two universities and an industrial partner, is driven
by the hypothesis that accurate calculation of strain gradients, and related
backstress and localization fields, during forming can be used to design strain
paths that optimize material ductility, effectively delaying
localization/failure in high-strength aluminum (Al) alloy sheets. The team will
conceive and implement a novel strain-gradient crystal plasticity finite element
model to encapsulate the scientific insights. The model will be guided by a
combination of two cutting-edge microstructural techniques that will provide
unprecedented detail of the deformation behavior at the relevant length-scale.
High-resolution electron backscatter diffraction (HREBSD) will be employed for
mapping both geometrically necessary dislocations, accompanying strain
gradients, and related backstress for each strain path, while high-resolution
digital image correlation (HRDIC) will extract the plastic strain tensor for a
complete picture of the deformation. The scientific advances will be applied to
warm forming of two high strength alloys with different microstructures, namely
AA6022-T4 and AA7050-T6.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.