* 1926303
* Automated decomposition of optimization problems through learning network structures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Prodromos Daoutidis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 359,592.00

Large-scale complex optimization problems have become increasingly important for
control or dynamic optimization of chemical processes, including design or
operation in an uncertain economic environment and integration of process
design, control and scheduling at the enterprise-wide level. These problems are
inherently non-scalable and computationally difficult to solve. Decomposition is
a type of solution method where the larger problem is "decomposed" into
multiple, easier-to-solve sub-problems. Decomposition based solution methods are
computationally efficient for solving large optimization problems, but they rely
on intuition for decomposing the optimization formulation into a set of
interacting sub-problems that can be solved iteratively to obtain the optimum.
The proposed research project aims to generalize this approach and eliminate the
need for applying heuristics (intuition) by developing an automated framework
for determining the most suitable decomposition structure and corresponding
solution method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to develop a
generic framework for learning the underlying structure of a complex
optimization problem, finding the corresponding decomposition consistent with
this structure, and adapting the decomposition to account for integer variables
and nonconvex constraints to improve the corresponding solution strategy. The
developed framework will be automated through the development of open-source
software packages for analyzing the structure of optimization problems and
executing decomposition-based algorithms based on high-level programming
languages. A stochastic block model will be introduced as a powerful statistical
inference tool for analyzing network representations (variable-constraint
graphs) of optimization problems. Within this framework, the most suitable block
structure underlying the optimization problem topology (community structure,
core-periphery structure, or hybrid structure) will be systematically
determined, it will be refined to accommodate integer variables and nonconvex
constraints and will be matched with the corresponding decomposition-based
solution algorithms. Graduate students will be trained in fundamental research
cutting across mathematics, optimization and network science. Undergraduate
research projects inspired from this research projects will be offered as honors
thesis research projects to undergraduate students at the University of
Minnesota. The PI will mentor and host students from DeLaSalle High School in
Minneapolis, which has a diverse student population, to cultivate their interest
in pursuing STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.