* 1926105
* Collaborative research: Phylogenomic analyses of lorisiform primates using museum collections
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Luca Pozzi, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 259,226.00

This project will advance current understanding of the primate tree of life by
investigating the evolutionary history of galagos and lorises, which are
elusive, nocturnal primate species that have been understudied relative to other
primate groups. The investigators will sequence the whole genomes of ten galago
and loris genera for which no genomic data are yet available. They will also
generate genomic data from a large number of primate specimens stored in museum
collections. By combining these unprecedented datasets, this research will
address fundamental questions about evolutionary relatedness, adaptations, and
biogeography in these primate groups. The project will result in a freely
accessible genomic database representing an important resource for future
studies of all primates and especially for the galagos and lorises, which are
extremely difficult to sample in the wild. This research and the database will
also inform the conservation of galagos and lorises, many of which are highly
endangered with extinction. The investigators will recruit graduate and
undergraduate students from historically underrepresented groups in San Antonio
(UTSA) and New York (AMNH), and train them in bioinformatics, molecular
laboratory techniques, and conservation sciences. The investigators will also
contribute to broader training through development of an open access teaching
module on the applications of museum collections and phylogenomics to
biodiversity conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding primate
evolutionary history and the processes of adaptation and diversification is a
significant research goal within biological anthropology and biology. This task
has been particularly difficult for small, nocturnal and elusive primate species
like the galagos and lorises. This study will leverage the vast number of
specimens housed in museum collections all over the world to improve our
knowledge of the evolutionary history of the lorisiforms (galagos and lorises).
By producing genomic data for this understudied group of primates, the
investigators will be able to address questions about their evolutionary
history, species diversity, and biogeography. The researchers will use a
combination of short-read and long-molecule DNA sequencing to obtain genomic
sequences of hundreds of specimens including all the known species currently
recognized with the lorisiforms. This large comparative dataset will be used to
1) infer a comprehensive picture of the primate tree, including time estimates
for the various branches; 2) identify cryptic species diversity; and 3) enable a
stronger scientific basis to inform the conservation of endangered lorisiforms,
which are typically neglected in both research focus and conservation attention
in comparison to larger-bodied primates. This project is jointly funded by the
Biological Anthropology program, Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences,
and the Systematics and Biodiversity Sciences Cluster, Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.