* 1926158
* Ocean acidification in the western Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Wei-Jun Cai, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 391,263.00

Rising carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, global climate change,
and the sustainability of the Earth's biosphere are of great societal concern.
This is true in the Arctic Ocean as it is widely viewed as one of the most
sensitive regions on Earth to climate change. Understanding the carbon cycle and
its underlying control mechanisms is necessary to predict how carbon flux in the
Arctic Ocean will change, as well as feedbacks to the larger climate system.
This project will measure components of the carbonate system to understand ocean
acidification in the western Arctic Ocean through collaboration with the Chinese
National Arctic Research Expedition (CHINARE) cruises along a transect from the
Bering Strait to high latitude basins. The investigator will collect high
resolution inorganic carbon data during summer 2020. These data, supplemented by
a subset of data collected in 2019 and 2021 by CHINARE collaborators, will be
used to understand the mechanisms controlling carbon cycle and fluxes and ocean
acidification in the western Arctic Ocean and the changes that have occurred in
recent decades. Continued data collection and data synthesis are important to
understand major environmental and climate-related changes in the marine
carbonate system in the Arctic Ocean. This research will enhance the
infrastructure of ocean carbon research and general science education through
teaching undergraduate and graduate courses at the University of Delaware. In
addition, it will enhance international collaboration and public awareness of
climate change and environmental issues through public outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observing and understanding the mechanisms controlling the
carbon cycle in the Arctic Ocean is necessary to predict future conditions and
feedbacks to climate change. This study will test the hypothesis that high
biological production and low partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) are
limited to the Chukchi shelf and the sea-ice melt edge and that ice-free basin
areas are characterized by high pCO2, low pH, and low carbonate saturation
state. A comparison of the new data with those collected between 2008 and 2018
during CHINARE, as well as other historical data, will be used to test the
hypothesis that the expansion of the basin area to north characterized by
increasingly higher pCO2 and lower pH is due to the earlier timing and longer
summer warming, reduced buffer capacity, and increased pCO2 in the atmosphere.
Finally, water column data collected in 2020 together with earlier data will be
used to test the hypothesis that the expansion of ocean acidification from
subsurface to deeper depths and to higher latitudes is primarily caused by the
increased input of the Pacific Winter Water into the subsurface basin driven by
rapid environment change such as sea-ice retreat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.