* 1926024
* I-Corps: Morphing Minimally Invasive Surgery Instruments
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Larry Howell, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make an
impact on the minimally invasive surgical systems market, which is greater than
$24 billion globally and is projected to grow to more than $40 billion by 2025.
The desire for increasingly smaller incisions leads to a need for decreased size
and increased functionality of laparoscopic surgical tools. The proposed
instruments combine multiple laparoscopic surgical tools (e.g. graspers,
endoscopes, and sealers) into a single instrument, reducing the time (and
associated cost) of switching instruments. The technology enables multiple tools
to be inserted into the surgical space through a single incision, which reduces
the number of incisions, operating time, recovery time, and patient pain, while
also improving cosmetics. This product could also decrease costs and make
minimally invasive surgical systems more affordable for healthcare systems and
patients worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will evaluate
creating next-generation minimally invasive surgery instruments by applying
fundamental research in developable mechanisms. The proposed laparoscopic
instruments take advantage of developable mechanisms' conforming and emerging
ability and combine multiple surgical instruments into a single instrument,
thereby decreasing the number of cannulas (surgical rods) needed to perform a
surgery and the number of incisions required. Fewer incisions leads to faster
recovery time, less pain, and improved cosmetics. By integrating multiple
instruments into a single unit, this technology will also be able to decrease
the number of units required for surgical procedures and thereby decrease
instrument and sterilization costs. Developable mechanisms are a new class of
kinematic mechanism that can conform to or be embedded in developable surfaces.
Developable mechanisms are a simple, clean way to add functionality to existing
shafts or tubes without adding material or increasing
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.