* 1926691
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium for the International Conference on Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling &amp; Prediction and Behavior Representation in Modeling and Simula
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Yu-Ru Lin, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports student travel to participate in the 2019 International
Conference on Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling &amp; Prediction
and Behavior Representation in Modeling and Simulation (SBP-BRiMS). The primary
goal of the SBP-BRiMS conference is to bring together researchers, system
scientists, and domain experts from diverse disciplines to discuss
multidisciplinary problems related to computational social science and cultural
and behavioral modeling, with the goal of developing novel theories and
methodologies to advance our understanding of social interactions. The SBP-BRiMS
conference has grown steadily, with approximately 130-220 participants per year
attending from academia, industry and government sectors; along with its
interdisciplinarity, this diversity in work contexts offers a rare opportunity
for cross-fertilization between researchers from different backgrounds. This
proposal's goal is to further enhance that diversity by supporting the
participation of junior researchers from underrepresented and marginalized
groups in STEM in both the main conference and the conference's doctoral
consortium, help junior scholars get both deep feedback on their proposed
research and chances to connect to the broader community of research around
computational methods for modeling behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference will be held at George Washington University in July 2019.
Participants will be recruited through a number of channels, including
professional mailing lists related to SBP-BRiMS research areas and lists
maintained by organizations whose goal is to increase participation of
underrepresented groups in computing. Up to 15 students will be supported to
attend the doctoral colloquium and conference, with selection criteria based on
the potential contributions of students' work to the field and to the diversity
of ideas at the conference and administered by the conference and doctoral
consortium co-chairs. Selected students will participate in a number of
activities, including research presentations, interdisciplinary tutorials, and
cross-fertilization round table sessions involving researchers and program staff
from federal agencies, that will offer them research training, professional
development, and community building opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.