* 1926738
* Dimensions US-China:  Collaborative Research:  Functional Genomics and Experimental Endosymbiont Replacements in Lice.
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2024
* Dale Clayton, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,291,869.00

Evolution is a process that optimizes the functions of genes within an organism
to facilitate survival in the face of competition and environmental change.
While evolution often serves as an engine of invention, it also plays an
important role in streamlining, ensuring that organisms do not waste resources
maintaining or operating superfluous functions. Many animals and plants have
evolved symbiotic relationships with microbes in order to gain access to
functions that their own genomic inventories do not provide. Microbes
participating in these associations experience a dramatic shift from an
autonomous lifestyle to one in which their plant or animal host provides many of
their needs. Symbiosis provides one of nature's most potent opportunities for
evolutionary streamlining, often resulting in the loss of over 90% of ancestral
microbial gene functions. This research focuses on understanding the process of
evolutionary streamlining in bacterial symbionts of feather-feeding bird lice.
These symbioses have evolved (separately) many times from near-identical
partners that have colonized different birds but have the same symbiotic
functionality. This is a rare and highly prized scenario for the study of an
evolutionary process because the high level of repetition provides unique
insight into the roles of random change and contingency. This research will also
provide a framework for science integration between Chinese and US students and
researchers, along with a summer "SIM-biosis" camp that will train 7-9th grade
students to develop computer simulations that can decipher the modes and
patterns of evolutionary processes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on understanding how intimate and interdependent symbiotic relationships
originate, function, and co-evolve. While many insects (along with other animals
and plants) have evolved symbiotic relationships with bacteria that facilitate
the acquisition of important new traits, this project focuses on feather-feeding
bird lice, which have repeatedly and independently evolved symbiotic
relationships with bacteria to obtain essential B-vitamins that are lacking in
their diet of feather keratin. The unusually uniform and simplified lifestyle of
these lice presents a unique opportunity to study the evolutionary outcome of
repeated acquisition of symbionts under similar conditions. This project
explores (i) the role of drift and contingency in shaping the processes of
genome evolution and degeneration in symbiotic bacteria, and (ii) the nature and
mechanistic basis of integrated functionality. The project uses novel
comparative genomic approaches underpinned by machine learning/artificial
intelligence algorithms to detect repeating patterns in highly-replicated
genomic datasets that effectively represent replays of symbiosis evolution in
lice. This will yield highly detailed insight into the molecular evolutionary
processes and adaptations that characterize symbiosis and, moreover, the
mechanism by which evolution facilitates genomic streamlining in
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.