* 1926139
* Collaborative Research: Standard: Exploring how scientists on multidisciplinary laboratory teams negotiate expertise and claim legitimacy regarding ethical practice.
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Megan Kenny Feister, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 211,216.00

The increasing diversity and complexity characterizing today's engineering
workforce and practice requires new research on the social factors that shape
ethics in STEM work. A common approach in research and teaching is to
incorporate the social aspects of teamwork, diversity, and ethics into isolated
lectures, separate courses, or to treat them as outcome variables. However, this
project takes the perspective that ethics is interwoven into everyday STEM work
not as a static outcome variable, but rather as a communication-based
achievement enacted in the social processes through which STEM work is
organized. It tests the hypothesis that in addition to technical, process, or
industry expertise, STEM team members can cultivate ethical expertise, a form of
knowledge and skills informing appropriate ways of working that is developed
through situated experience. This research advances scientific knowledge by
systematically investigating if and how different patterns of communication
affect ethical climates and ethical behavior within vertically integrated
multidisciplinary STEM teams from national and university laboratories. It
identifies areas in which misperceptions or misapplication of expertise may act
as a barrier to the development of ethical cultures in STEM organizations and
explores the ways ethics are learned and shared through ongoing social
relationships and interactions. Identifying the social and communicative factors
impacting the ethical accomplishment of complex scientific work provides insight
into a variety of actions and policies that universities, national labs, and
industry partners can use to cultivate ethical and collaborative research
climates to aid in the discovery and application of scientific knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study combines interview and ethnographic data with
social network analysis to examine how different patterns of communication and
interaction among members of STEM teams affect their perceptions of ethics in
laboratories and how these perceptions impact ethical research climates and the
social structures that enable effective and ethical teamwork. Phase 1 utilizes
ethnographic methods and grounded thematic analysis of interviews and
observations to capture and investigate the everyday practice of participants.
Phase 2 builds upon these findings and employs social network analysis to assess
the interdependent relationships between the different forms of expertise
present in the development of ethical climates, and their relationship to
ongoing interactions among team members. Phase 3 integrates these findings and
maps them onto extant literature to compare the salient features of each
institution and determine the explanatory mechanisms for the cultivation of
ethical climates and ethical behavior in STEM teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.