* 1926578
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: Bayesian analytical tools to improve survey estimates for subpopulations and small areas
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Andrew Gelman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 632,173.00

In this project, a set of tools will be built for in-depth analysis of survey
data, making use of and extending statistical methods for estimation for small
subgroups. Classical methods for surveys are focused on aggregate population-
level estimates but we can learn much more using small-area estimation. The goal
of this project is to build a user-accessible platform for modeling and
visualizing survey data that would give estimates for arbitrary subgroups of the
population, along with visualization tools to display estimates of interest. The
model would be fit in Stan, a state-of-the-art open-source platform for Bayesian
inference, and implemented for the Cooperative Congressional Election Survey
(CCES). An example of the sort of analysis that could be performed using these
methods is a study of how demographic gaps in voting vary by age, education, and
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The statistical method of multilevel regression and
poststratification (MRP) allows inferences for narrow slices of the population.
In the terminology of survey methods, MRP is "model-based" in that it uses
regression to do partial pooling (smoothing) for small areas and demographic
slices, and it is "design-based" in adjusting for variables such as age, sex,
ethnicity, and education that are predictive of inclusion in the sample. One
reason for extracting inferences for population subgroups using a flexible tool
rather than one-time analyses is that key variables can change over time.
Multilevel modeling gives the flexibility to adjust for large numbers of
predictors, which makes poststratification more effective. As a bonus, this
modeling and adjustment enables extraction of estimates of average survey
responses for small slices of the population, which can correspond to the very
sorts of inferences that consumers particularly want, and which typically are
unavailable from surveys without huge sample sizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.