* 1926667
* EAGER: Measurements of Soft Bi-material Interface Behaviors under Dynamic Loading Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Kara Peters, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2022
* USD 226,132.00

Thin polymer films are widely used in flexible electronics and soft robotics.
The durability of these thin polymer film interfaces is critical to their long-
term performance. A thorough understanding of the properties of these films is
also important in microelectronics fabrication where nanostructured polymer thin
film patterns are used to fabricate complex circuitry. As production rates for
these processes increase, an understanding of the dynamic performance of these
thin film patterns becomes more and more critical. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental research to create a new
experimental technique to measure the properties of material property gradients
in polymer thin films under dynamic loading conditions. This research will
generate critical experimental data on material property gradients and interface
conditions under dynamic loading conditions. This data can be used for the
enhancement of computational modeling of these material systems and enable the
design of new multi-layer film systems. Insight from this research will also
drive new fabrication strategies to enhance the long-term performance of
engineered flexible components. Enhancements to their performance would directly
impact the nation's soft robotics, manufacturing and healthcare systems by
enabling more durable devices for skin mounted sensors and flexible robots. This
project will provide opportunities to educate and train graduate students in
advanced experimental techniques that could be applied across many engineering
fields. The project will also impact undergraduate education through research
experiences for undergraduates with a focus on underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance of thin polymer films and multi-layer
films depends highly on the gradient of material properties through the
thickness of the film. These properties are altered relative to the bulk polymer
material due to chemical interactions with the substrate and geometrical
confinement. Similarly, the failure and dynamic behavior of polymer-matrix based
composites is often dominated by the interface/interphase properties between the
reinforcement and the matrix materials. This research aims to implement,
demonstrate and evaluate a novel acoustics based experimental technique for the
simultaneous measurement of stress-strain behavior gradients through the
thickness near soft, bi-material interfaces and adhesion properties at these
interfaces. Two specific material systems will be addressed, polymer thin films
and the interphase region in polymer-matrix composites. Material property data
will be collected over a wide range of dynamic loading conditions. The outcome
of this research will be a new experimental method for mechanics researchers to
more accurately determine property variations in the thickness directions for
thin-film and interphase specimens by significantly reducing the effects of the
local interface conditions and the substrate material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.