* 1926672
* A Configuration-Space Interrogation Approach to the Understanding and Design of Critical Load-Bearing Structures Susceptible to Buckling
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Lawrence Virgin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2023
* USD 382,395.00

Predicting the load that a structure can safely withstand before it collapses is
challenging. During its useful life-time, a structure is expected to perform
within an often severe, and changing environment, whether this is a solid-rocket
booster during lift-off; a multi-story building during an earthquake; a grain
silo during strong winds; an aircraft wing during turbulence; or an ocean
submersible subject to great pressure at depth. The failure of slender
cylindrical structures, in particular, is sensitively dependent on small changes
in geometry, and when they do fail, usually due to buckling, it is often a
sudden and catastrophic event. Due to their unpredictable behavior, they are
typically over-designed. This award supports the development of an innovative
approach to understanding the buckling of slender structures in general, and
hollow cylindrical structures in particular. A more rational basis for assessing
load-carrying capability, including appropriate safety factors, will allow more
accurate predictions to be made concerning the anticipated useful lifetime of a
given structure resulting in tremendous savings. This research is also important
for optimizing component replacement, scheduling maintenance based on
deteriorating performance, and minimizing material usage. Economic designs and
the prevention of disaster are long-term benefits of the research. During the
conduct of this research, graduate and undergraduate students will learn a
variety of skills including structural testing, mathematical modeling, additive
manufacturing, experimental design, and data analysis. Since hollow cylinders
are widely used as containers, ranging from soda cans to pipelines to
pressurized aircraft fuselages, this project has important impact on national
defense and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Testing thin cylinders under axial
load typically leads to large scatter in the measured buckling load. This has
led engineers to rely on relatively conservative design guidelines based on
empirical ?knockdown? factors. Rather than trying to predict the exact load at
which a highly nonlinear structure will buckle, the major goal of the new
approach is to assess the robustness of a structure to shocks or disturbances: a
form of configuration-space interrogation. The identification of unstable
equilibrium states, and their avoidance, is a key feature of the new stability
criteria. 3D-printing will be used extensively. The geometric precision and
versatility of 3D-printing is ideally suited to producing a range of high-
resolution cylinders that will be thoroughly tested in the laboratory. Numerical
simulations will also be conducted for verification purposes. The fundamental
knowledge gained in this research will provide an important contribution to the
understanding of structural stability and ultimately guide the design and use of
critical load-bearing elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.