* 1926913
* Precision Measurement and Modeling of Dynamic Millimeter-wave Wireless Propagation Channels
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 01/31/2024
* USD 479,508.00

One of the defining features of 5G communications is the use of frequency bands
in the mm-wave range. The ample available bandwidth has the potential to enable
dramatically higher data rates, thus enabling a plethora of new applications,
ranging from improved video streaming to virtual reality to industrial
monitoring and control. However, to properly assess the potential and
limitations of such mm-wave systems, it is required to first understand the
propagation channel, i.e., the way in which signals propagate from the
transmitter to the receiver. Since the fundamental propagation effects such as
diffraction and scattering are significantly different at higher frequencies,
the overall propagation channel can be expected to be different from the well-
explored channels at traditional cellular frequencies. The proposed project will
provide a detailed, measurement-based description of mm-wave propagation
channels, with special emphasis on the time variations that are created by
moving objects (cars, humans, machinery) in the environment. From such
understanding, it is possible to obtain insights in how to design more reliable,
and more efficient, mm-wave communications systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to
the great importance of mm-wave communication, a number of measurements do exist
for mm-wave channels, but they show serious restrictions. In particular, no
measurements are available that simultaneously (i) provide directional
information with high resolution, (ii) are dynamic, i.e., show the impact of
moving devices or scattering objects, and (iii) provide a statistically
significant number of measurement points that could form a reliable basis of
stochastic channel models, or training for machine learning. Because of a lack
of measurement results, many assumptions that are used in the development of 5G
devices and systems are conjectures, which this project aims to prove or
disprove. To achieve this, this project will use a novel channel sounder
recently developed at University of Southern California and extend its
capabilities through advanced signal processing techniques. This channel sounder
is based on the principle of fast beamswitching, which enables high equivalent
isotropically radiated power (EIRP) and capturing complete directional channel
characteristics within a short time (&lt;10ms). Using this sounder, the project
will perform and evaluate extensive measurement campaigns, some of which will
concentrate on dynamic effects and nonstationarities, while others will exploit
the capability for measuring and evaluating massive amount of data. Compared to
widely cited existing measurements, the new measurements can be done one million
times faster, and three orders of magnitude more measurement locations. Another
important result of the project will be the development of new channel models
that can reflect all of the relevant channel properties for theoretical analysis
as well as system design. By paying attention to the spatial consistency of the
results, and analyzing the number and amplitude distribution of the multipath
components, better deployment planning, and impact on system performance such as
prediction of various beamformer architectures will be
enabled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.