* 1926958
* Genomics of Diseases in Wildlife Workshop; June 2-9, 2019; May/June, 2020; Fort Collins, CO
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Sue VandeWoude, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2022
* USD 20,000.00

Wildlife populations can be drastically affected by the outbreak and
transmission of infectious diseases. Examples of this include white nose
syndrome which is devastating bat populations in the US, and Chytrid fungus
outbreaks that have caused declines in frog populations worldwide. Some diseases
of wildlife, for example, Rabies, Ebola, and West Nike Virus, can cause
outbreaks of disease in people, while other infections of wildlife, such as
Brucellosis and African Swine Fever, can be fatal to domestic animals and
livestock. Extraordinary new tools greatly improve our ability to detect
infection and understand why it sometimes is devastating and sometimes not.
While these new technologies make this an exciting time for new discoveries and
understanding that will improve wildlife disease management, many researchers
would benefit from training in their use. To address this need, we offer hands-
on training with real-world data through an intensive workshop "Genomics of
Disease in Wildlife" (GDW). The first two workshops offered in 2017 and 2018
were very successful and provided training for nearly 50 graduate students,
post-doctoral fellows, and faculty in Next Generation DNA Sequencing analysis to
use in projects about wildlife diseases. Going forward, this project will
provide scholarships to 12-14 graduate students or fellows (US citizens) with
financial need to attend workshops in 2019 and 2020. We will preferentially use
these funds to enhance diverse or underrepresented minority participation and
have been successful in recruiting women and diverse attendees to maximize
training impacts. This financial assistance will also facilitate building a
cohesive, effective scientific community making breakthroughs in control of
infectious wildlife diseases. For example, we have recently published a
manuscript helping the scientific community identify critical next challenges,
and the GDW workshop alumni are also involved in a listserv to promote
communications among a growing number of researchers with interest and expertise
in GDW problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent technological advances
in genomic sciences, and increasingly affordable Next Generation Sequencing
(NGS) assay costs, have coalesced to result in powerful tools to monitor,
detect, and reconstruct the past, present, and future role of pathogens
impacting wildlife populations. Wildlife researchers are thus uniquely
positioned to merge ecological, biological, and evolutionary studies with such
genomic technologies to exploit unprecedented "Big Data" tools in disease
research; however, most researchers lack the training and expertise required to
use these computationally intensive methodologies. Previous workshops have
consisted of lectures, daily computer labs, and analysis of real-world NGS data.
Previous workshops have provided comprehensive training in the use of genomic
tools for investigations of a broad range of interactions between wildlife host
species and their pathogens, and provided unique networking opportunities among
instructors, guest speakers, and participants. This project will provide support
for two additional years of workshops. Funds will be awarded as scholarships for
US graduate students and post-doctoral fellows interested in obtaining skills in
this emerging area. This award will encourage participation by early career
researchers. Participants will learn modern genomics techniques and generate
powerful genomic solutions to ameliorate the local, regional, and global impact
of wildlife disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.