* 1926972
* Probing Molecular Interactions in the Nitrogen Fixing Cyanobacteria-Feather Moss Symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Christopher Dupont, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

In 2002, it was reported that microbes capable of harvesting light for energy
and biomass, as well as generating nitrogen from the atmosphere, colonize
feather mosses that form a huge amount of the ecosystem in high latitude, or
boreal, forests. Subsequently, it has been found that these microbes provide a
large amount of the nitrogen that sustains boreal forests and that the feather
mosses secrete chemicals that attract the microbes. These microbes
(cyanobacteria) and mosses enter a symbiosis, with the cyanobacteria providing
nitrogen to the moss and the moss providing carbon to the cyanobacteria. The
work will examine in finer detail how the moss and cyanobacteria establish this
ecologically important partnership by determining essential elements and
exchanged compounds. Understanding the intricacies of epiphytic symbioses
increases the potential for a domesticated crop-plant-cyanobacteria symbioses.
Both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained as part of the research
activities. Additionally, a unique collaboration will be formed with the
ArtCenter College of Design to develop a funded studio design course aimed at
senior level art students, such a subject matter focused on symbiosis. A student
from this design course will also be selected for a DesignMatters Fellowship
onsite at the J. Craig Venter Institute. By engaging and integrating science and
design students, novel forms of education and information exchange will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In boreal forests, nitrogen-fixing
cyanobacteria form symbiotic associations with feather mosses and provide the
largest input of fixed-N into these systems. While the feather moss-
cyanobacteria association has been well-studied at the ecological level, it is
sparingly studied at the molecular level. The work provides additional
characterization of the association at three unique levels: cellular
differentiation, molecular localization, and gene to interaction relationships.
There are three main aims: Build and phenotype a collection of gene-knockout
cyanobacteria. Examine the elemental molecular exchange between moss and
cyanobacteria. Develop methods to quantitatively determine heterocyst frequency
and transcription of candidate symbiosis-related genes by different
cyanobacterial cell types during symbiosis. The synergy between these approaches
will discover new molecular interactions, establish material exchange, and
provide molecular tools for better characterization of cellular differentiation
during symbiosis. Given the widespread natural success of the cyanobacteria-
feather moss association, it will be critical to understand the molecular
exchanges taking place between the partners to model the impact of this high
latitude resource in a warming world. The research will provide a window on the
evolution of symbiosis mechanisms to determine whether they could be engineered
in a crop species. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be trained as
part of the research activities. Additionally, a unique collaboration will be
formed with the ArtCenter College of Design to develop a funded studio design
course aimed at senior level art students, such a subject matter focused on
symbiosis. A student from this design course will also be selected for a
DesignMatters Fellowship onsite at the J. Craig Venter
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.