* 1926871
* I-Corps: Virtual Clinical Trials Platform
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,05/31/2021
* Ancha Baranova, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project would be to
enable substantial improvements in clinical trial efficiency. Current industry
wide average cost to bring a novel medicine through FDA approval has now
exceeded $2.6 Billion. The average time for the same is 10 - 15 years.
Typically, industrial customer spends an average of 16,000 to 26,000 US dollars
per patient recruited into a phase I, II or III trial, with phase III
recruitment costing the highest. With this project's innovative model assisting
virtual clinical trials, the cost of recruitment alone can potentially come down
significantly as the costs associated with multiple sites setup and monitoring
would be eliminated. Each customer will also likely to see significantly reduced
dropout during the trials, thereby reducing overall cost and compressing the
schedule of the trial.

This I-Corps project develops a virtual siteless environment for clinical
trials. This environment will reduce risks, accelerate trial recruitment using
e-consent, aid in conducting multiple virtual follow-up sessions with trial
participants without requiring their travel to trial sites. It will also enable
collection of data continuously, through participants' wearable devices, web-
deployable questionnaires and surveys, home based specimen collection kits or
through home visits by a nurse or phlebotomists. This integrated environment for
virtual clinical trials will potentially integrate a patient facing application
for text, image, video and voice interactions, data hub for integration of
clinical, molecular, and digital biomarkers as well as capture of health
information.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.