* 1926689
* SBIR Phase II:  Production and formulation of a safe and natural sunscreen to replace ingredients harmful to human and environmental health
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Khaled Almabruk, Gadusol Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2023
* USD 965,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the development of a safe, effective, and
sustainably-produced natural sunscreen compound, gadusol, to replace harmful
ingredients widely used in current sunscreen products. Two to three million
cases of skin cancer are reported globally each year, including 132,000 cases of
melanoma. In 2015, the U.S. Centers of Disease Control and Prevention reported
80,442 new cases of melanomas of the skin in the U.S. The potential exists to
reverse this trend with effective, safe, aesthetically-pleasing sun protection
products that provided long-lasting full-spectrum UV protection. Sustainable
production of gadusol and the assurance of its safety and efficacy will enable
such products to be developed. With a global sunscreen product market of $16.5
billion and growing, along with the demonstrated need for natural, safer
sunscreen actives, this project is poised to have a worldwide, long-term impact
on national and global health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
will demonstrate the feasibility of sustainably producing gadusol, a natural,
marine-based compound with proven sun protection capability. Recent research has
documented that widely used sunscreen ingredients pose hazards to the
environment and possibly to human health, leading to bans on popular sunscreen
products. Mineral active compounds such as ZnO and TiO2 are safer substitutes
but pose aesthetic disadvantages, leading to products that many consumers
dislike. Gadusol has the potential to replace some of these widely-used chemical
actives as a safe, effective, and natural UVB blocker. The technical scope
proposed includes overcoming obstacles to sustainable production of gadusol
using the tools of synthetic biology, establishing gadusol's safety through
standard pre-clinical tests, and assessing its efficacy and suitability in
prototype formulations (SPF value). Successful completion of this project will
reduce the risks of adopting gadusol as a new sunscreen ingredient, enable its
commercial production, and provide essential safety data prior to initiating
clinical testing required for FDA approval.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.