* 1926420
* Collaborative Research: MRA: MACRO-Sheds: Comparative Ecosystem Biogeochemistry at Continental Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Emily Bernhardt, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 698,775.00

This research will enable anyone with internet access to compare the flow and
the chemistry of hundreds of streams throughout the United States and to explore
their watersheds. The project will combine data sets from many separate research
projects into an attractive Web site that makes the data available. This will
make it easy for scientists and students to ask questions about water quality
and river flow patterns across the continent. Researchers will use these data to
study what types of watersheds are best at retaining nutrients, are recovering
most rapidly from decades of acid rain, have the highest erosion rates, and have
flow patterns that are least sensitive to floods and droughts. The lessons we
learn from studying many watersheds and streams will contribute to more
effective management of our nation's water and forest
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of the literature of watershed ecosystem
science over the last decade has focused on gaining ever finer detail of spatial
heterogeneity within watersheds. This fine-scale focus has identified many
idiosyncrasies of individual watersheds but has not helped us develop general
theories about watershed dynamics. Most watershed ecosystem studies remain
rather parochial, involving detailed studies of individual or paired watersheds,
or surveys of a small set of attributes across multiple watersheds. Macrosystem
watershed science, or the search for general principles that describe the
functional capacity and behavior across watersheds, has been limited. A major
reason for this lack of large-scale focus is the challenge of data access and
integration across sites. Our goal in this proposal is to create a synthetic
dataset that merges all US watershed ecosystem studies into a common platform
(MacroSheds) and to enable and train a new generation of watershed ecosystem
scientists in the art and practice of macroscale watershed ecosystem
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.