* 1926004
* Theoretical Solid State Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Marvin Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Nontechnical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education towards understanding the electronic,
optical, and magnetic properties of materials and nanostructures at the
microscopic level. The fascinating properties and phenomena of condensed matter
emerge from mutual interactions of the electrons and ions that constitute the
material, many of which are central to modern technologies such as electronics,
optoelectronics, photovoltaics, and other energy conversion devices. These
properties can often be dramatically altered or new phenomena emerge from
varying the chemical composition or confining the materials to nanometer scales
along one or more dimensions. This project is centered on using quantum theory,
modeling, and simulations to explain and predict the existence and properties of
novel materials and nanostructures. New theoretical approaches and the
availability of modern high performance (massively parallel) computers allow the
team to obtain first-principles (i.e. with no empirical parameters) explanations
and predictions of the behavior of atomically thin (along one or more
dimensions) materials, nanostructures, interfacial and defect phenomena, new
superconductors, and photocatalytic materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational components are focused on training of students (graduate and
undergraduate) and postdoctoral fellows for research and development in using
materials in the current quantum technological revolution. The research findings
are published in scientific journals as well as presented on the team's website.
The computational tools developed from the project are incorporated into several
software packages, which are made freely available on the web to the research
community. Another educational activity is related to public education, which is
done through articles and interviews published in lay media and via public
lectures by the PI and co-PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education towards understanding the electronic, transport, optical,
and magnetic properties of materials and nanostructures at the microscopic level
by performing first-principles quantum calculations. Topics investigated
include: i) structural and dynamical properties of atomically thin one- and two-
dimensional systems; ii) novel optical, topological, and magnetic properties in
reduced dimensional systems and bulk materials; and iii) electron-phonon
interactions, superconductivity, and associated phenomena. The major objective
is to use many-body quantum theory and new concepts such as those from topology
to explain and predict the properties of real materials, in particular for lower
dimensional systems. Emphasis is placed on realistic models, close
collaborations with experimentalists, investigations and suggestions for
producing novel and useful materials, development of new theoretical and
computational approaches, and predictions related to structural, electronic,
magnetic, superconducting, transport and optical properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art techniques based on many-body quantum
theory are used to enable accurate first-principles calculations for real
materials. In particular, the ab initio pseudopotential method and total energy
techniques are applied within the density functional formalism (DFT) to compute
ground-state properties. Excited-state (spectroscopic) phenomena are
investigated using a first-principle self-energy approach based on the GW
approximation for quasiparticle excitations and an ab initio two-particle
Green's function method based on the Bethe-Salpeter equation for optical
excitations. Studies of magnetic behaviors and electron-phonon coupling
phenomena, going beyond the current state of the art, are carried out using the
team's newly developed renormalized spin wave method and the GW perturbation
theory method, respectively. Other studies rely on molecular dynamics or Monte
Carlo simulations, BCS theory, and extensions of standard many-body theory. The
first-principles calculations are augmented with model Hamiltonian studies when
appropriate, especially for understanding topological effects and systems with
strong electron correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational components
are focused on training of students (graduate and undergraduate) and
postdoctoral fellows for research and development in using materials in the
current quantum technological revolution. The research findings are published in
scientific journals as well as presented on the team's website. The
computational tools developed from the project are incorporated into several
software packages -Berkeley GW, PARATEC, and EPW- which are made freely
available on the web to the research community. Another educational activity is
related to public education, which is done through articles and interviews
published in lay media and via public lectures by the PI and co-
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.