* 1926800
* NCS-FO: State Representations in Multi-purpose and Multi-region Neural Network Models of Cognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Kanaka Rajan, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Our understanding of the human brain has rapidly progressed with recent
technological advances in both experimental neuroscience and artificial
intelligence. Despite this, neither approach in isolation is able to explain how
distinct cognitive functions such as learning, remembering, reasoning, and
intuition emerge from processes inside the brain. In particular, we lack an
understanding of how a relatively small and finite number of brain areas are
used to accomplish this large and varied repertoire of cognitive functions.
Bridging the fields of neuroscience and artificial intelligence, we seek to
discover how the brain tracks the cognitive function that is currently engaged
and switches between functions during ongoing behavior. We will apply new
computational models, called "multi-purpose recurrent neural networks," to
neural activity captured from the brains of different animal models to identify
common mechanisms that allow animals to track and switch among cognitive
functions. By bridging across experimental species, our findings will reveal
fundamental features of brain processing. Further, our integrated approach,
which uses a multi-disciplinary team of investigators and industry-academia
partnerships, will promote cross-fertilization of knowledge and methods between
artificial intelligence and neuroscience. We will also achieve broader societal
benefits through collaboration with a graphic artist to develop graphic novel
abstracts for widely comprehensible, visually appealing representations of the
science for publication. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A relatively small number of
neural circuits in the brain are used to accomplish a large and varied
repertoire of cognitive functions. Achieving this multi-purpose functionality
requires neural circuits to both track the engaged function(s) and switch
between them. How such tracking and switching is accomplished remains unclear.
Computational models based on neural and behavioral data offer an opportunity to
identify these key components of the brain's multipurpose functionality.
However, existing models that simulate one task at a time lack the flexibility
that underlies the brain's capacity to support many tasks. On the other hand,
models that simulate multiple cognitive functions lack biologically realistic
tracking and switching mechanisms. Here, we propose a new approach to this
problem. We will develop a new class of data-inspired multi-purpose recurrent
neural network (RNN) models that incorporate biologically plausible mechanisms
to track the task being performed and the transitions between tasks. We will
also analyze three distinct experimental datasets using machine learning to
identify principles underlying multi-purpose functionality, particularly those
that are conserved across species. Specifically, we will characterize multi-
purpose functionality at the level of dynamic states. We define dynamic states
as time-varying patterns of population activity that allow neural circuits to
perform multiple tasks, engage them sequentially, and switch between them as
task conditions or contexts change. We hypothesize that multi-purpose RNNs can
incorporate dynamic states and simulate the brain's ability to track and switch
between tasks, in a manner consistent with experimental data. First, we will
develop and characterize data-inspired multi-purpose RNNs with internal state
representations that track the engaged cognitive function/task performed.
Second, we will incorporate functional and structural modularity into RNNs and
analyze them in parallel with multi-region neural recordings. The resulting
computational framework will enable us to identify key features of state
representations and mechanisms underlying multi-purpose functionality in
experimental data. What we discover will lay the foundation for understanding
and testing core principles of how neural networks throughout the brain support
diverse cognitive functions, enabling key advances in the study of cognition.
Further, these robust, scalable multi-purpose RNN models containing internally
represented states will better leverage existing large-scale neural data and
galvanize new experiments designed to test model predictions. For instance, we
expect to identify spatio-temporal markers from ongoing neural dynamics that
predict upcoming behavioral transitions. In summary, we will build on recent
advances in computer science, specifically, deep learning and other AI/ML-based
techniques for neural networks, and bring them to bear on a key problem in
neuroscience. Our integrative strategy maximally leverages the rapid pace of
advances in computer science toward serving neuroscience and neuroengineering to
catalyze new investigations beyond the confines of a
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.