* 1926361
* Collaborative Research: Impact Resistant Equine Hoof - Structure, Properties and Bioinspired Designs
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Marc Andre Meyers, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 467,999.00

Keratin is a protein found on the outer covering of most animals, such as hair,
nails, horns, hooves, beaks, and feathers. Keratinous materials are among the
most robust biological materials, which have been optimized by nature for their
functions. For example, horse hooves are impact resistant while being
lightweight. The hooves can withstand powerful and dynamic forces, but the
fundamental reasons that give rise to this property are not known. This research
will significantly advance understanding of how hooves absorb energy and pave
the way to build new impact-resistant, bioinspired materials. Designs by
bioinspiration involve using ideas from nature and employing synthetic materials
to create new engineering composite structures. Impact resistant materials are
essential for a wide range of applications, which include body protection (body
armor vests and helmets), defense (blast resistant structures), automotive
industry (crash-resistant vehicles), aerospace (aircraft bird strikes), and
space exploration (protection against space debris). This transdisciplinary
research and educational program involving mechanical engineers, materials
scientists, and biologists, includes the experimental and computational studies
of keratin-based biological systems and designs and fabrication of new
engineering materials with a superb energy absorption performance during high-
speed impacts. The participating graduate students will be paired with
undergraduate researchers during the academic year and high school students
during the summer. Inclusion of underrepresented minority and women students is
planned. The graduate students will have the unique experience of getting
trained and using powerful instruments at national laboratories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this research project are to test the
following hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;1. The hierarchical structure of hooves assists
in energy absorption and resists high-speed impacts, &lt;br/&gt;2. Multiscale
modeling can predict the compression and impact behaviors of
hooves,&lt;br/&gt;3. Synthetic hoof-inspired materials will have outstanding
impact resistant properties.&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates concepts and
methods from diverse fields (biomechanics, materials science and engineering,
and biology). The methods and approaches include the state-of-the-art
characterization of keratin-based materials (small and wide angle X-ray
scattering, nano-and micro-computed tomography, small angle neutron scattering,
electron microscopy, nano- to macroscale mechanical testing), development of new
constitutive models, and designing, building and testing of impact resistant
bioinspired materials based on the exceptional properties of hooves. This
project's approach is transformative as it incorporates ideas from nature
(accelerates discovery), utilizes a computational materials science approach
(generates data) to screen parameter space and create a catalog of structure-
property relations, and employs neural network approach to find optimal
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.