* 1926402
* RIDIR Collaborative Research: Building a Database to Determine Environmental and Familial Effects on Social and Biological Factors
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Qiang Zhao, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* May Yuan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 101,403.00

Drs. Qian Wang, from Texas A&amp;M University, and an interdisciplinary team of
colleagues are developing a database that integrates genetic, environmental and
age-related information to study their effects on health conditions of the
rhesus monkey colony at Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico. The team brings together
expertise in anthropology, biology, biomedical sciences and computer sciences.
Founded in 1938, this colony is the source of a rare skeletal collection with
associated details about each individual's sex, age, and pedigree (up to eight
generations). Once the integrated database is available to researchers and the
public, information from the Cayo Santiago rhesus colony and the derived
skeletal collection will provide a powerful non-human model for studying human
disease, family history, development, individual experiences, and aging.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Wang and his colleagues will establish a database of
Cayo Santiago monkey health for studies of the effects of environment and
genetics on bone development, aging, and pathologies. The studies are based on
the Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico derived skeletal collection housed at the
Caribbean Primate Research Center and New York University. Bone dimensions, bone
density, body mass, tooth eruption, and observable disease conditions of the
rhesus monkey will be incorporated into the database with details on each
individual's sex, birth and death dates, parentage information, and social rank.
Differences in skeletal characteristics over time will be assessed, as well as
familial differences in health, longevity, and age-related conditions. The
effects of major hurricanes on rhesus monkey development will be assessed.
Database development incorporates undergraduate and dental students from diverse
communities, providing unique learning opportunities. These data will establish
a useful, searchable model that will be available to researchers interested in
further analyses of genetic and environmental factors influencing multiple
factors including health and disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.