* 1926789
* NCS-FO: Developing dyadic fMRI methodology to quantify and model human brain-to-brain interactions
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Paul Sajda, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,834.00

The neural mechanisms that underlie and promote social interaction and
communication remain elusive, despite a large number of evidence-based studies
in psychology and psychiatry. This is partially due to the lack of instruments
and technology that can directly measure natural human interactions. The
proposed project intends to develop a dyadic functional magnetic resonance
imaging (dfMRI) system to directly observe the brains of pairs of individuals
while they are interacting with each other visually and by touch. The project
also hopes to develop a computer model to quantify these interactions.
Developing this technology will improve the level of knowledge about how brains
work in complex environments. Findings from this project will serve the national
interest by assisting in the design of social robots, which will interact more
naturally with humans. Project findings may also help in identifying the neural
underpinnings of mental disorders, particularly those that affect
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage a pioneering
dfMRI technology and methodology that can simultaneously scan two people in one
commercial MRI scanner, and has generated successful feasibility tests in
observing and analyzing brain-to-brain coupling in live face-to-face
communication. The first aim will be to develop a state-of-the-art dfMRI
technology that will significantly improve temporal resolution and imaging
quality by implementing local static magnetic field shimming and parallel
imaging. The second aim will be to use the new system to address two fundamental
hypotheses in brain-to-brain interactions: (1) Face-to-face communication
(measured by dfMRI) recruits more brain faculty that the Internet-based
communications (measured by MR hyperscanning); therefore, it conveys more social
and affective information. (2) A multi-channel cerebral network model - derived
from dfMRI data - may be trained to deduce some basic social attribution
processes in dyadic interaction; thus, a causal relationship between social
behaviors and brain network can be identified. Overall, this is a
transformative, high-risk, high-payoff interdisciplinary proposal integrating
engineering and social and behavioral science to enable new technology and
methods to study human social interaction, mental disorders, and social
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.