* 1926845
* SBIR Phase II:  A Blood-Based Test to Identify Patients with Intracranial Aneurysm
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Vincent Tutino, Neurovascular Diagnostics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 815,820.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR Phase II project aims to validate and
test a novel blood-based diagnostic to detect unruptured brain aneurysms in
asymptomatic patients. In the U.S., approximately 2-5% of the population (about
6-17 million Americans) harbors an unruptured brain aneurysm. Since aneurysms
are largely asymptomatic, these individuals are unaware of the potential danger
they are in. Currently, there are no adequate screening tools to identify an
unruptured intracranial aneurysm (IA). As a result, ~30,000 Americans suffer
aneurysm rupture each year without warning, 10-15% of whom die on the way to the
hospital and another 30-40% of whom die within a month. The novel diagnostic
screening test to be validated in this project will provide a means to identify
people who have unruptured aneurysms, enabling patients to be monitored and
receive life-saving preventative treatments. In addition to the health benefits
of this non-invasive test, it will also result in massive savings for the
healthcare system. The estimated lifetime healthcare costs for annual cases of
patients with ruptured IA is about $3 billion, and more than $885 million for
patients with unruptured IAs. Plus, the annual lost wages of surviving ruptured
IA patients and their caretakers combined is an estimated $138
million.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to validate a molecular
diagnostic to detect biomarkers of unruptured aneurysms consisting of genes
expressed in circulating whole blood. Our Phase I and Post-Phase I study results
have shown that a panel of approximately 50 circulating RNAs isolated from blood
samples can be used to predict the presence of unruptured brain aneurysms with
over 90% accuracy. Since Phase I, analysis of these RNA biomarkers has been
transferred and verified on a clinical diagnostic platform that uses patented
chemical ligation-dependent probe amplification technology, standard qPCR
amplification, and capillary electrophoresis for readout. This Phase II project
will be the first large-scale validation of this test, utilizing blood samples
from 400 patients with and without aneurysms across 3 clinical centers to
reliably assess the diagnostic's accuracy. Next-generation sequencing on the
first half of patients will be used as a second verification of the platform and
to select new emergent biomarkers if needed. Predictive accuracy of 90% with an
AUC greater than 0.80 will be used to measure success. Furthermore, the last
half of the samples will be tested in a CLIA-certified lab in order to prepare
the test for launch as a Lab Developed Test following Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.