* 1926591
* Collaborative Proposal:  MSA:  Controls on coupled nitrogen and carbon cycles of watersheds across eco-regions
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Scott Ollinger, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2023
* USD 219,588.00

Title: Collaborative Proposal: MSA: Controls on coupled nitrogen and carbon
cycles of watersheds across eco-regions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen is a
critical nutrient that supports life. Too much can cause problems such as
unsightly algal blooms or coastal dead zones where fish cannot live. The fate of
nitrogen is closely tied to the fate of carbon in plants and soil. However, the
connection between nitrogen and carbon remains poorly understood. In particular,
little is known about carbon and nitrogen interactions across different
landscapes, from the tropics to the arctic. This project will help better
understand what controls nitrogen leaving watersheds through streams. It will
take advantage of data collected by the National Ecological Observatory Network
across the nation's diverse environments. This research is important as people
add more nitrogen to the land through air pollution, fertilizers, and septic
systems. It will also help understand how much carbon the environment can absorb
as carbon dioxide increases in the atmosphere. The project will result in new
data sets that will be shared with other researchers. The project team will work
with schools and local communities to explain how what happens on land affects
water quality. Findings will be translated to be useful for policy makers. A
diverse group of students will learn how to use environmental sensor technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent input and output measurements for terrestrial
and aquatic ecosystems collected by NEON will be used to address the overarching
question: "How tightly are watershed carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) cycles coupled
across biomes and how is this coupling influenced by physical environmental
conditions (climate and hydrology), vegetation characteristics, and legacies
from past disturbance?" Hypotheses will be tested related to the role of
watershed carbon to nitrogen ratios, precipitation, storminess, temperature, and
disturbance using 1) ongoing NEON sensor, manually-collected, and remote sensing
measurements to estimate watershed N inputs, N outputs and net ecosystem C
exchange (NEE), 2) a terrestrial ecosystem model (PnET) to scale NEE to the
entire watershed draining to streams, and 3) analysis of watershed net N and C
fluxes against potential explanatory data for each domain. Twenty-two NEON
watersheds defined by wadeable streams and proximity of NEE measurements will be
used, incorporating a wide range of watershed characteristics. Watershed budget
estimates will include estimates of uncertainty in both C and N fluxes and
sinks. Scientific findings will be translated into education and policy relevant
information with groups such as LTER Schoolyard program and the Science Policy
Exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.