* 1926957
* Research Initiation: Faculty, Student, and Employer Understanding of Holistic Engineers in the Energy Sector
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jason Zara, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,410.00

Engineering students receive much of their education and training from
engineering professors, peers, internship (or similar) experiences, student
organizations, and the structure of the curricula in their departments. However,
it is not clear how well-aligned students? education and training are with what
they will be expected to do in the workplace after they graduate. While there
have been investigations into what skills and knowledge are valued in the
workplace, there has been minimal investigation into what engineering professors
and students think these skills and knowledge are. For example, many engineering
professors have not worked in the types of workplaces where most engineering
graduates begin their careers, and this difference in training and experience
between academics and industry professionals may influence how and what
professors teach. Students who have never worked in engineering jobs may have
incomplete or incorrect knowledge about what will be required of them or useful
in the workplace. To help better connect engineering teaching to outcomes
(useful skills and knowledge for engineering graduates), this project aims to
gather the experiences, perceptions, and values of faculty, students, and
working professionals. The project will focus specifically on the energy sector
because this sector is a critical component of the nation's economy, and there
is growing demand for STEM professionals in the energy
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to deepen research on
the professional formation of engineers and expand the community of researchers
in this field. While there has been extensive research on the knowledge, skills,
and attitudes required of engineers in the workplace, there is limited awareness
about engineering professors' and students' perspectives and their perceptions
of workplace competencies. This project aims to close that knowledge gap by
connecting workplace competencies, as perceived by energy engineering
professionals in the workplace, to the perceptions of professional competencies
of engineering students who will enter the workplace, as well as the faculty who
prepare those students. The objectives of the project are to: (1) provide a
holistic model of competencies required for engineers entering the workforce,
(2) compare this model to the competencies guiding academic engineering programs
and practitioners, (3) train engineering professors in engineering education and
social science research methods, and (4) provide a foundation for future
research in the formation of engineers. The study will focus on the energy
sector by investigating energy engineering programs and partnering with an
industry collaborator. The methods involve two rounds of interviews of
professors, students, and industry professionals. The proposed project will
provide knowledge about the skills and competencies required in engineering
careers as well as discrepancies or concurrences between engineering educators'
and students' perceptions about the relevant skills and competencies. Its
comprehensive approach to simultaneously studying industry professionals,
faculty, and students is unique, and the knowledge created will enable the
comparison of competency models reflecting a more holistic view of how engineers
are formed within the energy field and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.