* 1926494
* The Immediacy, Inclusion and Productivity of NSF Grants Under the Broader Impact Criterion
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Thomas Woodson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 07/31/2023
* USD 274,813.00

For the two decades, the National Science Foundation (NSF) has required
scientists to discuss broader impacts (BIs) to show that their research extends
beyond the laboratory. The BI criterion requires scientists to include BI
activities, such as K-12 outreach and training graduate students, in their grant
proposals. However, there are no standard frameworks for assessing BI
activities. This project proposes a new framework for holistically assesses BIs,
accounting for three factors: the immediacy of the BI activities, the
inclusiveness of the BI activities, and the impact the BI activities have on
scientific productivity. Immediacy refers to the active integration of broader
impacts into the research design. Inclusiveness considers the impacts of the
research on marginalized communities. Research productivity relates to the
output of the research project. Reframing the evaluation of the BI criterion to
highly immediacy, inclusiveness, and productivity will provide an opportunity to
encourage inclusive research and support marginalized communities. This analysis
is essential for ensuring that granting agencies meet their mission to support
science that advances the whole nation's health, prosperity, and welfare.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To analyze BIs, this project develops a new framework,
called the Immediacy-Inclusion Criterion (IIC). The two dimensions of the IIC,
immediacy and inclusion, form a 3X3 grid. There are three types of immediacy
(intrinsic, direct, and extrinsic) and three types of inclusion (universal,
advantaged, and inclusive) that characterize broader impact. This project has
two central hypotheses: 1) the NSF funds more projects that helps advantaged
groups compared to marginalized groups; and 2) funded projects with intrinsic
immediacy are more productive than projects with extrinsic immediacy. The
project tests these hypotheses by coding and analyzing NSF Project Report
Outcomes, using the framework. This will provide insights on the most frequent
Bis among NSF grants and how these vary by directorate, field, and type of
institution. The work will also analyze the relationship between IIC and
research outcomes, such as publication rates. This will provide insight on the
relationship between the scientific output and broader impact. This work will
inform not only the administration of NSF grants, but will provide wider insight
on the relationship between scientific outputs and benefits to the wider
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.