* 1926612
* A Next-Generation Sensing Platform for Bacterial Metabolomics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Regina Ragan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 415,000.00

Cell metabolites are small molecules used or produced by cells and are direct
indicators of the cellular state, function, and health. Metabolomic analyses is
the characterization of cellular metabolites, and it is key to our understanding
of cell function. Current metabolomic methods include mass spectrometry and
nuclear magnetic resonance, techniques which require large, expensive
instruments and long times for analysis. Here, an alternative approach is to use
integrated optical sensing devices to detect the chemical fingerprints of
metabolic changes within cells on the time scale of minutes. These devices will
fingerprint bacterial metabolites involved in stress responses-a basic component
of bacterial survival in dynamic conditions. As part of this work, scientific
questions about the relationship between the molecular scale architecture of
optical sensors and the ability to differentiate metabolite response in the
resulting data will be answered. The demonstration and characterization of this
sensing platform will also involve the rapid collection of large data sets and
the application of automated big data analysis software to interpret complex
sensor signals. Results from these studies will inform understanding of
bacterial behavior in diverse habitats ranging from medical infections and
industrial contamination to probiotics in human health and agriculture, and
microbial interactions influencing nutrient cycling in the environment. The
principal investigators and students will engage in an annual two-week summer
outreach program for a diverse group of high school students - ASPIRE: Access
Student Program to Inspire, Recruit, and Enrich. Graduate, undergraduate and
high school students will learn how to define, analyze and solve research
problems and communicate results that focus on the importance of metabolomics in
health and the environment and the importance of technology innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Practical nanophotonic sensing platforms will provide a
new lens for examining dynamic biological function. Control of surface-enhanced
Raman scattering sensor architectures and surface chemistry will be investigated
to design sensitive receptors that both enable the rapid collection of large
data sets and differentiation of metabolite fingerprints in complex biological
media. Measurements of phonon-plasmon coupling will inform of chemical
interactions between functionalized sensor surfaces and metabolites of interest.
Machine learning algorithms will be further developed that are best suited to
accurately analyze the large volume of vibrational spectra generated as part of
these studies. Libraries of microbial metabolic fingerprints and methods for
analysis of spectral information will be disseminated. The fundamental studies
of nanophotonic device architecture, nanoparticle surface chemistry, and machine
learning analysis of complex Raman spectra will then be utilized for the
detection of metabolic fingerprints associated with stress response in
polymicrobial bacterial communities. Metabolic changes associated with bacterial
stress responses to antimicrobials and inter-species interactions will be
measured to develop new methods to understand how to control, nurture, and
mitigate various microbe-host interactions-a key application area of the
investigated sensing technologies. High throughput detection of the bacterial
stress response is important for screening antimicrobial treatments for
bacterial contamination in medical and industrial settings. Similarly, metabolic
markers of bacterial stress can be used as indicators of the presence of
chemicals of interest in the environment, such as heavy metals or toxic organic
compounds. In both cases, the ability to quickly and accurately detect stress-
induced metabolic changes in bacteria is a critical technological challenge
uniquely addressed by this nanophotonic sensing
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.