* 1926387
* ISS: Engineering Stem Cell-Derived Cardiac Microtissues with Metabolic Regulators in Space to Promote Cardiomyocyte Maturation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Chunhui Xu, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,999.00

Cardiac muscle cells generated from stem cells could be used to replace damaged
cells in patients with heart disease, which is the leading cause of death in the
United States. Scientists have also used these cells to study heart disease and
drug responses. Currently, when scientists grow cardiac muscle cells in a dish,
the characteristics of these cells look like the heart cells at the early
developmental stage; their shape, size, and function resemble immature heart
cells. Ideally, more mature cardiac muscle cells are needed in cardiac cell
replacement therapy and the study of heart disease. Therefore, developing
methods to accelerate the maturation of cardiac muscle cells is highly
significant. The unique environment of the International Space Station (ISS) is
known to provide beneficial effects on human cardiac precursors to help their
growth and differentiation. In this project, the research team will investigate
the maturation of stem cell-derived cardiac muscle cells by growing these cells
in tissue-like structures in the ISS. The investigators also plan to develop a
technology to promote cardiac muscle cell maturation in microtissues that are
suitable for large-scale production, a requirement essential for translational
research. This project also incorporates the training of young scientists and
students and provides science-learning opportunities for kids in a local
hospital in the Children's Healthcare of Atlanta system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish a multipronged
approach combining microgravity, tissue engineering and metabolic regulation to
promote the maturation of cardiomyocytes derived from human induced pluripotent
stem cells (hiPSC-CMs). First, the investigators will optimize the design of
tissue engineering and cell culture conditions in ground-based experiments by
examining the effect of simulated microgravity, cell composition and metabolic
regulation. Second, the hiPSC-CM microtissues will be cultured in the ISS. The
experiments will be performed within a perfusion system that is suitable for
suspension cell culture and has gas permeable membranes that allow sufficient
gas exchange for cell growth. The cells will remain in the same culture units
throughout the experiment and cell morphology will be monitored once a week
utilizing an inverted phasecontrast microscope currently available at the ISS,
and the imaging data will be transmitted for ground-based control and data
retrieval. Following spaceflight, the researchers will investigate molecular and
functional characteristics of the hiPSC-CMs. Exposure of hiPSC-CM microtissues
to microgravity in space is expected to eliminate shear stress and consequently
enhance cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions within multicellular
architectures. Findings from this project will provide insights into the
molecular regulation of accelerated hiPSC-CM maturation. Applying these insights
to the research on earth could assist in the production of more mature hiPSC-CMs
to enhance their potential application in regenerative medicine, the study of
heart disease and drug development. (Project integration and operation on the
ISS will be provided by the Center for the Advancement of Science in Space
(CASIS) implementation partner, BioServe.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.