* 1926011
* Collaborative Research: The Mechanics of Intermediate Depth Earthquakes: a Multiscale Investigation Combining Seismological Analyses, Laboratory Experiments, and Numerical Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Sheng-Wei Chi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 11/30/2023
* USD 542,348.00

It has been nearly a century since deep earthquakes, below about 50 kilometers,
were definitively detected. Due to the difficulty observing such events,
however, the mechanisms that control deep earthquakes are still poorly
understood compared to shallower events. The pressures at depths greater than
roughly 50 kilometers prohibit the frictional sliding and weakening mechanism
that is essential to shallow events. This project focuses on the study of
intermediate-depth earthquakes, those between approximately 50 and 300 km depth.
The collaborative research combines small-scale scale laboratory experiments
conducted at high pressure and temperature, seismological analysis of
intermediate-depth earthquakes in well instrumented areas, and physics-based
computer simulations to bridge the scales between the laboratory experiments and
field observations. The hypothesis, generated from preliminary laboratory data,
is that the minerals typical in subducting plates that produce deep earthquakes
undergo one or more transformations that lead to mechanical instability as
pressure and temperature increase. Minerals can densify when changing phase,
reducing pressure locally and allowing for fracture propagation. Other reactions
may create weak surfaces between or within grains. Under the right conditions,
these instabilities can slip, generating heat and causing a runaway reaction
leading to an earthquake. Laboratory data can reproduce these reactions at the
small scale. Computer models will be created using the laboratory data to
reproduce these experiments and determine parameters for the models. The results
will then be systematically scaled up to simulate intermediate depth earthquakes
in actual subduction zones. These large-scale simulations will be compared to
the characteristics of observed earthquakes, with improved sensitivity to detect
micro-earthquakes based on novel template matching and machine learning
techniques. The combined research will help to demonstrate, for the first time,
whether the same processes observed in small-scale laboratory specimens can
account for large intermediate-depth earthquakes in subduction zones.
Intermediate-depth earthquakes, while less common than shallow earthquakes, do
result in casualties and significant damage. Understanding the mechanisms that
cause such events will help to better characterize the potential hazard and
risks to seismically active areas. The interdisciplinary experimental,
numerical, and seismological work has the potential to transform our
understanding of deep seismic events and deep Earth interior that are difficult
to observe directly. The project will support postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students, and undergraduate students further their education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been nearly a century since deep earthquakes,
defined as below about 50 km depths, were first unequivocally discovered. The
pressures at these depths preclude the frictional sliding that dominates shallow
earthquakes and mechanisms of deep earthquakes remain poorly understood. Many
challenges surround the study of deep earthquakes, including the inability to
physically examine the fault structure and directly observe earthquake slip in
the deep Earth interior. Here, this project investigate the mechanisms behind
intermediate-depth earthquakes, defined as those between about 50 and 300 km
depths, by integrating three key approaches: (1) detailed seismological
investigation over a few well-studied tectonic settings, (2) controlled
laboratory experiments on candidate mineral/rock groups with potential
mechanical instabilities triggered by high-pressure, high-temperature reactions
with acoustic emission monitoring and quantitative waveform analyses, and (3)
micromechanics-based mathematical and physical models with a multiple scaling
scheme to cover rupture processes from mm to km scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging new seismological tools such as template matching
and machine learning allow detection of microevents in subduction zones with
unprecedented spatial and amplitude resolution. The more than 10-fold increase
in event detection provides much more illumination of fault areas than
previously available. With such advances, this study will focus on the
subduction zones in Central and Northern Japan, to examine event distribution,
frequency magnitude statistics, aftershock productivities, source properties,
fault orientation and stress drops. Experimentally, a number of major
constituents of subducting slabs such as partially serpentinized olivine,
eclogitization of lawsonite blueschist facies rocks, and even harzburgite, are
now known to produce mechanical instability. Several physical mechanisms have
been proposed for intermediate-depth earthquakes based on these observations.
Development of experimental devices have increased sample linear dimensions by a
factor of about 10. New developments in broadband acoustic emission technology
have permitted quantitative analyses of acoustic emission events ("labquakes")
using state-of-the-art seismological tools. Therefore, earthquakes and labquakes
can be treated in a unified fashion in seismological analyses, allowing direct
and better comparison with observations at very different scales. Thermo-poro-
mechanical models will account for phase transformations, and formation of nano-
shear or reaction bands as observed in the experiments. Simulations will be
conducted in three stages: (1) Simulate the small-scale experiments. Detailed
scans of experiments will allow us to mimic the perturbation in material that
will initiate the transformation. The experiments at this stage will be used to
validate and improve the model, as well as fit model parameters. (2)
Mathematically upscale the model, homogenizing the small-scale behavior, so that
the model can be used to simulate earthquakes in plates. (3) Simulate the Japan
subduction zone. The models will then be compared with seismological
observations to valid the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will complete
one of the last pieces in the puzzle of intermediate-depth earthquakes:
verifying whether observed phenomena in small-scale experiments can
quantitatively be the principal mechanism for regular intermediate-depth
earthquakes observed at large depths. The combined seismological, experimental,
and multiscale numerical work has the potential to truly transform the approach
to the study of intermediate-depth earthquakes. The research will also lead to
the development of new numerical methods and their application to geophysical
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of intermediate-depth earthquakes
bears enormous societal impact with great scientific significance to the Earth
and planetary science community. Large intermediate-depth earthquakes are
capable of producing significant damage and casualties. Hence, an improved
understanding of their mechanisms helps mitigate seismic hazard from these
events. The mechanics of solids under high pressures is also of interest to
physicists and material scientists. The interdisciplinary nature of the work has
diverse applications throughout science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.