* 1926604
* EAGER: Quantum Random Walks in the Bose Hubbard Circuit
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* David Schuster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 06/30/2021
* USD 207,223.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Random walks of particles serve as a model for
many different phenomena. These include noise, tunneling, topological
protection, and the onset of strong correlations. Their applications include
precision tests of short-range gravity, and precise measurements of fundamental
constants. This work will study quantum coherent random walks of microwave
photons using a quantum lattice circuit. It will extend the capabilities of the
circuit quantum electrodynamics platform into the regime of quantum many body
physics, through the development of correlated state-preparation and measurement
tools. By exploring the interplay of tunneling, topology, and interactions in a
setting with sufficient coherence to permit the emergence of substantial
entanglement, we will have the opportunity to develop intuition and quantitative
coarse-grained models of correlated electronic transport in materials. These
studies will train students in the intellectual and experimental tools of
quantum science and quantum information that will play an increasingly central
role in the US and worldwide economies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Initial work will explore quantum-coherent random walks of
individual photons in a 1D Bose-Hubbard quantum circuit lattice developed by the
principal investigators, and then extend this technique to entangled walks of
multiple photons in higher dimensions. This work will not only advance the
state-of-the-art for manipulation, control, and readout of large circuit QED
platforms, but will provide essential insights into the role of quantum
correlations in the dynamics of interacting particles, with direct implications
for electrons in high mobility 2DEGs and correlated electron materials in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.