* 1926187
* All-Semiconductor Enhanced Efficiency Plasmonic Mid-IR Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Daniel Wasserman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 521,423.00

Semiconductor light emitters, particularly lasers and light emitting diodes
(LEDs), have served as the driving force for many of the most significant
advances in technology over the past five decades. From the telecom lasers used
in our communications networks, to the LEDs reducing energy consumption in solid
state lighting applications, semiconductors offer compact, low cost, and
efficient light sources for a broad range of technological advances. However,
the majority of the aforementioned sources and applications lie in the visible
and near-infrared portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. With a few
exceptions, the longer wavelength mid-infrared (mid-IR) lacks semiconductor-
based light sources of equivalent utility and efficiency, despite being a
wavelength range of significant technological importance for a range of
biomedical, environmental, industrial, as well as security and defense,
applications. The lack of semiconductor sources in this wavelength range can
largely be attributed to the intrinsic inefficiency of mid-IR optoelectronic
materials, which dissipate energy more efficiently as heat than as light. The
inherent inefficiency of mid-IR emitters, however, offers very real
opportunities for implementing new approaches for efficiency enhancement unique
to these long wavelengths. This project seeks to transform the field of mid-IR
semiconductor light emitters by marrying recent advances in epitaxial materials
growth, light-matter interactions, and semiconductor device architectures to
develop a class of efficient semiconductor mid-IR light sources, with potential
applications in infrared quantum communications, infrared sensing, thermal
signaling, and biomedical imaging. Our technical efforts will be augmented by a
robust K-12 outreach program, as well as sustained REU and RET
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;Technical: &lt;br/&gt;The field of plasmonics has promised
a broad range of transformational advances in optics and optoelectronics,
including but not limited to, on-chip sub-diffraction limited waveguiding,
higher efficiency photovoltaics, sub-diffraction limit and ultra-efficient
emitters, and enhanced sensitivity sensor systems. Research efforts on the above
have largely focused on the near-infrared and visible wavelengths of the
electromagnetic spectrum (400 nm - 3um), where efficient emitters abound, and
the introduction of plasmonic materials generally results in decreased emission
efficiency (even if other benefits, such as sub-wavelength confinement, are
demonstrated). The mid-IR (3 - 30 um), on the other hand, is a wavelength range
largely devoid of efficient emitters, where plasmonics can be leveraged to
improve, not degrade, emitter efficiency. The mid-IR is also a wavelength range
where high quality plasmonic materials and quantum engineered and nanostructured
emitters can be grown epitaxially in the same material system. This project will
utilize the highly-doped semiconductor 'metals' platform, combined with quantum
engineered active regions and patterned epitaxial growth, to develop new,
increased efficiency, mid-IR sources in a monolithic semiconductor platform. The
project will offer transformational opportunities for fundamental investigation
of light-matter interactions between quantum engineered emitters and designer
plasmonic structures. At the same time, the project will look to demonstrate
that plasmonics can be leveraged to realize significant improvements in mid-IR
source efficiency. The ultimate goal of the project is the demonstration of the
first electrically-driven all-semiconductor plasmonic/quantum-emitter sources
for efficient mid-IR light emitting devices and their subsequent integration
into mid-IR optical systems.&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have strong track records of
outreach to the larger Austin community, and as part of the proposed effort will
strengthen these ties with regular outreach and modular activities in K-12
classrooms. The PIs have a commitment to diversity in their research groups, and
will build off of this diversity and look to recruit a talented and diverse
group of students to the project, which will expose participating students to
cutting edge research in crystal growth, optics, device design and materials and
device characterization. The PIs will advise undergraduate students and local
K12 teachers through existing summer REU and RET programs at
UT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.