* 1926780
* NCS-FO: Understanding How Prior Knowledge Shapes Visual Perception in the Individual Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Biyu He, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,027,367.00

Past experiences powerfully shape our daily perception, so our perception of the
world around us not only reflects the stimuli input impinging on our senses but
is also strongly shaped by what we already know. Sensory input in the real world
is often ambiguous, thus incorporating prior knowledge from past experiences is
particularly important for perceptual processing in realistic, complex
environments. When this process goes awry, past experiences may overwhelm
sensory input and cause hallucinations. Through this project, an
interdisciplinary research team with expertise in cognitive neuroscience,
clinical neurology, and multi-modal human brain imaging will tackle the question
of how prior knowledge from past experiences guides perceptual visual processing
in the human brain. The research team will further investigate individual
variability in these mechanisms and test whether they have predictive power for
personality traits that lie on a continuum with mental illnesses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project employs a robust, dramatic perceptual
paradigm to shed light on how past experiences shape current perceptual
processing. Combining psychophysics with cutting-edge human brain imaging
technologies, this project will dissect the neural mechanisms underlying the
influence of prior experience on human visual perception at the levels of local
processing within a brain region, inter-areal information transmission, and
large-scale brain dynamics. Further, the extent to which perception relies on
prior knowledge varies across healthy individuals and psychiatric patients. This
project will capitalize on variations in the general population to determine
which neural mechanisms drive individual variability in the reliance of
perception on prior knowledge, and further test whether such neural mechanisms
can predict an individual?s propensity to psychosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.