* 1926998
* Integrating Human Wearers' Perception and Cognition into Prosthesis Control Policy
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* He Huang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2023
* USD 787,711.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
human-prosthesis interactions and the personalization of robotic prosthesis
control. Current powered lower limb (LL) robotic prostheses use intrinsic
feedback of joint motion and forces to adjust joint impedance as a function of
the current phase of gait. Personalization of the control parameters (controller
tuning) is typically performed manually and heuristically by a clinician who
modifies one parameter at a time until the amputee's gait "looks good" and the
amputee self-reports satisfaction with the control. The research objective of
this project is to develop a novel "wearer-led" auto-tuning procedure for LL
robotic prostheses that considers and enhances cognitive aspects of the human-
machine interaction during gait, such as the user's goals, required attention,
cognitive workload, trust and comfort. This project will promote the progress of
science and advance the national health by developing intelligent prosthesis
controllers that can tune themselves to the personal preferences and perceptions
of their users, thereby augmenting the physical performance of individuals with
lower limb amputations and maximize their acceptance of the robotic limbs as a
functional part of the body. Broader impacts of the project include K-12
outreach and educational efforts at the undergraduate and graduate levels
intended to attract and retain women and underrepresented minorities into STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three sets of research
activities aimed at developing a user-adaptive auto-tuning procedure for lower
limb robotic prostheses. The first develops a novel "wearer-led" tuning
procedure wherein able-bodied subjects and individuals with unilateral trans-
femoral amputation will walk with the robotic prosthesis and tune its control
parameters using a "think aloud" process. The research team will perform human
subject experiments to study the wearers' thought and decision processes as they
walk with a robotic limb and adjust its control parameters to optimize its
performance and comfort. The second set compares physical gait performance and
selected aspects of cognitive functioning while walking with a prosthesis that
is tuned either by an existing machine learning algorithm, by a trained
prosthetist, or using the novel wearer-led tuning procedure. Biomechanical
performance and measures of perception, cognitive workload, attentional
allocation, and other cognitive factors will be compared across the three tuning
approaches. The results will fill the knowledge gap in wearer-robot interactions
at the cognitive and physical levels. The third set of activities will
incorporate the novel wearer-led tuning procedure into a new, intelligent,
automated, lower limb prosthesis tuning system that directly incorporates the
wearer's preference, perception, and cognition into the procedure for prostheses
personalization, thereby promoting seamless wearer-prosthesis integration and
embodiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.