* 1926668
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FR: Shedding light on brain circuits mediating navigation of the odor plume in a natural environment
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Victor Bright, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,093,512.00

Animals have a keen ability to find odor sources such as food, partners, pups
and predators through the sense of smell in a manner that cannot be replicated
by machines. How brains mediate navigation of the environment (the odor plume)
through smell is an important unsolved problem. Indeed there are many instances
where using machines to navigate an odor landscape is an unmet need to society.
For example, even though their training requires lengthy one on one interaction
with a trainer, dogs are still used to find explosives in airports and in the
battlefield. Our multidisciplinary Odor Plume Neurophotonics (OPeN) team will
tackle understanding the brain circuits mediating odor plume navigation. This is
a daunting task because it involves characterizing how odors diffuse in the air
(environmental engineering), developing advanced miniature microscopes to record
from the brain of freely moving animals (electrical and mechanical engineering),
recording from brain regions processing odor plume information in real time
(systems neuroscience and integrative neurophotonics), and developing
mathematical procedures to quantify how the information necessary for successful
odor plume navigation is represented in the brain (applied mathematics). Our
team will engineer a novel miniature microscope to record activity as mice
navigate the odor plume and will assess how the activity of these neurons result
in successful odor plume navigation. Furthermore, the team members of OPeN are
thoroughly committed to foster advancement of women, underrepresented
minorities, veterans and disabled individuals in science and participate in
various programs to promote science diversity. Additionally, the team members
have a track record of disseminating their work and have an established
partnership with a local small business, Intelligent Imaging Innovation, Inc.
with world headquarters located in Denver. We will continue our commercial
dissemination efforts of the technology developed in this project. Finally, we
will endeavor to communicate science to the broader audience through venues such
as Scientific American, Public Broadcasting Service and outreach through the
Denver Museum of Nature and Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of our OPeN
interdisciplinary team developed a novel two photon fiber-coupled microscope for
3D imaging of brain activity in the freely moving mouse and generated and
quantified realistic odor environments in the laboratory to explore algorithms
used for odor-guided navigation. In this project we leverage the extensive
expertise and achievements of the team to crack the circuit basis for odor plume
navigation. We will develop a low-weight, miniature 3-photon fiber coupled
microscope (3P-FCM) to record neuronal activity simultaneously in one brain area
in two planes of view. In addition, OPeN will develop a portable photoionization
(PID) sensor to detect the odorant concentration at the nostril as the animal
navigates the odor plume. Members of the OPeN team will record neural activity
in the hippocampus and cerebellum of animals navigating the odor plume and will
develop a Bayesian analysis method to decode odor plume navigation from neural
activity. This multidisciplinary approach will result in understanding of the
brain mechanisms of odor plume navigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.