* 1926524
* NSF QCIS-FF:  Columbia University Computer Science Department Proposal
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2024
* Rocco Servedio, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 04/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

All of us are aware that the computing revolution has changed our world in
profound ways over the past several decades, but many desired applications of
computing -- of great potential importance and utility -- are simply beyond the
capabilities of today's computer systems. This is because for many central
problems in computer science, the fastest known computer programs that can solve
these problems have running time or storage requirements that scale too quickly
with increasing input sizes (exponentially as opposed to linearly or
polynomially); even worse, it is widely believed that faster programs for
today's conventional computer systems simply cannot exist. Quantum computing
offers the possibility of a new and dramatically different approach. The key
premise is that by harnessing quantum mechanical properties, in certain settings
it is possible for a quantum computer to simultaneously process an exponentially
large number of superimposed states, and thus (in some sense) to perform
parallel operations over an enormous search space in a way that is simply
impossible for classical computers. Motivated by this exciting possibility, the
School of Engineering and Applied Sciences at Columbia University (SEAS) has
launched the "Columbia Quantum Initiative," an ambitious multi-year plan to
develop a center of excellence at Columbia University spanning multiple aspects
of quantum science and technology, leveraging the long-standing world-class
research and educational programs at Columbia University on closely related
topics. A central goal of the Quantum Initiative is to recruit a half dozen or
more tenured/tenure-track faculty over the next few years whose primary research
interests are in the areas of quantum computing, communication, sensing,
materials, devices and technologies, and a near-term goal of the Quantum
Initiative is to hire two tenured/tenure-track faculty members in the area of
quantum computing. As part of the Quantum Initiative, this award will enable the
creation of a tenured/tenure-track position for a faculty member with research
specialization in quantum computing, either in the Computer Science Department
or as an interdisciplinary joint hire between Computer Science and a second
department such as Applied Physics/Applied Mathematics, Electrical Engineering,
or Industrial Engineering and Operations Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core
Computer Science hire is necessary to provide a solid base of expertise in key
computational aspects of quantum technology such as quantum algorithms, quantum
programming methodologies, and quantum computer architectures, while an
interdisciplinary hire will play a key bridging role in ensuring that the entire
team of electrical engineers, applied physicists, researchers from other
domains, and quantum computing researchers comprising the Quantum Initiative can
work together effectively. The addition of quantum computing faculty to the
intellectual ecosystem at Columbia SEAS will greatly expand educational
offerings to train students at Columbia University in a range of subjects
relevant to the development of quantum technologies. Such technologies have the
potential to have broad, as-yet unforeseen impacts on many aspects of science
and society. With its large population of outstanding students in Computer
Science and associated subject areas, there is great potential for significant
broader impact through education via faculty growth in quantum computing at
Columbia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.