* 1926847
* SBIR Phase II:  Biometric IoT system for First Responders
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Zachary Braun, FireHUD Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,448,312.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to reduce injuries and costs due to
overexertion and heat strain in firefighting through a real-time, biometric
monitoring system and accompanying analysis tools. This system collects each
firefighter's vital signs and sends the data to authorized commanders for real-
time strategic decision-making. By receiving access to life-critical
information, commanders can make informed decisions on the allocation of key
resources during the hectic scene of an emergency. Every year over one million
firefighters risk their lives to protect others. Almost 60% of the deaths in
firefighting are caused by overexertion and stress, which can induce heart
attacks as well as other serious medical issues. Around 70,000 firefighting
injuries occur each year, and associated costs total over $7 billion annually.
The proposed system can be easily adapted to serve other first responders, such
as military personnel, industrial workers, and others with occupational
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will improve the occupational
safety of first responders through the research and development of the following
components: 1) An improved biometric collection wearable; 2) software used by
the biometric monitoring system; 3) a location-monitoring tool; 4) algorithms to
estimate sleep quality, fatigue, and detect symptoms for certain diseases, and
improve exertion and core-body temperature estimates. 5) network improvement
solutions allowing first responders in remote areas to utilize biometric
monitoring tools. All five objectives will consist of multiple pilot studies
with ongoing research and development that will incorporate crucial feedback
from end-users. It is expected that the outcomes of this project will
demonstrate a significant reduction in firefighter injuries, paving the way for
a clear return on investment for partnering fire and emergency
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.