* 1926610
* Collaborative Proposal: MRA: Local- to continental-scale drivers of biodiversity across the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Angela Strecker, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 09/30/2024
* USD 415,520.00

Understanding how natural and human-made factors affect geographic patterns of
biodiversity is essential for planning conservation efforts, especially in the
face of rapid global changes. Geographic patterns of biodiversity are expected
to be influenced by a combination of local biological factors, like competition
among species, and by regional to continental physical factors, such as climate.
However, this expectation has not been evaluated from local to continental
scales across diverse species lineages. In addition, natural and human-made
disturbances are likely to alter this expectation. This study uses the
geographic design of the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) across
the USA to test this idea, by quantifying multiple biological and physical
factors affecting biodiversity patterns of small mammals, fish, and ground
beetles at nested spatial scales. The study will add new, publicly available
data to NEON including measures of animal body sizes, species diversity, and
geospatial layers for disturbance and land use histories, climate, geology, and
topography. Teaching modules will highlight data science skills needed to work
with NEON data. Undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs will engage
directly with the research. The study will also engage the public and increase
awareness of the biosphere and environmental change with an interactive exhibit
for Science on a Sphere developed with computer science students, a natural
history museum, and a large science festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will advance the field of ecology by connecting fine-grained
measurements of individual organism traits, like body size, to cross-scale
drivers of biodiversity from plot to continental scales. This research develops
a conceptual framework that describes relationships among intraspecific trait
variation (ITV) in body size, biodiversity, and drivers related to disturbance,
past land use, and their interactions. This framework will advance basic theory
and prediction of spatial biodiversity patterns by linking ITV to drivers of
biodiversity across scales. Three main questions include: (1) How does spatial
scale influence body size ITV and its relationship with biodiversity across taxa
within NEON? (2) How is disturbance regime explained by different scales of
climate, geodiversity and land cover, and past land use across NEON? (3) How do
relationships among climate, geodiversity and land cover, past land use,
disturbance regime, and body size ITV explain variation in biodiversity across
taxa from local to continental scales? The proposed research will meet a major
research need within NEON, to quantify disturbance and land use history data
from the plot to the domain scale. Such data are essential to interpretation of
observational ecological data and will be publicly disseminated as a geospatial
and tabular database containing code for linking other NEON plot, site, and
domain data products. These new data and biodiversity analyses will serve to
establish a baseline for future spatiotemporal NEON data products that concern
ecological communities and ITV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.