* 1926576
* NCS FR - Elucidating the relationship between motor cortex neural firing rates and dextrous finger movement EMG for use in brain computer interfaces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Parag Patil, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,276,395.00

Prosthetic hands controlled directly by the nervous system have been the subject
of science fiction for decades, and could lead to dramatic quality of life
improvements for people with upper limb amputations or paralysis. The brain is
the only known controller capable of moving a 5-fingered robot with high
precision to use a wide variety of tools and objects. While we know a lot about
the control signals in the brain and movement of the fingers, we do not have a
good idea of how one gives rise to the other. Here, we will generate an enormous
dataset, which will be publicly distributed to students and other scientists
everywhere. It will include many channels of brain activity simultaneously with
muscle activity to help work out the transformation between the two, and attempt
to replicate this control system using artificial neural networks. A strong
demonstration of brain controlled prostheses could lead to human studies, and a
clinical system that could impact the quality of life for hundreds of thousands
of people with amputations or paralysis, as well generating insights for smarter
robotic systems. Beyond the direct output of the research, brain machine
interfaces have the capability to inspire a large number of students, including
those from underrepresented groups, into careers in science and technology, by
showing clearly to a young audience how this kind of education can help
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to record data simultaneously
from the brain, muscles, and kinematics of the primate hand during complex
finger movements, in order to replicate this control system. Specifically, the
objective of this particular application is to establish the first such dataset
in a nonhuman primate, recording 200 channels from motor cortex, 12 channels of
EMG from the muscles, and precise kinematics during the acquisition of finger
targets from 4 different degrees of freedom. Our central hypothesis is that
firing rates can be transformed to EMG using a single layer neural nonlinearity
followed by a regularized linear regression, and then transformed into finger
kinematics through non-linear but well-characterized anatomy. This differs from
upper limb signals, which can appear to be linearly modulated by endpoint
velocity regardless of posture. We will complete this project with three
objectives. In Objective 1, we will establish a world-class surgical team to
create a nonhuman primate animal model with simultaneous chronic brain recording
and EMG recording. In Objective 2, we will develop an algorithmic approach to
map motor cortex firing rates to EMG as well as kinematics, with both offline
and online testing. In Objective 3, we will explore low power circuitry to
extract this information in real time, at a power consumption that would be
appropriate for an implantable medical device. The overall scientific philosophy
of this project is that the brain provides an example of a low power neural
network, which is relatively shallow between motor cortex and EMG, for
controlling a complex soft robotic system. Uncovering this relationship will
enable us to use this approach for brain machine interfaces for paralysis as
well as guiding future human made robotic approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.