* 1926745
* Student Housing and Student Program Support for the 51st North  American Power Symposium, Wichita, KS, October 13-15, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Chengzong Pang, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This proposal seeks funding to partially support student-housing and student
related activities at the 2019 North American Power Symposium (NAPS 2019), a
student-centric conference. The 2019edition of NAPS will be held from October 13
to 15, 2019 at Wichita State University, Wichita, KS. It will continue its
tradition of supporting students through an enhanced conference experience. This
year, the student activities include skill-development workshops, technical
presentations and networking opportunities. Students who publish and present a
paper in NAPS will receive feedback from industry and academic experts.
Exceptional student contributions will be recognized through a best paper award
competition. Aiming to increase undergraduate student participation, NAPS 2019
will include a separate track to highlight undergraduate student research. The
soft-skills workshop is planned for the student attendees to provide an
opportunity for the future power system experts to be more effective
communicators&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this conference is to
encourage student researchers in the general area of power and energy systems to
share their preliminary outcomes. This conference also provides an avenue for
them to interact with industry and academic experts to further simulate their
interest and understanding in the emerging areas of power and energy systems.
These outcomes often become the initial step towards new research directions and
the modernization of the power grid. The articles presented in the conference
will&lt;br/&gt;be peer reviewed original work and will be achieved through the
IEEE digital databases, IEEExplore. These articles will be available to the
power system community around the world. Student attendees will be able learn
about contemporary issues in power systems by attending the plenary sessions by
industry&lt;br/&gt;experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.