* 1926697
* WORKSHOP: iConference 2019 Doctoral Colloquium
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Anita Komlodi, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2022
* USD 20,038.00

This is funding to partially support participation by approximately 23
U.S.-based students (out of an estimated 28 total participants), along with
distinguished faculty mentors, in a doctoral colloquium (workshop) on
information science research to be held in conjunction with the 14th iConference
that will take place March 31-April 3, 2019, in Washington DC, and which will
jointly be hosted by the Information School at the University of Maryland, by
Syracuse University, and by the University of Maryland Baltimore County. Since
2005, the iConferences have provided a forum where information scholars,
researchers and professionals from around the world gather to share insights on
critical information issues in contemporary society. An openness to new ideas
and research fields in information science is a primary characteristics of these
events, which have been successful in bringing together people who otherwise
might rarely interact with one another, thereby helping to promote
interdisciplinary research. Recent iConferences have drawn close to 500
attendees, a testament to participants' appreciation for the inspiring sense of
community, high quality research presentations, and myriad opportunities for
engagement. The iConferences are presented by the iCaucus, now a consortium of
87 schools within the United States and abroad (plus 10 associate members)
,dedicated to advancing the information field and preparing students to meet the
information challenges of the 21st Century. This year's theme is "inform |
include | inspire". The iConference doctoral colloquia traditionally bring
together the best of the next generation of interdisciplinary researchers
focused on the interplay of information and technology in a social context,
allowing them to develop a network both among themselves and with senior
researchers. Participation is encouraged from a broad range of relevant
disciplines, thereby expanding attendees' perspectives on their topics of study
and promoting advancement of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 Doctoral
Colloquium will be tightly integrated into the conference experience, starting
with a full-day event on Sunday March 31, the first day of the iConference. The
primary objective of the Doctoral Colloquium is to help train the next
generation of information science researchers. To this end, it will provide the
student participants with an environment in which they can share and discuss
their goals, methods and results in order to gain feedback on their work both
from the mentors and from other students, which should allow them to enhance
their research. The student participants will come away with a better
understanding of the various research communities engaged in the study of
information science, and they will learn how to position their work within the
field. At the end of the day, a closing plenary session will provide an
opportunity for the faculty mentors to discuss various professional issues, such
as the job market, getting grants to support research, negotiating work-life
balance, and developing one's research program post-Ph.D. Thus, the colloquium
will provide students with the chance to make new professional connections
beyond their own disciplines and institutions, and it will also help them
successfully launch their careers whether in industry or
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.