* 1926986
* SBIR Phase II:  Magnetic Quantum Dots for Cell Separation and Characterization
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Qirui Fan, Core Quantum Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 899,847.00

The broader/commercial impact of this SBIR phase II project will develop
magnetic and fluorescent reagents for the separation and analysis of cells from
tissue samples stored in biobanks, central repositories for biological samples,
including tissues, cells, blood, sera, and urine, and their associated patient
data, used in research to identify new methods to diagnose and treat disease;
this industry is currently $52 B/yr with a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of
4.5%. Biobank samples typically consist of a mixture of pathologically normal
and diseased cells and tissues, requiring separation. Sample quality is thus
critical for biobanks. The cell separation market ($3.9 B/yr, CAGR 4.1%) is
dominated by the flow cytometry segment ($3.1 B/yr, CAGR 3.6%); whereas magnetic
cell separation is a growing market ($582 M/yr by 2020 CAGR of 6.4%). Most
biobanks currently provide unpurified samples or samples purified via flow
cytometry alone, with typical recoveries of &lt;10% at purities of ~20%. This
research will develop and commercialize reagents that combine magnetic
separation with flow cytometry analysis for target cell purification from
biobank tissue samples. In the company's Phase I research of cells in
suspension, these reagents yielded ~100% recovery with purities &gt;75%. This
research will expand this technology to tissue homogenates with increased
heterogeneity and viscosity, increasing purity of biobank samples and enhancing
researcher ability to develop breakthrough medical
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop magnetic-
fluorescent nanoparticle reagents for cell separation and subsequent flow
cytometry analysis of heterogeneous clinical tissue samples from biobanks. Given
the heterogeneous nature of biological specimens that may contain more normal
than diseased components, purification technologies are critical to biobank
operation. Based on the Phase I research, the company anticipates that this
technology could increase recovery and purity to &gt; 75% (vs. 10-20%
currently). This will be accomplished by: (1) developing an open magnetic
separation system to reduce obstruction compared to existing commercial magnetic
bead-packed columns; (2) optimization of reagent magnetic and fluorescent
content to maximize cell separation and analysis signal while minimizing size
and signal overlap with tissue autofluorescence; (3) protocol development for
tissue homogenate analysis using commonly employed mechanical and enzymatic
tissue digestion methods. This research will yield new tools for cell isolation
from complex, viscous environments that will greatly enhance the utility of
biobank samples in research and clinical investigations. Such improvements will
also benefit applications with less rigorous engineering design requirements,
including bio/pharma separations, bioprocessing (e.g., CAR T-cell therapy), and
clinical diagnostics (e.g., circulating tumor cell
recovery).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.