* 1926559
* MSA:  Dust as an ecosystem driver: determining the ecosystem consequences of cross-system subsidies of nutrients and microorganisms in dusts
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Bonnie Waring, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,948.00

Atmospheric transport of soil (dust) connects distant ecosystems, moving
nutrients and organisms across continents and against gravity from lowland areas
to mountain wilderness. Dust deposition can influence climate, accelerate
snowmelt, affect air and water quality, and have human health consequences.
Despite the importance of dusts within the environment, we know very little
about the quantity and composition of dusts transported by the atmosphere
through time and space. This project will determine where within the western USA
dust loading is greatest, examine the composition of collected dusts, and
document how nutrients and microorganisms transported in dusts affect aquatic
ecosystems in which they are deposited. The results will inform natural resource
managers and policymakers on how climate and land-use activities can influence
ecosystem services downwind, such as water quality and community diversity. The
project will provide research experiences for high school students by directly
involving them in the collection and examination of dust samples. Students will
be able to compare the properties of collected dusts in their region as it
relates to geography, land-use, and climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will examine the role of dust in transporting nutrients and microorganisms in
ecologically meaningful quantities to mountain ecosystems. Because dust can
contain appreciable concentrations of terrestrial limiting nutrients, it has
been hypothesized that increased dust deposition has led to widespread
eutrophication of remote waterbodies in the US. Moreover, dust deposition may
represent a major mechanism of microbial dispersal across ecosystems,
potentially shaping the composition and function of resident microbial
communities. The project will test these hypotheses through the capture and
analyses of atmospheric dusts across the western and mid-western USA, with
direct examination of nutrient bioavailability and microbial community
composition through laboratory and field experiments. The research has four main
objectives, 1) determine the gravitational deposition rate of dusts in the
western US through a coordinated effort with the National Atmospheric Deposition
Program (NADP), 2) use controlled laboratory experiments to quantify the
microbial composition and the leachable and hydrolysable nutrient fraction from
dusts, 3) determine in situ effects of dust additions on aquatic microbial and
algal community composition, and 4) provide critical data on best practices for
measuring and tracking dust movement. The education plan will engage high school
geography, earth science, and ecology students, and cultivate an interest and
understanding of the role of climate and human land-use in affecting important
biogeochemical cycles, air quality, and environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.