* 1926983
* The Fifth International Conference on Sustainable Chemical Product and Process Engineering, Tianjin, China, June 30-July 3, 2019
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

Depletion of nonrenewable energy resources, climate change, environmental
pollution, and population growth are creating global challenges, whose solution
heavily depends on the development of sustainable manufacturing technologies.
This grant is to provide travel support for US-based faculty and students to
attend The Fifth International Conference on Sustainable Chemical Product and
Process Engineering, Tianjin, China, June 30-July 3, 2019. This international
conference has a focus on chemical manufacturing technologies that promote both
energy and environmental sustainability. The organizing committee, which
consists of distinguished researchers with a broad range of skills in chemical
process systems and reaction engineering, will provide for a vibrant and diverse
atmosphere that fosters exchange of ideas on research and education. It is
anticipated that approximately 20 US-based researchers will receive partial
travel support to attend this conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meeting the
world's demands for energy, food, water, chemicals, and pharmaceuticals in a
sustainable manner while protecting the environment will be key topics of this
conference. The US participants will have the opportunity to network with
leading researchers from China and the rest of the world and exchange ideas
about the state of the art in research and education in this important field.
The main objectives of the Conference are: (i) to share knowledge and research
experience in studying economic, environmental and social sustainability, (ii)
to assess the state-of-the-art in sustainable chemical product and process
engineering, (iii) to bridge the gap between research and development,
strengthening the linkage between academia and industries, (iv) to discuss
research directions for the chemical and allied industries to move towards
sustainability and educational approaches for the integration of industrial
sustainability into chemical engineering curriculum, and (v) to explore
opportunities for international collaboration in various technical areas. The
organizers plan to encourage faculty researchers as well as
graduate/undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented groups,
to participate and receive partial travel support from this grant. Participation
in the conference will be especially beneficial to the young US-based
researchers, who will have an opportunity to interact with experienced academic
and industrial researchers in the field from around the world, which could
positively influence their professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.