* 1926327
* Collaborative research: Significance of eye morphology on gaze perception
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jessica Yorzinski, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 367,073.00

The ability to determine gaze direction is vital to many social behaviors. This
project will study the morphological factors influencing individuals' abilities
to detect gaze direction. Using human and nonhuman primates in a comparative
framework, the researchers will study the relationship between eye morphology
and gaze perception. The research will provide a better understanding of how the
appearance of the eye influences gaze perception across the primate lineage.
Outreach activities will include the project team giving interactive
presentations on primate behavior and conservation to high school students and
community members, with a particular focus on students and community members
belonging to groups underrepresented in STEM fields. The project will also
develop a primate behavior module at an under-resourced high school; the
students will learn about primates and conduct observational studies at a local
zoo. The team will train a postdoctoral associate, as well as undergraduate
students, in primate behavior, conservation, and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaze perception is of fundamental importance to
social cognition but our understanding of the ways in which eye morphology
impacts it is limited. This project will examine the relationship between gaze
perception and eye morphology to determine whether conspicuous eye morphology
facilitates gaze perception while inconspicuous eye morphology conceals gaze
perception. It will manipulate eye morphology and examine its impact on gaze
perception in humans as well as other primates. After presenting subjects with
photographic arrays of faces that have systematically manipulated eye
morphology, it will instruct subjects to detect faces with specific gaze
directions. It will monitor the eye movements of subjects to track their gaze
behavior during the task. The results of this study will help elucidate the
evolutionary significance of eye morphology on gaze perception across primate
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.