* 1926391
* Collaborative Proposal: MSA:  Environmental and anthropogenic drivers of decadal-scale changes in estuarine fish alpha and beta diversity from local to biogeographic scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Lauren Yeager, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Gruner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 249,972.00

Preserving biodiversity in the face of dramatic global environmental change is
one of society's most pressing challenges. To date, most focus has been placed
on biodiversity loss, motivated by documented extinctions of many terrestrial
vertebrate species. This focus on species extinctions, however, misses much of
the bigger and messier picture of how biodiversity is changing. In many places
across the globe, the number of species at a given location has actually been
increasing or staying constant, not decreasing - bucking the expected trend.
This might be because invasive species or species moving poleward in response to
changing temperatures may balance out or outpace local losses. Moreover, species
extinctions occurring at regional or continental scales simply may not be well
documented in small-scale studies. Furthermore, even if the number of species at
a location is not changing, the composition of the ecological community may be
unstable. Estuaries (coastal water bodies where fresh and salt waters meet) are
places of rapid transformation due to combinations of global environmental
change and local factors, such as coastal development. This research will bring
together data from government and academic research programs to measure how the
biodiversity of estuarine fish communities has changed over the last 70 years
across the entire US Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic coasts. Fish biodiversity is
tightly linked with important ecosystem services like fisheries productivity. It
is therefore critical to understand how these environmental changes may alter
the biodiversity of estuarine fishes and how expanding warm-water species may
reshape coastal fisheries. This project will support one postdoctoral researcher
and provide innovative training in statistics, data synthesis, and
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study is to identify
environmental and human drivers of multiple components of estuarine fish
biodiversity (alpha, temporal beta, and spatial beta diversity). This project
will leverage time-series data sets spanning up to seven decades from 65 coastal
embayments ranging from South Texas to Maine to assess biodiversity trends at
nested spatial scales (survey site, embayment, eco-region, and continental).
Through synthesis of biodiversity data with environmental and land-use data
along with multi-scale and hierarchical models, it will be possible to identify
hotspots of biodiversity change, important predictors of this change, as well as
relevant spatial scales at which effects on biodiversity are evident. The
project will also use a newly proposed metric, community mean range limit, to
assess whether increases in warm-water species are driving biodiversity change
along major range boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.