* 1926174
* Standard: Ethics-in-the-Making: Changing Practices in Data Science
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Bruce Lewenstein, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,121.00

A nontechnical description of the project, which explains the project's
significance and importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
research project that studies the phenomenon of ethics-in-the-making in data
science and machine learning. Specifically, the project will focus on both
research and development contexts where prediction and classification models are
used to study risks, especially health and financial risks. The research team
will provide an account of how ethics emerges in practice in these contexts, and
it will identify points where different ways of envisioning and doing ethics
diverge and converge. The analysis will shed light on the production, reception,
and influence of the prediction and classification systems and research
practices that express specific understandings of what it means to do ethical
data science and machine learning projects. Understanding the dynamics of
ethical change in prediction and classification research is of utmost importance
given how fast these models are being woven into the fabric of society. Changes
introduced via ethics-in-the-making can strengthen, weaken, or otherwise affect
the moral and structural integrity of science and the political legitimacy of
scientific institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers propose to use
qualitative research methods to investigate empirically how ethical standards
and practices are being reconfigured in prediction and classification research
and development. The research team will study the process of building ethically
significant forms of accountability and control into prediction and
classification research practices; and the team will examine the ways that
prediction and classification researchers conceptualize ethical issues in their
work. Of special interest is what practices and systems researchers consider
ethically problematic or unproblematic, and why. The study will provide a timely
basis for cultivating ethical practice in contemporary data science.
Specifically, the project will document existing and potentially uncover new
ethical challenges and opportunities; disseminate findings in academic journals;
contribute to societal debate with perspective pieces in scientific journals;
produce a white paper for data scientists and practitioners in academia and
industry; and develop a set of pedagogical case studies intended to help
students and professionals reflect on data science ethics. Finally, the findings
will be incorporated into a curriculum development project, the 'Data Science
&amp; Society Lab,' which will be made available on an open access
basis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.