* 1926074
* Travel Grant: Consortium for the Advancement of Shape Memory Alloy Research and Technology 3rd International Student Design Competition; Konstanz, Germany; May 12-17, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2019
* Aaron Stebner, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides travel support for undergraduate and graduate students to
take part in the Consortium for the Advancement of Shape Memory Alloy Research
and Technology (CASMART) 3rd International Student Design Competition to be held
in Konstanz, Germany from May 12-17, 2019. The design competition will be held
as part of the International Conference on Shape Memory and Superelastic
Technologies (SMST). Building on the success of past conferences, SMST 2019 will
be the premier forum for sharing and dissemination of the latest scientific,
engineering, and technology advances in field of smart materials. This is the
3rd installment of the design competition with a healthy history of US
participation. Students will present their solutions to design challenges in
various industries, such as astronautics and medicine. The designs will be
developed by students based on the creative use of engineering theories and
methods, engineering design principles, and mentorship provided by CASMART
members. Not only will the students be exposed to the interesting work of fellow
competitors, they will also be exposed to world class academic and industrial
research in an international environment, which will foster their personal and
professional growth.

Toward ensuring a workforce to sustain that growth, as well as current market
and R&D needs, CAMSART held its first international student design competition
in 2015 and has repeated it every-other year since then in conjunction with the
SMST conference. This grant will support undergraduate and graduate students
participating in this design competition to travel to the conference to present
their designs in paper, poster, and hardware demonstration formats.
Specifically, there are 14 student teams registered for the competition
representing five US Universities: Colorado School of Mines, Texas A&M,
University of Minnesota, University of Toledo, and University of North Texas.
The student teams will compete their designs for: deployment and orientation
mechanisms for solar arrays that power smallsats, compact deployable
communications dishes with curvature correction, heat engines for recovering
energy from power plant waste heat streams, and advancements in the state of the
art for Tourniquets and scoliosis spinal curvature prevention devices. CASMART
will collect the student papers and condense them into a full length, peer
reviewed article on the advancements in the state of the art in SMA alloy and
application design practices and tools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.