* 1926959
* I-Corps: Super-slick Coatings for the Handling of Viscous Fluids in Extreme Environments
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Sarbajit Banerjee, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project derives from the
anticipated reduction of energy consumption and cleaning expenditures incurred
by any industry dealing with the handling of viscous liquids. The technology
that is the focus of this project is a thin-film coating that is repellant to
both water and oil and can withstand high temperatures. Such coatings are
expected to find broad applicability in oil tankers, railcars, and trucks used
to transport viscous fuels. The coatings will bring end-users considerable
benefits in terms of reduced cleaning and repair costs while enabling improved
energy efficiency and reducing the volume of fluids discarded during
transportation. The technology is further of relevance to the design of nozzles
for additive manufacturing, the processing of nuclear waste streams, and the
robotic handling of specialty chemicals. In all of these applications, the
coating will allow for viscous fluids to be delivered without adhesion and
contamination of surfaces and with the added benefit of protecting the
underlying substrate from corrosion. Benefits to society will include more
efficient fuel utilization and reduced exposure of workers to potentially
hazardous substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
research that has led to the development of thermally robust and highly textured
coatings that readily glide both water and viscous oil droplets. Nature has an
abundance of surfaces that are not wetted by water droplets (e.g., lotus leaves
or shark skin); however, surfaces that are not wetted by low-surface-tension
liquids, such as oils, do not exist in nature. This project is based on coatings
that in laboratory tests are not wetted by either oil or water. The extreme non-
wettability of these surfaces derives from the creation of thermally robust
three-dimensional texturation spanning multiple length scales within ultra-thin
metal or ceramic films, which gives rise to an interconnected network of trapped
air pockets. Grafting molecules with intrinsically low wettability onto the
surfaces of porous films yields extended surfaces that are non-wettable by water
or oil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.