* 1926482
* Collaborative Proposal: MRA: Understanding how local-scale controls on litter decomposition shape emergent macrosystem biogeochemical patterns
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Mark Bradford, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 889,554.00

Decomposition of leaf litter is fundamental to carbon and nutrient cycling in
terrestrial ecosystems. Soil animals and microorganisms feed on leaves when they
fall to the ground, derive energy and nutrients from consuming the leaves, and
then are themselves consumed as part of the food chain. An important result of
this process is that nutrients reenter the soil in forms available to plants for
new growth. Alternatively, much of the carbon in leaves is released into the
atmosphere as carbon dioxide, with a smaller proportion being stored as soil
organic carbon, which helps to maintain soil fertility. As such, by mediating
leaf degradation, decomposers play a fundamental role in recycling plant
nutrients and maintaining soil health. Decades of research on leaf decomposition
suggests that the speed at which this process occurs is dependent upon
temperature and moisture, as well as the nutritional quality of the leaves. This
project will test whether knowledge of these three factors is, in fact, adequate
to predict leaf decomposition rates. Recent work suggests that they are not,
because soil organisms vary at these scales in their inherent ability to
decompose leaf matter. A collaborative team will examine the possibility that
the soil animals and microorganisms, themselves, are an additional and important
control on decomposition rates. If that is the case, the research will also
determine how it changes predictions of nutrient and carbon cycling across the
continental US in response to environmental change. The study will examine these
questions over regional to continental scales, and thus in the context of plant
species variation (which determines leaf nutritional quality), and changes in
climate. Accurate predictions of nutrient and carbon cycling are necessary for
effective management of ecosystems to provide food, fiber and fuel, as well as
to support biodiversity, as the environment changes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whether differences among belowground heterotrophic
communities directly affect macrosystem biogeochemical behavior is unknown.
Ecosystem theory and biogeochemical models are based on the assumption that they
do not, with different belowground communities then assumed to function
similarly under the same environmental conditions. As such, the impact of
environmental disturbance on macrosystem biogeochemical patterns should be
predictable without understanding site-specific differences in belowground
communities. Emerging evidence challenges the validity of this assumption of
scale invariance and suggests instead that the activities of decomposer
communities are uniquely shaped by regional environment. This project tests
these competing hypotheses of scale invariance versus scale dependence for
litter decomposition. These competing hypotheses have not been evaluated because
the design of previous broad scale decomposition experiments aggregates local-
scale responses, creating the possibility of statistical inference fallacies
that obscure robust tests of the hypothesis of scale invariance. The project
addresses this information gap through field experiments, extensively replicated
within 18 National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) sites arrayed across
the eastern United States, which fall within seven ecoclimatic domains. The
field research will be combined with controlled laboratory studies to quantify
site-specific relationships between temperature, moisture, litter quality and
decomposition rates, and to evaluate whether the relationships arise through
selection by the domain-level environment for particular microbial functional
traits. The mechanistic insights and data generated through this empirical work
will inform the structure, and be used to directly estimate the parameters, of a
biogeochemical model. The model will be used to forecast the sensitivity of
macrosystem behavior to the possibility that it emerges from scale-dependent
relationships generated by trade-offs which dictate the activities of
belowground communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.