* 1926729
* EAGER:Field Testing Two New Portable Geothermal Gradient Probe Prototypes
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Matthew Hornbach, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 03/31/2021
* USD 36,299.00

For the past sixty years or so, scientists have been collecting heat flow data
from the seafloor using large, heavy instruments that are inserted into the
sediment and measure temperature versus depth below the seafloor. Heat flow data
provide fundamental information on the physical, chemical and biological
processes that are occurring near and below the seafloor and ultimately,
information on the thermal and chemical evolution of Earth. The goal of this
study is to advance the development of two prototype heat probes beyond the
testing/development stage so that they can be used by the broad scientific
community. The new heat-flow probes will be lighter and provide near-real-time
temperature data; both of which will streamline how heat flow data currently are
collected. The project incorporates new technology into the prototypes compared
to conventional heat flow probes. The project includes international
collaboration and provides training for an undergraduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to provide either
real-time or near-real time temperature data at higher sample rates and with
longer endurance time than standard heat flow probes. The prototypes have the
potential to transform our understanding of complex submarine fluid flow near
faults, seeps, vent sites, or caldera lakes. The two prototype probes are
designed to operate in water depths of 500 m (Prototype-1) and 2000 m
(Prototype-2); individual components for each probe have been pressure tested.
Currently, however, the fully constructed probes are untested at pressures
greater than 1 MPa (100 m water depth). Prototype-1 is designed to include real-
time heat flow data and sea-bottom imaging for site characterization and
selection; Prototype-2 is designed with Bluetooth data transmission. Both
prototypes will increase heat flow data collection by a factor of two compared
to conventional methods. Until pressure tests and geothermal gradient field
tests are completed, however, the probes cannot be scheduled for scientific use
without high risk of failure. This study has the potential to transform how
marine heat flow and fluid fluxes are collected and analyzed, especially in high
heat flow environments. Work involves full pressure testing and potential
thermal gradient testing for prototype-2. Specifically, the pressure tests will
go to 20 MPa (up to 2000 m water depth), and the thermistors will be tested
offshore Montserrat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.