* 1926379
* Research in Residence: Addressing Community Challenges Through University-Government Collaboration
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2021
* Kamran Saddique, CITY INNOVATE INC
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 295,446.00

The need for scientific and research capabilities to help address challenges
facing communities has never been greater. From preparing workers for STEM jobs,
to growing opioid usage, to the impact of new modes of transportation, the
challenges facing society are only growing. Yet local government and other
community organizations lack access to research teams who can help inform
solutions. This project aims to test a novel methodology called Research in
Residence (RIR), whereby local and state government offices or agencies
competitively select the most qualified research teams to help address critical
community-identified needs. These teams, supported with short-term funding
provided by the participating government, work collaboratively with their
government partner to carry out initial research activities. The academic-
government partners additionally define longer-term research objectives and
questions, schedule of activities, cost, and develop a path to securing full-
funding for the identified activities through local or other support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three primary barriers inhibit research with communities:
1) ineffective matching of community needs with academia; 2) unstructured
engagement practices; and 3) complexity of supporting the research activities.
Currently, there is no streamlined mechanism for government staff to locate
researchers who can assist them and conversely for researchers to identify the
right party within municipalities with whom to engage. If a match does occur,
the lack of a structured engagement model reduces the likelihood of successful
outcomes. These difficulties have led government entities to either rely on
voluntary academic research or to push the burden of securing funding to
universities. This project will utilize a new approach for linking researchers
with communities, unlocking potential benefits to researchers who gain access to
personnel and resources to address pressing community needs, communities who
benefit from impactful research-based solutions, and funding entities who
benefit from a set of well-developed, use-inspired research
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.