* 1926423
* Collaborative Proposal:  MRA:  Linking land-to-water transport and stream carbon cycling to inform macrosystem carbon balance
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Wilfred Wollheim, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2024
* USD 176,635.00

Carbon is the energy currency of ecosystems. Carbon emissions from streams and
rivers are important sources of carbon to the atmosphere. Scientists rarely
measure the movement of carbon from air to plants, into soils and groundwater,
through streams and rivers, and back to the atmosphere. This research will
develop new methods and data to measure terrestrial carbon cycling through
freshwaters. This project will also train diverse students and professionals to
conduct research linking terrestrial and freshwater carbon flows. Educators will
complete summer research projects using environmental sensors and public
datasets to enhance K-12 student understanding of research. Collaborations with
industry partners will create common standards for freshwater sensor
measurements. The project will also develop open-source software to improve
water quality and carbon cycling research with data collected by sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The movement of terrestrial carbon across land-water
boundaries controls the carbon balance of watersheds and the metabolism of
freshwater ecosystems. Streams are the primary interface between terrestrial and
freshwater ecosystems. They are ideal testbeds to advance understanding of land-
water carbon transfers and meta-ecosystem ecology (i.e., the study of multiple
ecosystems linked by energy and material transfers). This research seeks to
answer the questions: (1) What is the magnitude and variability of land-to-water
carbon transfers and stream carbon emissions in watershed carbon balances? (2)
What controls carbon form, cycling, and fate in meta-ecosystems? (3) How does
meta-ecosystem carbon cycling in different parts of the United States vary
within and among years? The factors regulating carbon metabolism and emissions
are predicted to operate at different spatial and temporal scales. Environmental
sensors and water chemistry sampling will capture the temporal variability in
carbon cycling and losses in soils and streams at paired terrestrial-aquatic
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) research sites across the United
States. Project outcomes will advance a predictive understanding of the daily,
seasonal, and annual processes controlling watershed carbon cycling through
measurements and models that cross land-water boundaries and approaches that
integrate biology, geology, and chemistry across space and
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.