* 1926175
* Scientific and Ethical Implications of the Emerging Data Sciences for the Interpretive Social Sciences: An Interdisciplinary Workshop: Arlington, VA - Fall 2019
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Dena Plemmons, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2023
* USD 27,070.00

This workshop explores the scientific and ethical implications of open science
initiatives and calls for research transparency for understandings of "data" in
qualitative social science research. Building on prior NSF-funded projects,
participants will consider evolving and competing meanings of data given recent
developments in data management, including examinations of data collection,
sharing, and analysis. This will be accomplished by drawing together proponents
of open science and scholars with diverse perspectives about possible and
appropriate management of qualitative data, including ethicists, social
scientists, representatives from federal and private funding agencies, and
public policy scholars. Participants will explore the ways emerging data
sciences, broadly conceived, are driving priorities for the interpretive social
sciences and reshaping our understanding of them. It will also identify key
challenges to better representing the methodological pluralism of the social
sciences, including competing accounts of "data" and associated implications for
managing qualitative research results. Workshop outcomes will inform decision-
making in the science policy and funding communities regarding science and data
management in the ethnographic/humanistic social sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop considers consequences of widespread, often
technologically-enabled approaches to data management and the rising influence
of data-reliant industries for qualitative social science research. A primary
workshop goal is to systematically articulate where and how the push towards
open science and data management is compatible with qualitative social science
research and where it might not be. In so doing, the workshop will examine the
implications of different conceptualizations of "data" across the social
sciences, and invite discussion of how these often unacknowledged and
underplayed differences figure in competing processes of sense-making, including
how data are collected, classified, interpreted, and archived, and the
concomitant ethical implications of each of these
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.