* 1927153
* Collaborative Research: Geological constraints on the disappearance of the Laurentide Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 274,984.00

The Laurentide Ice Sheet (LIS) once covered much of the North American
continent. It grows and expands during cold periods and contracts during warm
periods in Earth's recent geological past. Today, the last remaining vestige of
the LIS is the Barnes Ice Cap, located on central Baffin Island. While tracking
the size of the LIS at times when it was significantly larger than today is
relatively straightforward, constraining the size and frequency of LIS minima is
much more challenging but can provide a long-term context in which to evaluate
the current small state of the Barnes Ice Cap. For this project, the
investigators will use new, cutting-edge geological techniques to piece together
how often the LIS reaches its current dimensions. The team will be led by an
early-career Hispanic geoscientist, and the project will train one doctoral and
two undergraduate student. The investigators will participate in institutional
open houses that are available to the public and recruit undergraduate student
participation through institutional internship programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of past warm periods and their effect on the
cryopshere can help place modern warming and glacier demise in a longer-term
context. LIS is Earth's most dynamic ice sheet having undergone repeated
continental-scale expansions and contractions through the Quaternary. Evidence
for past ice-sheet maxima is found in terrestrial and marine settings, yet the
minimum extent of the LIS during interglaciations is largely unknown. The Barnes
Ice Cap, the last remaining vestige of LIS, once covered much of the North
American continent during the Last Glacial Maximum (~27-20 ka). The
investigators will measure multiple cosmogenic nuclides (Beryllium-10,
Carbon-14, Neon-21, Aluminum-26, and Chlorine-36) from recently exposed bedrock
along the Barnes Ice Cap to quantify how frequently and for how long the
LIS/Barnes Ice Cap achieves its modern dimensions during interglaciations. They
will use a new field method that relies on shallow bedrock cores (rather than
surface samples), which will be combined with the inventory of multiple
cosmogenic nuclides with different half-lives, to quantify total Quaternary
exposure and burial durations of bedrock surfaces just now being exposed by
receding ice. Results will be compared to recent cosmogenic nuclide measurements
from beneath the Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2) borehole that suggest the
Greenland Ice Sheet nearly completely deglaciated on several occasions through
the Quaternary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.