* 1927167
* Collaborative Research: Accel-Net: Nature-Based Solutions for Urban Resilience in the Anthropocene (NATURA)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* P. Timon McPhearson, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,161,879.00

1927468 (Grimm) 1927167 (McPhearson). Cities and urbanized regions worldwide are
exposed to extreme weather events and rising seas. They are at risk because
their infrastructure often is in disrepair, no longer appropriate for more
intense or frequent extreme events, or unable to keep up with rapid urban
population growth. Traditional engineered infrastructure, such as stormwater
drainage systems or sea walls, is usually designed for only one purpose and
seldom can adapt to changing conditions. Solutions that are based on nature-
preserving protective ecosystems, incorporating ecological elements or even
mimicking nature in built infrastructure, offer flexibility in the face of
changing conditions and provide multiple benefits to society, often at
relatively low cost. The NATure-based solutions to Urban Resilience in the
Anthropocene (NATURA) project links 26 networks to enhance connectivity among
the world's scholars and practitioners and improve the prospects for global
urban sustainability. NATURA exchanges knowledge, shares data, and enhances
communication among research disciplines and across the research-practice divide
to advance understanding of how to prepare for the growing threat of extreme
weather events. As an important part of this knowledge sharing, learning
exchanges will build capacity of the next generation of researchers and
practitioners to work together on applications of nature-based solutions in a
wide range of social, ecological, and technological
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NATURA international network of networks
brings together research scientists (ecologists, engineers, and social
scientists) and city practitioners (such as officials from city, county, or
state governments, members of non-governmental organizations, and community
leaders) who work on devising and implementing solutions to the challenge of
extreme events. NATURA will unite 21 networks focused in Europe, South Africa,
China, North and South America, and globally with 5 U.S.-based networks that are
conducting research and implementing nature-based solutions. NATURA will advance
theory and research on nature-based solutions, identifying and filling research
gaps across diverse global social-biophysical contexts to understand where
nature-based solutions are unique or can be more generally applied to meet urban
resilience challenges. Through all-hands meetings, thematic working groups,
regional nodes, and synthesis writing workshops, the project will accomplish the
goals of synthesis and data sharing, and network coordination. Early-career
researchers and practitioners will be sponsored by NATURA to pay five-week
visits to network partners. Further, NATURA will train postdoctoral scholars and
graduate students through learning exchanges to networks around the globe.
Through collaboration with partners, international students will be invited to
participate in these exchanges, hosted by US networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts. This project was co-funded by the
Division of Environmental Biology (BIO/DEB).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.