* 1927504
* Mechanisms controlling organization of the plant acentriolar microtubule array.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sidney Shaw, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 939,440.00

Cell function is tightly coupled to cell shape in plants where the cell wall
defines cell shape and maintains the physical structure of the plant. Creating
cell shape requires carefully expanding the cell walls, a process that involves
the patterned deposition of cellulose fibers into the cell wall and the
controlled activation of cell wall enzymes. Intracellular polymers, termed
microtubules, serve as critical pattern generators for cellulose deposition
during plant growth. This project examines the molecular and cell biological
mechanisms driving the organization of these microtubules into specific array
patterns and seeks to determine how plant hormones, such as auxin and
brassinosteroids, coordinate microtubule patterning with cell expansion to
affect a morphogenetic program. By understanding the mechanisms by which
microtubules form patterns, researchers may one day be able to engineer plant
morphogenesis and create smart cellulosic materials. This project will have
broader impacts through training undergraduate researchers in the Integrated
Freshman Learning Experience honors program, which is linked to Indiana
University's residential STEM programs that have 50 women enrolled.
Underrepresented students will be recruited through the SACNAS and ABRCMS
programs to help broaden participation in this STEM field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because microtubules direct the deposition of cellulose
fibers into the cell wall that are required for creating plant cell shape, this
project seeks to understand the molecular mechanisms by which microtubule
patterning is controlled. Using a multi-disciplinary approach, this project will
integrate genetic screens, computational modeling, live-cell imaging, and mass-
spectrometry to identify and characterize genes hypothesized to control the
dynamic transitions between the different microtubule array patterns, as well as
to discover how microtubules are created in specific positions within the cell.
Time-course imaging will be employed to examine how, and in what capacity,
information from the microtubule cytoskeleton is transferred to cell wall
materials for controlling expansion anisotropy. Additional work will focus on
two previously identified genes that alter the dynamic properties of the
microtubules, leading to defects in microtubule array patterning with subsequent
cell morphology defects. In summary, the project seeks to define the central
molecular mechanisms driving plant morphogenesis at the cellular
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.