* 1927159
* Dimensions US-China:  Global Patterns of Biodiversity in the Ancient Ciliate Paramecium
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Lynch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,999,999.00

Do microbes exhibit patterns of biogeographic distribution similar to those of
multicellular species? One idea is the 'everything is everywhere' hypothesis,
which postulates high levels of migration scattering microbial species
throughout the globe. Alternatively, environmental factors could be subdividing
lineages into locally adapted taxa. This study focuses on a charismatic but
poorly studied genus, the ciliate Paramecium, which originated prior to the
appearance of vertebrates. These creatures are animal-like in many ways, such as
having separate germline and somatic genomes and carrying a bacterial
microbiome. Unlike animals, however, all species in this groups are similar in
morphology, which simplifies many analyses. The population-genomic studies will
reveal the extent to which intra- and interspecific variation is shaped by the
population subdivision and migration. The researchers will explore the role of
the microbiome in driving phylogenetic and geographic divergence. The study will
examine if morphologically cryptic species are also similar in
ecological/physiological traits. The combined efforts of two major ciliate labs,
one in the US and one in China, will yield a public database of global molecular
diversity. Graduate students and postdoctoral fellows will be trained by this
research. Overall, this study will provide a wide-ranging exploration of
speciation and adaptation in microbes of broad interest to the research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; An understanding of the distribution of
biodiversity and its relevance requires information on key population-genetic
parameters such as the power of random genetic drift and migration. Combined,
these can constrain the development of local adaptations. This study will
acquire whole-genome sequences in a worldwide survey of genetic variation within
and among populations of 30 Paramecium species and their endocytobionts. Methods
from molecular population genetics will yield estimates of global effective
population sizes and migration rates for all such species. The temporal and
geographic distributions of species will be revealed, and the existence of
cryptic species complexes formally established. Classical methods from microbial
physiology will estimate key parameters of basal metabolic requirements, growth,
and cell size across gradients of temperature and resource availability. This
work will be done on a wide range of geographic isolates of all species to
determine whether local adaptation has occurred, or if such patterns are
consistent with phenotypic-plasticity responses. Study of genotypes with and
without endocytobionts will clarify whether such bacteria impose net metabolic
losses or gains for their host cells. The resultant data will be organized into
web portals to provide users with accessible assemblies and annotations of the
genomes of all species, along with the survey of within-species variants found
at all genetic loci. Sequenced strains will be cryopreserved in a viable state
for use by future researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.