* 1927037
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Market-driven design concept formation in undergraduate engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Steven Hoffenson, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 179,739.00

Designing successful products requires a balance of many competencies, including
technical expertise and business acumen. While undergraduate engineering
programs emphasize technical design and analysis, they generally do not
adequately teach or discuss marketability, and evidence suggests that
engineering students are graduating without a sufficient grasp of the bigger
picture of design. At the same time, research in engineering design has resulted
in new market-driven design techniques, which provide guidance for design
practitioners regarding how to develop products that are both technically sound
and marketable. This research project studies the application of market-driven
design methods to engineering education, by examining how undergraduate
engineering students learn design. It specifically seeks to understand how
students' mental models of design develop throughout a third-year design
curriculum, which introduces market-driven design concepts through course
material and novel interactive tools. By learning more about students' initial
mental models of design, as well as how this course influences their
conceptions, this project will provide a foundational understanding and
recommendations regarding holistic design education for
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To bridge the gap between market-driven design
and engineering education research, this proposal explores how students
currently understand design as a process before and after exposing them to
market-driven design approaches and tools in the context of an engineering
design course. The fundamental research questions are: (1) To what extent do
undergraduate engineering students' initial conceptions of design account for
the market context, such as competition and consumer considerations? (2) In what
ways do these design conceptions change after introducing market-driven design
techniques and tools in a design course? Data from concept maps (pre- and post-
instruction), student reflections on their conceptions of design, and a survey
of student perceptions of the course and their understanding of design will be
collected and analyzed. This will contribute to a stronger understanding of how
students conceptually balance the technical and non-technical elements of
design, as well as evidence regarding the value of a constructivism-based
educational approach to advancing student understanding of market-driven design.
In addition, these research questions will help design researchers to understand
the needs of market-driven design methods, as it provides a baseline for how
engineers are currently approaching design and how receptive they are to the
processes and tools from the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.