* 1927803
* ISS: Cellular Mechanotransduction by Osteoblasts in Microgravity
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 549,241.00

Osteoporosis causes bones to become weak and brittle as individuals age and
commonly leads to fracture with low forces or a fall. It is well appreciated
that weight-bearing exercises are beneficial to the bones and lowers the risk of
osteoporosis. In space, microgravity causes a number of physiological changes --
such as heart and bone deconditioning -- and represents a unique experimental
environment to test biological hypotheses an environment that speeds up
pathological changes. Despite a deep understanding of the outcomes of bone
formation and bone loss in bone biomechanics, the mechanism of how applied
loading affects the cells and causes bone loss and osteoporosis is not entirely
clear. Recent research has suggested that a group of proteins, known as
transcription factors, control gene expression in the nucleus of a cell and can
be regulated by the stiffness of a cell. Leveraging the unique experimental
environment on the International Space Station (ISS), this project will quantify
the effect of microgravity on the stiffness of osteoblasts - bone forming cells
- and relate this to the signaling that occurs due to key proteins. In addition,
the development and function of osteoblasts in microgravity will be compared
with and without the addition of mechanical compression in order to see if this
returns function to a normal state. Answering these questions will support an
increased understanding of how changes in bone loading cause bone loss and
osteoporosis, which will in turn support improved prevention and treatment
development. The research results will be shared broadly with the public through
public talks, seminars, and publications. The PI will collaborate with the
Detroit Area Pre-College Engineering Program to develop a bioengineering module
for the Saturday Series program for middle school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research combines microfluidic devices, cell biology,
and bioengineered systems to test the hypothesis that cell mechanics regulates
the crosstalk between YAP translocation and Bone Morphogenic Protein (BMP)
signaling in the context of osteoblast maturation. The first objective will
determine if microgravity affects osteoblast mechanosensitivity by reduceing
cell tension and thereby regulationg YAP/BMP crosstalk. The second objective
will apply mechanical compression to osteoblasts to see if they recover their
mechanosensitivity, as demonstrated by restored YAP/BMP signaling. The project
will implement a microfluidic device to autonomously measure the mechanical
properties of cells under microgravity and compare these with measurements
performed on Earth. The effect of cell tension on BMP signaling and YAP
translocation will be measured both on Earth and at the ISS. The ability for
mechanical compression to restore BMP signaling of osteoblasts in 3D spheroids
under microgravity will also be examined. This work will deliver new
bioengineering platforms that will extend current research abilities on the ISS.
Significant insights will be gained at the nexus of cell tension, YAP
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling, and BMP signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.