* 1927125
* Research Initiation: Recruiting More U.S. Women into Engineering Based on Stories from Morocco
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* RANI SULLIVAN, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

Economic forecasts predict that the U.S. will have a shortfall of approximately
million STEM professionals over the next decade. The workforce shortfall can be
addressed by recruiting and retaining a more diverse workforce. Due to the high
percentage of women seeking STEM careers in other countries, this project aims
to understand the impact of culture on career choice for women in engineering.
The objective of this research is to examine differences in messaging received
in Moroccan and American cultures to determine factors that contribute to
women's decisions to pursue engineering degrees at higher rates in Morocco. The
relationship between cultural dimensions, expectancies, values, and
students&amp;#1523; choice to pursue an engineering degree will be investigated.
With the U.S. unable to shift the low female enrollment in some engineering
fields, this is an opportunity to identify new ways to recruit and retain women
in engineering based on stories from international students and American
students with regards to their career choice. The research component of this
effort will generate knowledge that can be used to increase the number of
American women pursuing careers in engineering fields to meet U.S. workforce
needs. The project builds on the state of the art for women in engineering by
examining cultural differences for American and international, male and female
students simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory, qualitative research
utilizes interviews to understand students' intentions and cultural influences
of Moroccan and American women and men engineering students. This study is
designed to answer the following research question: How do engineering students
from Morocco and the United States describe the cultural reasons that factored
into their choice to pursue an engineering degree? The research plan utilizes a
theoretical model of national culture combined with expectancy-value theory to
determine relationships that exist between six cultural dimensions and the role
of expectancy and value and students? choice to pursue an engineering degree.
The study focuses on narratives for two cohorts of students. We are conducting
two rounds of interviews with Moroccan students as they arrive in the U.S. while
simultaneously interviewing U.S. students enrolled in the same engineering
program. This project is grounded in theory and focused on revealing key factors
regarding gender messaging in the U.S. from an outsider?s perspective. This
project builds on the national effort to continue changing the conversation
about engineering to make engineering more inclusive. Results from this study
will be used to design messaging that can be used to broaden women&amp;#1523;s
participation in engineering and other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.