* 1927003
* SBIR Phase II:  Removal of VOCs using novel photocatalytic materials and systems
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Melissa Petruska, SONATA SCIENTIFIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2022
* USD 777,836.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is establishment of sustainable, cost-effective
technology to mitigate volatile organic chemicals (VOCs) in a variety of
industrial settings by using photocatalysts to effectively destroy them. The
technology is broadly applicable to VOC removal and is highly relevant to
environments with low levels of VOCs that pose health, environmental, and
manufacturing risks and where current approaches underperform. The proposed
innovation addresses key gaps limiting the successful application of
photocatalysts to these environments, specifically the need to eliminate by-
products that may form during VOC destruction and the implementation of high-
performing photoreactors employing robust photocatalysts with long lifetimes. It
is expected that the developed technology will extend to chemical processing on
an industrial scale, including CO2 conversion. This technology will enable
large-scale processes and has the potential for an extensive societal impact by
reducing CO2 emissions that affect climate change. The technology will also form
the core foundation of high performance and attractive residential products,
which will improve indoor air quality in homes and businesses where VOCs pose
health risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to
improve indoor air quality in industrial settings by developing a photocatalytic
technology platform that enables efficient and effective VOC removal. The
technology will be particularly valuable in the presence of low-level
contamination where alternative technologies are expensive, poorly performing,
and adversely affect the environment. Photocatalysts are widely known as
effective chemical scrubbers and disinfectants. When activated by light, their
surfaces become chemically active via formation of reactive oxygen species,
which decompose toxic VOCs. The objectives of this project are to overcome the
key drawbacks of commercially available photocatalysts that inhibit their
widespread use in industrial environments. Previous photocatalysts form by-
products and intermediates, which may be toxic or which can contaminate the
photocatalyst. Those products are powder-based, leading to shedding and high
attrition. The proposed research will develop a photocatalyst and photoreactor
systems that provide efficient light coupling and enable rapid reaction rates.
The anticipated result is a highly robust photocatalyst with an optimized
macroscopic form factor that is matched to a prototype reactor system. The
technology developed in Phase II will be validated for industrial VOC mitigation
in the parts per trillion range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.