* 1927861
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Interactions of environmental and land surface change, animals, infrastructure, and peoples of the Arctic
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Jingfeng Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 02/28/2022
* USD 15,167.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together earth
system scientists, engineers, ecologists, and anthropologists to develop a plan
to document and explain changes in ecosystems and their effects on the plants,
animals, indigenous peoples, and industrial infrastructure of the Arctic region.
It will emphasize interactions between these elements to help understand,
inform, and plan for changes to come. Researchers will focus on the Yamal
Peninsula, which presents a continuous gradation of habitat types from forest in
the south to tundra in the north, a rich diversity of endemic and invasive plant
and animal species, a large population of traditional peoples, and economically
critical natural resources. Yamal serves as a small-scale and manageable model
for the Arctic as a whole, wherein changes in climate and their effects on
temperature, precipitation, landform, plants, animals, peoples, and
infrastructure need to be understood and related to one another. The project
will contribute to the curriculum development for a collaborative,
transdisciplinary online inter-institutional undergraduate and graduate course
to train the next generation of scientists to take a holistic approach to
problem solving. The team will directly engage Indigenous knowledge holders and
other stakeholders throughout the research project. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at developing a convergence research team
to study the Yamal region as an ideal natural laboratory for transdisciplinary
work to understand the complexity and adaptation of Arctic biotic and abiotic
systems to climate change, and the feed-forward and feedback mechanisms
modulating the co-evolution of human society and natural systems. The
participants will focus on developing research ideas and approaches for testing
the hypothesis that displacing Arctic systems from their historic state of
dynamic equilibrium under changing environment stimulates further changes to
abiotic, biotic, and socio-cultural elements, particularly when combined with
the spread of industrial infrastructure, to increase the role of feed-forward
and feedback mechanisms. Two transdisciplinary research "transects" will be
considered as main determinants of the Arctic system with two contrasting
scenarios: gradual warning and extreme weather events. Planned activities will
include two workshops, monthly virtual conferences, international research
capacity building, and a synthesis paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.