* 1927513
* AI-DCL: EAGER: Fairness-aware Informatics System for Enhancing Disaster Resilience
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nina Lam, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This award supports a research project to develop a smart, fairness-aware,
emergency informatics system. The system would automatically collect disaster-
related data for real-time event monitoring and prediction making to better
coordinate search and rescue operations. The system could, for example,
automatically collect real-time victim event data from social media such as
Twitter, utilize predictive algorithms to capture the spatiotemporal dynamics
associated with those events, forecast future events, and direct rescue teams in
response. Such systems would be useful to state and local government agencies
for resource allocation and planning. For the public to support their
implementation, steps are needed to ensure that they operate fairly; it is well
known that decisions made by algorithms generated by machine learning techniques
often exhibit bias due to a number of factors including data bias and the design
of algorithm models. A rescue system based only on Twitter data, for example,
may exhibit socioeconomic bias since higher disaster-related Twitter-use
communities tend to be communities of higher socioeconomic status. To address
fairness concerns, a prototype will be tested and verified using Twitter data as
well as data collected from other sources in response to Hurricane Harvey. The
approach could be applied to various types of emergency situations including
earthquakes and fires. The project is interdisciplinary; the research team
includes an expert in computer science and artificial intelligence, and another
in geography and spatial sciences. Two graduate research assistants will also be
involved in the project, which will deepen their understanding of machine
learning, data analytics, and environmental social science; as a result, the
project will contribute to capacity building for interdisciplinary research.
Results of this project will also be incorporated into course materials and
classroom activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this research
project is to develop a fairness-aware AI system for emergency management. The
project involves formulating and testing reliable principles and methods to
adjust the AI algorithms for fairness, a very domain specific challenge. This is
especially true in emergency management, where the system has to be able to
predict rescue events in real time from large, noisy, and biased data, such as
Twitter data. In light of this, the research team will develop a novel point
process model for event prediction from streaming data, and it will investigate
statistical learning problems when event data are noisy and incomplete. To
adjust for the fairness of the prediction algorithm, the team will integrate
heterogeneous social and geographical data with varying degrees of granularity
and different levels to build a classic event prediction model and to examine
correlations between the two approaches. Through comparing the approaches (with
and without fairness adjustment) using an empirical example (Hurricane Harvey),
the project will reveal the patterns of disparities, if any, and add new
knowledge on community resilience and emergency management. Theory, models, and
software all together form a framework that leads to scientific advances to
further development in disaster resilience. This interdisciplinary research will
serve to advance our understanding of machine learning, data science, and
socioeconomic fairness in the management of environmental hazards. New methods
will be developed to tackle incomplete and biased data and to integrate them
with other components of emergency informatics systems. The approach will be
applicable to many other AI system developments
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.