* 1927086
* SBIR Phase II:  Hemodynamic Optimization and Preclinical Assessment of a Shape Memory Polymer Wrap to Reduce Hemodialysis Access Site Failures
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Timothy Boire, VenoStent, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,294,224.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to develop an external stent to improve the
quality and length of life for dialysis patients. Dialysis is the primary
lifeline for patients with failed kidneys (i.e. End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD)).
Unfortunately, our current standard of care, which provides no additional
support or treatment to the artery-vein connections surgically created in the
arm to initiate dialysis (i.e. access sites), results in 40-70% failure rates
within the first year. These failures are most often due to the vein's
maladaptation to the high pressure, high flow arterial environment in which
cells within the vein wall migrate and grow inwards, causing obstruction of
flow. Consequences of this are dire: significant pain, suffering, and death for
dialysis patients, hospital readmission penalties, and billions of dollars in
direct costs to Medicare. The one-year mortality rate upon hemodialysis
initiation is 22%, in large part due to vein failures at the access site that
necessitate reliance on a centralized catheter that drastically increases risk
of infection, thrombosis, and death - reducing survival to merely a coin flip.
Despite some promising preclinical studies involving external stents, there is
nothing on the US market to prevent access site failures, in part due to
inappropriate biomaterial selection and device design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address these issues, an external stent, or wrap around the vein-artery
connection, is developed in this project. The wrap provides critical, custom-fit
mechanical support and outward growth to the vein to help it adapt better to the
high pressure, high flow arterial environment in a manner unique to this
biomaterial. To realize the potential of this technology to improve vein patency
and, in turn, the lives of dialysis patients, computational fluid dynamic (CFD)
modeling experiments need to be conducted to optimize device design. The
computational models will be validated empirically under physiological pressures
and flows through 4D Flow MRI experiments in which three-dimensional velocity
profiles tracked over time enable cross-matching of actual experiments to
computational models. This modeling is done with artery-vein connections from
both ex vivo experiments utilizing human arteries and veins, and in vivo in
sheep. Quality, FDA-compliant manufacturing of devices is enabled through
collaboration with quality contract manufacturers, and biocompatibility is
assessed. Lastly, the optimized design is tested in an FDA-compliant large
animal model. The final outcomes of this project will be a better understanding
of hemodynamics causal and preventative of vein failures, and development of an
external stent that can that can ultimately impact - or even save - dialysis
patients' lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.