* 1927422
* EAGER: AI-DCL: Exploratory research on the use of AI at the intersection of homelessness and child maltreatment
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Sanmay Das, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 299,996.00

Homelessness and housing insecurity present fundamental challenges for the
delivery of social services. The absence of stable accommodations increases the
risks of poor outcomes for all members of the household, including children,
experiencing this insecurity. This project is an exploratory study in the use of
techniques from artificial intelligence (AI) to improve early screening and the
delivery of targeted assistance to households that are at risk of future
homelessness and child maltreatment. The team will seek to develop novel methods
for allocation of scarce housing-support resources to at-risk households, taking
into account considerations of both overall efficiency and fairness. This work
will necessitate novel problem formulation and algorithm development in AI as
well as creating new ethical methods for deciding on how to effectively deliver
social services taking into account the vast complexity of human behavior.
Moreover, reducing the risks of homelessness and child maltreatment are critical
societal goals with the potential to substantively improve the lives of many of
our most vulnerable citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
feasibility of using novel algorithmic techniques to inform societal decision-
making on the allocation of scarce resources, with the specific goal of
improving service system outcomes for both homelessness and child welfare. The
team's focus will be on homelessness prevention interventions that offer timely,
non-reoccurring resources to stabilize families at risk of experiencing housing
crises; examples of such resources include landlord mediation, one-time rent or
utility payments, and moving expenses. They will leverage unique datasets on
child welfare and homelessness in the research, and use these to inform the
design of machine learning approaches to prediction of outcomes (specifically,
repeat episodes of homelessness and future interactions with child protective
services), and optimization techniques that leverage these predictions in order
to decide on which households to target for prevention interventions. The
interplay of prediction and optimization, in a context where the overall
allocation must both improve social welfare (measured along multiple dimensions)
and satisfy notions of fairness, equity, and local justice in the allocation of
scarce resources, is a challenging domain for AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.