* 1927133
* Collaborative Research:  An Open Access Experiment to Seismically Image Galapagos Plume-Ridge Interaction
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2020,02/29/2024
* Yang Shen, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 335,201.00

On Earth there are three fundamental ways in which volcanoes form. This study
will examine how two of these styles behave in proximity. The Galapagos
archipelago is a well-known example of hotspot volcanism, fed by a rising plume
of hot mantle, and this system is interacting with the Galapagos Spreading
Center (GSC) where volcanism occurs in response to seafloor spreading at the
boundary between two tectonic plates moving apart. Scientists have studied the
Galapagos hotspot-GSC system for several decades and have long puzzled over
persistent discrepancies between geophysical and geochemical observations and
physical models for how the pair work together. This study will image how mass
and temperature are transported, as well as how magma is generated beneath the
Galapagos system, using a technique called seismic tomography. A network of
instruments spanning a large area of the islands and adjacent seafloor will be
deployed. These seismometers will record seismic waves traveling from distant
earthquakes and ambient ground displacement over a period of 15 months. As the
seismic waves pass beneath the study area, they respond to differences in mantle
composition, temperature, deformation, and the presence of magma. Imaging these
properties will allow many unanswered questions particular to the Galapagos
system to be addressed. The study will also address the fundamental processes
occurring in the shallow part of the mantle that is hot and weak and the
interactions with the the cool, stiff overlying part that forms Earth's tectonic
plates. This program will train three graduate students in marine geophysics. In
addition, an Apply-to-Sail program will allow graduate students and early career
scientists from other institutions and community college instructors to
participate on the research cruises to gain sea-going training. Lastly,
Ecuadorian scientists and graduate students will also participate on the
cruises, bolstering science education and international research
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To produce the first mantle seismic view of
how mantle plume-ridge interaction really works, an open-access seismic dataset
will be collected around the Galapagos system. The experiment and subsequent
analyses are designed to address three main scientific questions: (i) At what
depths, in what geographic pattern, and by what mechanism does mantle plume
material flow northward to the Galapagos Spreading Center and disperse along the
ridge? (ii) Do the scale and nature of heterogeneity indicate small-scale, sub-
lithospheric convection? and (iii) What is the spatial distribution of melting
and volatile release, as well as the associated heterogeneity in composition and
rheology due to plume-ridge interaction? The Galapagos system is exceptionally
well-suited for such a study given the history of previous investigations of the
surface manifestations, the evidence from mantle tomography below the Galapagos
Archipelago, and the favorable azimuthal distribution of seismic sources. A
large number (53) ocean-bottom, broadband seismometers will be deployed for 15
months in an array spanning the area between the Galapagos Islands and the
Western Galapagos Spreading Center. Data from 7 broadband stations on the
islands also will be used. The data will undergo initial processing, including
ambient noise cross-correlation, and be archived in the IRIS-DMC for immediate
public use. Tomography models of isotropic velocity will be produced from body
waves, isotropic velocity from the combination of surface waves and ambient
noise, as well as radial and azimuthal anisotropy from surface waves. Receiver
functions will be analyzed to identify discontinuities related to the
lithosphere and melting and shear wave splitting will be used to map anisotropy.
Geodynamic models of plume-ridge interaction will be used for hypothesis testing
by comparing modeled and observed seismic waveforms, and by using the geodynamic
models as a priori information for the tomographic inversions. The project will
also substantially advance a broad understanding of mantle plume processes, the
asthenosphere, and their interactions with oceanic lithosphere; specifically,
the deployment will function as a unit array within the Pacific Array
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.