* 1927573
* SBIR Phase II:  Digital Media Synchronization, Performance and Urban Education Enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Charles Spencer, ThinkLive! INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,209,518.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase II project will be achieved through
further development of a novel physical music media platform with advanced
instrumentation that is designed to promote deeper engagement in education for
underrepresented youths. The platform will provide much needed educational
support for youths' STEAM (science, technology, engineering, arts, and math)
learning. The technology's relevance and attractiveness to adolescents have
important implications for promoting social resilience of the learners given the
salience of STEAM as the "career supporting language of the 21st century".
Initially the sensor embedded platter units will be offered for use in after-
school programming. By engaging and educating inner city students with their own
musical interests, an increased pipeline of diverse STEM learners is expected.
The proposed product may also help counteract maladaptive coping patterns (such
as truancy) among inner-city youths and inspire them to pursue personally and
socially impactful goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this SBIR Phase II project lies in the development of unique sensor
embedded turntable designed for delivering entertainment to simultaneously
deliver educationally enriching content. Specifically, the project will provide
SensorTable platters, software, and STEM curricula. The proposed Turntable Lab
will be a school-based program to enhance STEM learning in underserved urban
youth communities. To promote effective immersion, the proposed Turntable Lab
not only will integrate known musical and visual content but also enable the
student to actively manipulate the content. This immersion will keep the
students engaged while producing desired educational outcomes. With appropriate
curriculum lessons, these advancements will facilitate development of programs
designed to instruct students in STEM subjects via the art of DJing and Music.
Used in practice, DJs will benefit from learning techniques via the unique
instrumentation, while students will benefit from the data collected during live
performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.