* 1927046
* SBIR Phase II:  Virtual and Augmented Reality Enabled Personalized Manufacturing Training
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,01/31/2025
* Rajesh Jha, SimInsights Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,388,618.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research SBIR Phase II
project will be achieved through investigating approaches to leverage extended
reality (XR) for immersive, interactive and intelligent training in
manufacturing, healthcare and higher education, to accelerate learning, increase
engagement, and foster more effective use of expensive equipment. In 2017, the
global training market was estimated to be $388 B, while the US market was
estimated to be $166 B. Training and design use cases frequently rank among the
top 5 XR use cases in industry reports, and the enterprise VR training market
alone is forecasted to grow at 140% year over year for the next five years to
reach $6.3 B per year. XR technologies hold significant potential by providing
users with a sense of presence and immersion heretofore not possible due to
cost, safety, security, physical, geographical or other limitations. This
project will pursue this growing market opportunity with content expected to
bring together classrooms, labs, factories, hospitals and field service
environments, broadly advancing learning and engagement in both schools and
workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase II
project lies in the development of high- fidelity modular and reusable virtual
object and assembly models, customized models for scenarios, tasks, instructions
and user proficiency, application of natural language processing techniques to
enable conversational interactions in immersive multiplayer environments and the
use of computer vision techniques to support effective reuse of content across
both virtual and augmented reality settings. Specialized modules will be
developed for each of the above functionalities and then integrated to develop
an innovative, easy-to-use product that will make it easy for non-programmers to
author and publish XR content for training, design, service and other use cases,
as well as collect data to evaluate the content and experiences. Pilot testing
will be conducted with users in the higher education industry to rigorously
evaluate and iteratively refine the technologies and the final product. By
judiciously combining XR, virtual objects, and simulations with voice, vision
and collaboration, this project aims to build an innovative product that may
enable anyone to build engaging knowledge-rich
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.