* 1927696
* Collaborative Research: Multi-mutualist Effects on Populations, Communities, and Ecosystems Across Ecological Gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2025
* Jonathan Bauer, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2025
* USD 407,445.00

Restoration, or the rebuilding of degraded ecosystems, may be one of the best
tools for slowing the loss of biodiversity. Unfortunately, many rare plant
species fail to establish in restored ecosystems, potentially because the soil
microorganisms required for their establishment are missing. Most plant species
interact with specific soil microbes, but the conditions under which those
microbes (microscopic organisms) benefit or inhibit the establishment of rare
plants is unknown, limiting our ability to increase the success of ecosystem
restoration. This work will test the overarching hypothesis that the presence of
particularly rare, difficult-to-establish prairie legumes is limited by both
mycorrhizal and rhizobial mutualists and that in low-fertility environments
those mutualists synergistically improve prairie restoration outcomes in terms
of legume establishment, plant diversity, and ecosystem function. Further, it
will evaluate whether these interactions matter in the real world. In this
research, undergraduate and graduate student researchers will investigate two
groups of microbes that live in the soil, known to enhance the growth of rare
legumes (plants in the bean family) in native prairies. Researchers will isolate
strains of these microbes from restored ecosystems and from relatively
undisturbed native prairie ecosystems and then evaluate their ability (either
singly or in combination) to increase legume growth, increase prairie plant
community diversity, and improve prairie ecosystem performance across a wide
range of environmental conditions. They will also share these beneficial
microorganisms with restoration practitioners and train practitioners to
incorporate soil microbes in real-world, large-scale prairie restoration
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, researchers will examine
mutualisms between legumes and soil rhizobial bacteria and arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi, using a range of approaches that span the spectrum of highly
controlled lab studies to real-world field studies in restored prairies. In
plant growth chambers and greenhouses, researchers will test the quality of
individual strains of rhizobia and arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi isolated from
various remnant and restored prairie soils and evaluate whether they can
synergistically enhance the growth of twelve prairie legumes under unfavorable
soil conditions, including decreased nutrient availability or poor microbial
quality. In field plots across ten restored prairies varying in soil fertility,
they will evaluate whether patterns from controlled environments remain
consistent for legume growth in real prairies. In greenhouse mesocosms and field
plots in restored prairies, researchers will evaluate whether both types of
mutualists together have synergistically positive effects on plant community
diversity and prairie ecosystem functions (primary production, nutrient cycling,
soil building).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.