* 1927081
* SBIR Phase II:  Interactive, Combined Circuit &amp; 2D Field Simulator for Educational Mobile Game
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Dave Colleran, Elloveo, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2022
* USD 739,510.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research SBIR Phase II
project will be achieved through creation of a new way of teaching abstract
scientific concepts, like electricity and magnetism, and presenting them in an
approachable, visual way. The project involves the expansion of the interactive,
combined circuit and field simulator built in Phase I. The phase II research
will include adapting the existing simulator to cover additional topics covered
in middle school and high school physics, for example: semiconductors, solar
panels, LEDs, transistors, logic circuits, memory, computers, etc. This
innovation is a complex simulator that allows users to "play" with charges,
conductors, magnets, generators, motors, and particle accelerators. This allows
the user to feel confident with the concepts before they dive into the complex
mathematical equations behind the science, which often intimidate students. The
goal is to make this very challenging material easier for young people to
understand, ultimately inspiring more students to pursue engineering and physics
degrees in higher education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this SBIR Phase II project lies in developing a new simulator that will
be parallelized. Simulating a semiconductor in real-time (60 frames per second)
would require handling the electric/magnetic field and diffusion behavior of
hundreds to thousands of charges simultaneously and has never been accomplished.
Modeling diffusion and increasing the particle count to thousands will require a
parallelized, GPU-based simulation engine to handle the physics of the large
number of particles required. This is equivalent to incorporating Fick's Law for
diffusion and the continuity equations for semiconductor current into the
company's existing electricity and magnetism engine. Using this updated engine,
students can intuitively learn about the technologies surrounding them
(computers, solar power, LEDs, etc.). Additionally, the GPU-based engine will be
inherently cross-platform so that it can be used on any device (Apple,
Chromebook, PC, etc.). This interactive field and circuit simulator is the first
of its kind, and is ideal for allowing students to visualize, experiment with,
and intuitively understand complex electricity and magnetism
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.