* 1927077
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Renewable Nanoparticle Platform for Green Energy Production and Storage Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Virginia Irwin Klausmeier, Sylvatex Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,299,322.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be in lowering the overall cost of lithium-ion
batteries. Material cost reduction drives greater adoption of technologies using
batteries such as electric vehicles and storage systems while increasing the use
of renewables. Cathode material is a battery's largest cost contributor, and
with the market growing 10+% year-over-year, producers are having to spend
millions of dollars in plant expansions to meet this increased demand.
Technology solutions that allow cathode material producers to cost effectively
expand current production capacity without investment or sacrificing quality or
performance are immediately needed in this industry. Current industry processes
require lengthy high-temperature production steps that consume large amounts of
energy throughout the production process. This phase II project is focused on
developing a "one-pot" manufacturing process that will address the current
market priorities of lowering production costs, shortening manufacturing times,
increasing production yield and using sustainable materials, allowing cathode
producers to significantly increase profit margins while addressing demand for
increased production. More broadly, lower battery costs will increase the
adoption of technologies that utilize lithium-ion batteries and enable greater
implementation of other renewable energy sources like wind and
solar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to build upon
the promising feasibility results achieved in Phase I to develop a breakthrough,
sustainable, "one-pot" process for the manufacture of cathode materials for
lithium-ion batteries. This manufacturing process will capitalize on the
opportunity within the cathode production to address its needs for lowering
production costs, increasing production capacity, and reducing energy
consumption. The Phase II project will involve (i) the optimization of the
manufacturing process, as measured by half-cell battery performance screening,
(ii) demonstrate doubling throughput and providing cost savings of at least 20%
over current production processes for NMC 622, (iii) demonstrate battery
performance that is equivalent to, or better than, that of a commercial
benchmark in full cell testing, and (iv) design and construction of a pilot
reactor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.