* 1927694
* EAGER: Biologically inspired valveless impedance pump
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Narine Sarvazyan, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

In spite of recent success in tissue engineering blood vessels and patches for
repairing damaged regions of the heart, there has been little success in tissue
engineering supportive pumping systems that can produce one-way flow, which
often require valves that prevent flow reversal. Chronic venous insufficiency,
which can affect 20-30% of the people over the age of 50, is an example of such
an unmet need. In chronic venous insufficiency, blood pools in affected veins
and doesn't return to the heart efficiently, which can lead to swelling, skin
changes, varicose veins, ulcerations, and even loss of limbs. The goal of this
project is to perform exploratory work to tissue engineer a biological valveless
pump based on recently discovered novel physical principles governing the
functioning of an embryonic heart, in which there is one-way flow without
significant valve control. Pumps of different designs will be systematically
tested for their ability to create one-way flow. Key parameters, including the
pump's outer radius and length, the thickness and consistency of a gelatinous
inner layer and the position and the contraction frequency of its active segment
(a rhythmic cuff made of cardiac muscle cells), will be examined. If
successfully developed, valveless pumps can be useful in multiple other
projects. On a microscale, ongoing efforts to build organs-on-a-chip devices to
study various diseases and their treatment using patient-derived cells can
clearly benefit from a more physiologically relevant version of circulation that
involves energy efficient valveless pumping. On a macroscale, implantable
valveless pumps might be able to aid venous blood or lymphatic flow since they
can be made suitable to different anatomical scales, including the peripheral
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use tissue-
engineered cardiac muscle cuffs to create effective directional pumping action
in a valveless fashion. Theoretically, this can be achieved in the presence of a
sectional difference in mechanical compliance along the cuff and by asymmetric
stimulation with respect to such gradients. The theoretical basis and a man-made
impedance pump of this kind was first proposed by Gerhart Liebau in the 1950s.
Later it was suggested that this mechanism can play an important role in heart
development and aortic flow. The main goal of this EAGER project is to recreate
this fascinating mechanism of valveless pumping by combining novel tools of
tissue engineering tools and 3D bioprinting and to test theoretical predictions
that addition of a gelatinous inner layer to the classic Liebau impedance pump
can significantly improve the ability of these pumps to generate unidirectional
flow. The work will involve 3D printing of live tissue constructs containing
defined amounts of cardiac myocytes and fibroblasts. It will also rely on a
newly developed 3D bioprinting approach that uses agarose slurry as a support
bath to sustain free-standing hydrogel structures in cell culture environments.
Pacing of the contractile segment of the tissue engineered Liebau pumps will be
achieved by external electrical field or by light-based stimulation of myocytes
expressing channelorhodopsin. If successful, such biomimetic pumps can i) serve
as energy- efficient flow generators in microdevices such as human-on-the-chip,
ii) be used as experimental models for modeling function of embryonic heart
during normal development or in diseased states, iii) be recreated from
patient's own cell for the purpose of improving flow of biological fluids at
specific locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.