* 1927462
* EAGER:AI-DCL:Cognitive-Behavior Model to Predict Human Reaction to Swarm AI Non-Compliance.
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Souma Chowdhury, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 11/30/2022
* USD 298,734.00

This project studies autonomous swarm systems, which consist of a large number
of collaborating robots that work together with a few human supervisors. Such
systems promise unmatched task parallelism, fault-tolerance, resilience, and
keeping humans out of harm's way. However, there are important technical issues
that stand in the way of realizing these promises. Specifically, there is a
sizeable lack of understanding of how human supervisors (who provide tactical
input and mission intent, as opposed to direct or indirect control) interact
with embodied swarm intelligence. That understanding is imperative for
identifying solutions to mitigating cognitive overload and preserving human-
swarm trust and shared situation awareness, especially in humans-swarm teams
that are actually scalable to practical applications. The researchers will
leverage their engagement with particular stakeholder groups including the
Buffalo Fire Department and Government/Industrial parties involved in Oil Spill
Response. The project will also have impact on education, training, and broader
research community through the development of curricular materials for AI and
Robotics courses, multi-robotic workshops at pertinent conferences, and public
dissemination of data and models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will
conduct a set of experiments and identify modeling approaches to answer
fundamental questions regarding how humans respond to the behavior of embodied
swarm agents. Those questions include how humans react to circumstantial or
deliberate non-compliance by the swarm and the level of feedback provided by the
swarm to explain any non-compliance, how humans identify and attribute errors
(or perceived errors) to swarms, and how this impacts their intervention
frequency. They will use a neuro-ergonomic approach to estimate human metrics
such as event-related (brain) potential, intervention tendencies, situation
awareness, and cognitive workload via physiological information. On the machine
intelligence side, they will design decentralized swarm behavior to allow
studying impact of unique factors such as non-compliance and feedback levels in
search and object transport applications. The researchers have complementary
expertise in the areas of human-robot interaction, human psycho-physiological
monitoring, and autonomous swarm systems for engaging in the synergistic
research activities that are central to the project. They also have access to
key research facilities including a large motion capture environment, a swarmbot
arena, aerial/ground swarm robotic platforms, brain-computer interfaces, and
physiological monitoring setups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.