* 1927056
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Injectable, Enzyme-Degradable Poly(carboxybetaine) Hydrogel Formulations as Aesthetic and Surgical Tissue Fillers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Andrew Sinclair, Taproot Medical Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,282,979.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the realization of a next-generation soft
tissue filler. Fillers are used to replenish volumes left by surgical
procedures, medical disorders, trauma, or aging. In this $6B global market,
there is great need for a filler having superior longevity to the leading
hyaluronic acid products, while also exhibiting better safety and reversibility
than existing synthetic products. This project aims to commercialize a
degradable zwitterionic hydrogel (DZH) filler formulation that meets these
market demands to improve patient outcomes. In Phase I, the key features
required for an innovative product were identified, and prototype DZH
formulations achieving these benchmarks were successfully developed. The
objectives in Phase II are to finalize the design and characterization of an
initial product, evaluate its in vivo performance in preclinical studies, and
establish manufacturing feasibility. The success of this project will form the
basis for a sustainable business, and further enable the development and
commercialization of many next-generation biomedical products and technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will prepare DZH formulations for commercial
translation as a reversible dermal filler. Currently, all reversible fillers in
the skin rejuvenation market are based on similar hyaluronic acid hydrogel
architectures that disappoint patients with their poor longevity. The DZH
architecture exhibits a unique set of properties that combine to represent a
real innovation: these include significantly enhanced longevity, high
biocompatibility, broadly tunable rheological properties such as viscosity and
cohesivity, and complete reversibility. The proposed R&amp;D activities are
designed to bridge the gap between this proof-of-concept and an attractive
initial product. These include (1) finalizing the formulation and developing
analytical methods and quality benchmarks prerequisite to in vivo testing and
manufacturing; (2) scaling the design and protocols for feasible GMP production,
(3) performing initial biodistribution and excretion experiments in mice; and
(4) conducting GLP preclinical toxicology studies based on ISO 10993 guidelines.
It is anticipated these efforts will establish the safest, longest-lasting
reversible filler available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.