* 1927156
* Dimensions US-South Africa: Convergent evolution across time and space: Evolutionary diversity and contemporary adaptation in New and Old World lizards
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Douglas Menke, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 896,778.00

Natural selection, the differential survival and reproduction of individuals
possessing different traits, is a major process driving evolutionary change. One
sign of natural selection is convergent evolution: when traits in different
species that occupy the same environment evolve in a similar matter. Although
convergence was once assumed to be rare, recent research demonstrates that
convergence occurs quite commonly. An outstanding question, however, is whether
closely related species and populations are more likely to converge, both in
their physical characteristics and in their genes, than more distant relatives.
Similarities in natural history and genetic makeup might predispose close
relatives to adapt in similar ways to similar circumstances. Moreover,
contemporary adaptation to the changed environmental circumstances resulting
from human actions is increasingly common. It is not known whether species are
adapting to anthropogenically induced selective pressures in the same way as
they have adapted to natural changes in the environment. This is an important
question because species' survival in the face of environmental change may
depend on evolving adaptations to new conditions. Conservationist scientists are
gaining interest in how to make evolutionary adaptation more likely. The
predictions about adaptation that will result from this research may be useful
in guiding actions to maximize that evolutionary potential of populations.
Students will be trained in international scientific research, and several
outreach activities will engage the general public in better understanding of
scientific issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will address these questions
by focusing on two groups of lizard, Caribbean Anolis lizards and South African
chameleons, and examining the degree to which convergence occurs at multiple
levels: between lizard groups separated by millions of years of evolutionary
divergence, within each of these clades, and among modern-day populations
adapting to human-altered environments. These questions will be investigated
both by examining anatomical characteristics, for example leg length and body
size, and by studying genetic differences among diverse groups of lizards. In
addition, comparisons across populations and species will help identify
candidate genes that may be responsible for the observed anatomical differences.
New gene editing methods will be used to directly test whether these genetic
changes actually produce the predicted anatomical changes. These studies will
play an important role in understanding the limits of natural selection in
shaping adaptation to future environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.