* 1927708
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: Resilience and adaptation to the effects of permafrost degradation induced coastal erosion
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Anne Jensen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,234,877.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperatures in the Arctic are rising
rapidly, and these warmer temperatures have caused permafrost, ground that
remains frozen for at least two consecutive years, to warm and thaw. Permafrost
coasts, which make up approximately 30% of the world's coastlines, are
experiencing accelerated erosion due to thawing. Erosion at some locations has
occurred at the rate of 16 m per year since 2007. Degradation of permafrost and
related coastal erosion damages coastal infrastructure and facilities across the
Arctic, impacting the economic prosperity and lives of its inhabitants. As
critical infrastructure becomes vulnerable to permafrost degradation and
erosion, residents are forced to abandon homes and entire communities must be
relocated. This diverts resources from other critical needs and disrupts social
networks and subsistence practices. This research addresses society's capacity
to adapt by analyzing interactions among the natural environment, social
systems, and the built environment, in a part of the Arctic where coastal
erosion due to permafrost degradation is taking place. This project co-produces
knowledge with Arctic indigenous communities and will share research outcomes to
inform decision-making with local communities and the public. The project
promotes NSF's initiative of Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (INCLUDES)
by involving local indigenous high school students in the collection of field
data, providing workshops in local communities demonstrating how science and
engineering can improve community well-being, and provides students and early-
career researchers with training and capacity-building opportunities in
convergent research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand the complex relationship between permafrost degradation and related
coastal erosion, civil infrastructure, and community well-being, including
social and cultural resilience. Results can be used to formulate a holistic and
predictive model that aids adaptation of social systems and the built
environment to the unprecedented environmental changes in the region. The
project consists of five research tasks with related research products: (1)
development of a thermal model with high spatial resolution (130 m) to evaluate
and predict the rate, extent, and mechanisms of permafrost degradation in the
next century and a maximum entropy principle model to estimate the future rate
of coastal and river bluff erosion and thermokarst development; (2) creation of
an infrastructure hazards map of the region experiencing the effects of
permafrost degradation and coastal erosion; (3) co-production of knowledge with
Arctic indigenous communities to identify and understand the most urgent issues
relating to permafrost degradation and coastal erosion and flooding, as well as
collecting and integrating local long-term observations of these phenomena by
local observers; (4) development of a quantitative assessment model of
sociodemographic resilience of communities to permafrost degradation,
demonstrating the impacts of infrastructure disruptions on the social resilience
and adaptation capacity of coastal communities; and (5) development of an agent-
based model (ABM) that can be used to adapt civil infrastructure and build the
social resilience of communities to future permafrost degradation and coastal
erosion. The project works with communities along the coastal region of Alaska
North Slope Borough (NSB) to develop and validate models, although results will
be of value to many coastal communities experiencing permafrost-induced coastal
erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.