* 1927250
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: RUI: Is it Rocket Science or Brain Science? Developing an Approach to Measuring Engineering Intuition
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Adam Carberry, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 09/30/2022
* USD 137,641.00

Engineers are tasked with designing, developing, and building solutions to
complex problems. By nature, their decisions can have critical consequences,
such as in the space shuttle Challenger disaster and the Boeing 737 Max 8 faulty
sensor incident. In both of these events, the vehicle was cleared to fly by an
engineer. Avoiding such engineering mistakes requires not only technical
knowledge but also the ability to rapidly assess whether a solution is feasible
and appropriate. The skill of engineering intuition (often referred to as a "gut
feeling") becomes increasingly important as engineers become further removed
from the problem-solving process. Today's engineers rely on sophisticated
software tools where the assumptions and computations leading to a solution are
hidden from the user. They must be able to evaluate whether a computer output is
reasonable or ridiculous. This intuition is thought to be developed through
professional experience but could also be acquired in the classroom as part of
the formal development of engineering expertise. No clear definition of
intuition or methods for identifying an individual's level of intuition exist
despite the well-documented importance of intuition in developing expertise. The
gap in knowledge and resources around engineering intuition limits educators as
there is no clear path on how to develop engineering intuition in the classroom.
A definition and means of measuring engineering intuition is needed to equip
engineering educators with the tools to create classroom activities that promote
intuition development as currently engineers must rely on variable experiences
and opportunities to gain intuition. Furthermore, building intuition has the
potential to foster student confidence, which disproportionately affects the
persistence and resilience of underrepresented minorities in engineering majors
and careers. The link between intuition, experience, and access to opportunity
can empower students to persist in engineering careers and narrow the existing
opportunity gaps in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project initially
defines engineering intuition as the ability to assess solution feasibility and
predict outcomes or options within an engineering scenario. The project will
begin by interviewing practicing expert engineers to determine the alignment of
their definition of intuition with ours and identify the constructs that
encompass engineering intuition. This study will use a mixed-methods approach to
provide qualitative insights into expert engineering intuition that can be
leveraged to create a quantitative instrument with acceptable validity and
reliability evidence to support further use by engineering scholars and
educators. Grounded in frameworks for expertise development such as the Dreyfus
model and Fuzz-Trace Theory, the project aims to answer the following research
questions: (1) What are practicing professional engineers' perceptions of
discipline-specific intuition and its use in the workplace?; (2) Where does
intuition manifest in expert engineering decision-making and problem-solving
processes?; (3) How does the motivation and identity of practicing professional
engineers relate to discipline-specific intuition?; and (4) What would an
instrument designed to validly and reliably measure engineering intuition look
like? The proposed research bridges the theory-to-practice gap to develop
engineering intuition by defining intuition and its relationship to other
constructs (e.g., motivation) and developing a procedure for measuring and
identifying how discipline-specific intuition is
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.