* 1927245
* EAGER: AI-DCL: Hybrid human algorithm predictions: balancing effort, accuracy, and perceived autonomy
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Mark Steyvers, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 293,923.00

Artificial intelligence algorithms are becoming an increasingly common component
in everyday decision-making scenarios. Such algorithms use medical data to
assist doctors in making diagnostic and treatment decisions, use sensor data to
assist drivers in operating vehicles, and use review data to make
recommendations for products to purchase and restaurants to visit. These systems
are often hybrid, with decisions influenced by a combination of an artificial
intelligence algorithm and a human decision-maker. For example, in one mode of
operation, a human makes each decision after taking into account input from the
algorithm. In another mode of operation, when human resources are limited (as in
medical diagnosis), a hybrid system can use the algorithm to make the majority
of routine decisions and allocate to a human decision-maker only those problems
that are most challenging to the algorithm. As these hybrid systems are being
increasingly used in critical decision-making tasks it is important to address
questions about the understanding and design of such systems. This project will
address a series of fundamental questions about hybrid decision-making systems
from the dual perspectives of algorithm development and cognitive models of
human reasoning and decision-making. For example, how can the overall
performance of a hybrid human-algorithm system be optimized when taking into
account limited human resources and potential trade-offs between human and
algorithmic skills? From a psychological perspective, does a perceived lack of
autonomy negatively affect human engagement and can systems be designed to
mitigate this? The project will develop new theories and methods for how humans
and algorithms can work together and the results will help produce more accurate
and more robust decision-making systems across a variety of areas such as
medicine, transportation, business, and consumer applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals the research project will bring
together prior threads of work from psychology, machine learning, and Bayesian
estimation. The project will consist of two closely-coupled components with a
common focus on modeling and understanding of prediction problems that are
handled by a combination of human and algorithmic expertise. The first component
will develop and evaluate different computational and statistical frameworks for
an algorithmic arbitrator that balances black-box predictions and human
expertise in large-scale classification tasks. The second component will build
on theories from human cognition and psychology to analyze joint algorithm-human
prediction performance, with explicit consideration of the effect of a human
dropping out and not continuing to work with the algorithm (e.g., due to a
perceived lack of autonomy). An extensive series of user studies, under a
variety of hybrid prediction scenarios and different decision allocation
methods, will be conducted during the project to support the development of new
cognitive insights and computational approaches for hybrid algorithm-human
prediction systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.