* 1927175
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: ICNet Global
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Mari Tye, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 9,000.00

1927351 (Jacobs), 1927170 (Mallick), 1927175 (Tye), 1927180 (Arroyo), 1927516
(Hayhoe), and 1927543 (Harvey). Changes in sea level, extreme rainfall, heat
extremes, and winter temperatures are already affecting the performance and
integrity of transportation infrastructure around the world. These changes have
serious ramifications for infrastructure safety, environmental sustainability,
economic vitality, mobility and system reliability, particularly for vulnerable
populations and urban locations. They also compromise resilience of the larger
interconnected physical, cyber, and social infrastructure networks. Increasing
resilience of transportation infrastructure to current and future weather and
climate extremes is a global challenge. The complexity of this challenge
requires a convergence approach to foster collaboration and innovation among
technically and socially diverse researchers and practitioners. To address this
challenge, this project will create a multi-institution ICNet Global Network of
Networks that unites domestic and international research and practice networks
to facilitate integrated engineering, climate science, and policy research that
can advance the development of resilient transportation infrastructure and
systems. The project's PIs and key collaborators represent networks based in
Korea, Europe, the United Kingdom, and the United States that have the maturity,
size, complementary foci, and bandwidth necessary to jumpstart this catalytic
level network of networks. ICNet Global will link researchers at the forefront
of scientific, engineering, and policy research frontiers, drawing expertise
from many disciplines and nations to share and enhance best practices for
transportation resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICNet Global's long-term mission
is to prepare the world's existing and future transportation infrastructure for
a changing climate. To that end, ICNet Global will: (1) build a network of
existing research networks that are tackling the challenges climate change poses
to transportation infrastructure; (2) establish a common base-level knowledge,
capacity, and vision to support the convergence of novel and diverse ideas,
approaches, and technologies for creating climate resilient transportation
infrastructure; and (3) grow the next generation of critical and diverse
thinkers with the expertise to address and solve climate-related infrastructure
challenges. Key activities for achieving these goals include network mapping and
engagement (both in-person and virtual); convergence and training webinars;
education and training material collation; and next generation mentoring. ICNet
Global will link the institutional networks needed to accelerate and advance
methods for making global transportation infrastructure resilient to a changing
climate. It will also advance the science of resilient infrastructure design and
will bring together different research and practice communities (e.g., climate
scientists, engineers, policy makers) to develop a new global community of
research and practice capable of engaging in community-based participatory
research. By creating a space to connect, share information and learn from one
another, ICNet Global will advance innovation in the field of resilient
infrastructure design while helping to grow and sustain individual participating
networks. The knowledge-linking strategies explored through ICNet Global will
build conduits among researchers and practitioners responsible for
transportation infrastructure standards and policies, and will help identify
approaches transferable to other countries and challenges. ICNet Global will
work with its partners' established diversity programs, such as those at the
National Center for Atmospheric Research, to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups as it advances the next generation of researchers. ICNet
Global will also provide opportunities for, and already reflects in its
leadership and members, early career scholars and women in engineering and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. This project is co-funded by the Environmental Sustainability
(ENG/CBET) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.