* 1927282
* Collaborative research:  RoL:  Using reaction norms to link genomic and phenotypic variation with regional-scale population responses to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Peter Adler, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,096,023.00

Rapid environmental changes, such as rising temperatures and nitrogen pollution,
can have dramatic impacts on plant and animal species important to society.
Endangered species may be driven extinct, damaging invasive species might
increase in distribution and abundance, and changes in the production of timber
or forage species can alter rural economies. To help natural resource managers
make good decisions, biologists predict the effect of environmental change on
important species using population models. However, these predictions are rarely
tested against observations. As a result, the ability of population models to
make accurate forecasts for large regions is unknown. The goal of this project
is to build a state-of-the-art population model and rigorously test its
predictions against independent observations. The results will establish a
benchmark for the current predictive ability of population models, while also
identifying the kind of information required to make good predictions. For
example, is it possible to make a skillful forecast without understanding
genetic differences between individuals from different locations or accounting
for interactions between the study species and its competitors? Graduate
students and postdoctoral scientists will be invited to workshops for training
in advanced statistical and population modeling techniques. To educate the
public about the impacts of invasive species and environmental change,
interactive exhibits will be installed at three museums and botanical
gardens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on the reaction
norm, a quantitative description of how an organism's performance depends on the
environment. Success will require new advances to determine the relative
importance of processes operating at gene, individual, and community levels in
shaping reaction norms and regional population dynamics. The investigators will
integrate DNA sequencing, common environment experiments, a regional network of
distributed experiments across abiotic gradients, and new statistical techniques
to answer the following questions: 1) What processes influencing reaction norms
must we understand to predict impacts of environmental change on regional-scale
population dynamics? 2) What is the magnitude of intraspecific variation in
reaction norms, and to what extent does it reflect local adaptation vs. other
processes? 3) How do phenology and physiology interact to determine demographic
responses to weather? 4) How do abiotic conditions and competitive environment
combine to influence demographic rates? The focal species is the invasive grass
Bromus tectorum, which has degraded millions of acres of sagebrush steppe across
the western US. Predictions about future changes in B. tectorum abundance across
the region, and resulting changes in fire regimes, will help decision-makers
prioritize future investments in conservation and
restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.