* 1927614
* International Symposium on Multi-Robot and Multi-Agent Systems (MRS 2019) Student Travel Awards
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Jingjin Yu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 06/30/2020
* USD 12,853.00

The funds will support student attendance of the two-day single-track MRS 2019
conference and associated mentoring activities. The conference will be held in
New Brunswick, NJ, USA, between August 22nd and August 23rd in 2019. The
conference will be hosted on the campus of Rutgers, the State University of New
Jersey. The proposal requests funding support to help approximately 15 U.S.
students to attend the MRS 2019 conference. Participation in the conference will
provide motivation and excitement for graduate students and advanced
undergraduate students to continue their research journey in multi-robot and
multi-agent systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this Student Travel
Grant Proposal is to make it possible for U.S. students to attend the
conference, present their work, and forge connections with colleagues from
around the world. In addition to paper presentations, MRS 2019 will feature 4?6
keynote presentations by internationally renowned roboticists. These
presentations will provide succinct, first-hand information on historical
perspectives, current state-of-the-art, and future trends of multi- robot and
multi-agent systems, which are hard to come by otherwise. The overall goal of
the multi-robot meeting closely matches the core Robust Intelligence program and
cross cutting programs like the National Robotics Initiative (NRI 2.0). In
particular, the main theme of MRS, which focuses on multi-robot and multi-agent
systems, coincides with the collaborative robotics theme of NRI
2.0.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.