* 1927644
* NNA Track 2: Developing Arctic village resilience to changes in the water cycle, river systems, and coasts
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* James Temte, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 249,993.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is responding rapidly to
global climate change, which is driving Arctic temperature increases at twice
the rate of the rest of the planet. Sea ice is retreating, permafrost is
thawing, sea level is rising, and the timing of precipitation cycles in rain and
snow are changing. As the Arctic continues to warm, it is essential that
scientists and Arctic residents develop plans that holistically consider how
communities might adapt to changes in their physical world.This new warmer
Arctic presents challenges to Arctic peoples and ecosystems as traditional ways
of life are altered. Adaptation requires knowledge of how, and at what rate, the
Arctic is changing. To do so, this project will deepen existing partnerships
with Arctic people in western coastal Alaska through the Alaska Native Tribal
Health Council (ANTHC) and to collaborate with communities at risk. The research
will grow a comprehensive view of community needs and prepare community members
for responding to three important areas of concern to society: the impact of a
changing climate on municipal water use; the impacts of coastal erosion and
river derived sediment delivery to harbor facilities, infrastructure, and
health; and the future of access to abundant and clean community water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning process will set the foundation
for a larger project in the future. While the content and intellectual merit of
this future science plan is purposefully not set given the need for community
planning and dialogue, it is expected that the three focus areas will yield
hypotheses and science goals that will answer important open science questions,
while at the same time serving local communities and other stakeholders looking
to the future. This planning process will identify new and exciting science
questions as conceived by Arctic residents based on their own knowledge and
observations. The approach is to hold four hub workshops in Alaska (2 in Bethel;
2 in Kotzebue) allowing local residents to express their concerns and desired
science goals. The researchers will invite residents and other stakeholders from
as many as 30 regional villages and subsistence camps to engage with the
researchers to identify key concerns, threats and opportunities for resilience.
The researchers will then use the intersection of societal needs and the
scientific method to develop an integrated plan that both addresses emerging
issues but also serves to build capacity (skills, knowledge, tools, equipment)
in the hubs and villages as the Arctic continues to change in the coming
decades. This phase one planning period will include direct training and support
of multiple community members from each village, especially young people,
empowering them to take charge of their own science as they navigate their own
New Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.