* 1927218
* Research Initiation: Effects of High Impact Engagement Activities at Land Grant Universities on Engineering Student Participation, Persistence, and Success
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Candis Claiborn, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 217,071.00

The engineering profession is crucial to the innovation economy. Yet despite the
career opportunities it offers, a high proportion of undergraduate students that
enter engineering colleges do not complete an engineering degree. Student
perseverance, retention and graduation rates remain grand challenges in
engineering education, especially among women, underrepresented minority group
members, and nontraditional students. Although many factors contribute to
student success, there is research evidence suggesting that students are more
likely to persist and be successful when they are involved in "high impact
engagement activities." These include (but are not limited to) undergraduate
research, entrepreneurship programs, study abroad programs, service learning
opportunities, and creative, collaborative experiences. Despite this evidence,
only a fraction of engineering students take advantage of these opportunities
which remain largely voluntary and potentially inaccessible for diverse or
nontraditional students. The long-term goal of this research is to broaden the
effects of high-impact engagement activities on student perseverance and student
success among engineering undergraduate students, including women,
underrepresented minority group members, and nontraditional students. The
objectives of this project are to: (1) identify those factors that affect
engineering student participation in high impact engagement activities; (2)
examine how to broaden the participation in such activities through improved
student awareness and access across gender, racial, ethnic, age, and socio-
economic boundaries; and (3) build engineering education research capacity at
Washington State University in order to better respond to the engineering
profession's current and emerging needs for an innovative and inclusive
workforce. The products of this research will include: (1) a better
understanding of the relationships, if any, between participation in high impact
engagement activities and engineering student perseverance and success,
including specifically among diverse or nontraditional students, as well as the
factors affecting student participation (e.g., lack of awareness/interest, time
constraints, financial or social/family constraints); and (2) evidence-based
recommendations on how to make high impact engagement activities more
accessible, especially to nontraditional students, women, and underrepresented
minority group members. These results will be disseminated in the form of a
report and through publications in peer-reviewed higher education journals and
engineering conference proceedings. The third product will be the establishment
of an active and sustained engineering education research program partnership
between Washington State University, which does not have a formal engineering
education program, and Utah State University, which does have a formal
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically contribute new
understandings of the current status of student participation in high impact
engagement activities in rural, land grant settings. Because there is limited
research on engineering (and computer science) undergraduate education within
rural land-grant university settings, this work is potentially transformative,
as it could add new understanding about this less-well researched setting. To
achieve these goals, the project will examine, through surveys and focus group
interviews, the following: (1) to what extent engineering and computer science
students at two rural, land grant universities participate in high impact
engagement activities; (2) how participation in these activities is correlated
to student outcomes; (3) what factors (i.e., personal, social, institutional,
financial, etc.) affect student awareness, interest, and participation among
engineering and computer science students in these activities, specifically at
rural, land grant universities; and (4) how individual factors (i.e., personal,
social, institutional, financial, etc.) influence student awareness, interest,
and participation rates. A two-phase, explanatory, sequential, mixed-methods
research design will be used. Analysis of qualitative (focus group interviews)
and quantitative (survey) data will result in new understandings concerning ways
to increase participation of engineering and computer science students in high
impact engagement activities, within rural, land grant, public university
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.