* 1927845
* NNA Track 1: Innovations in Energy Technologies and Empowerment in Arctic Fishing Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Mary Albert, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,616,817.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cold Arctic conditions, twenty-four-hour
summer sunlight combined with twenty-four-hour winter darkness, and a frozen
ocean coastline for much of the year are threatening survival of Arctic
communities. These communities currently rely entirely on expensive fossil fuels
for their energy needs. The joint impacts of energy cost, changes in fisheries
and the environment, and a young self-rule national government are intertwined
in ways that are currently threatening the culture and lifestyles of people who
have long called the region home. This project discovers sustainable
technological innovations and identifies an achievable and affordable pathway to
the future for small communities in a changing Arctic. The research identifies,
creates, tests, and demonstrates cutting-edge and next-generation energy
technology systems suited to cold, harsh Arctic conditions, including, for
example, next-generation batteries, solar and wind technologies for polar
conditions, and ocean-linked heat pumps. The discoveries will be published so
that the findings will be widely available. Educational activities with the
youth and schools in the Arctic will provide inquiry-based, hands-on activities
for learning about renewable energy systems that are also useful in schools in
the U.S. The learning activities will contribute to self-confidence needed by
students to pursue community or four-year college programs for technology-
oriented careers. Sustainable technological solutions will also benefit remote
communities in the mid-latitudes. Availability of affordable renewable energy
will enable cultural continuity, enhance health and safety, and strengthen
community resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An iterative, systems-based approach
that is driven by stakeholder values and objectives is being used to define
energy and fishery-related research needs faced by Arctic communities who rely
on fishing for their food and income. Initiated by an invitation from local
fishers to a Dartmouth professor, this project represents stakeholder-driven
science with knowledge co-generation between community members and academics.
Research by faculty, graduate and undergraduate students in this project will
produce mission-relevant insights and prototypes and will enable identification
of robust and resilient adaptation strategies. Engineers, scientists, students,
hunter-fishers, utility managers, local government representatives, and citizens
will collaborate to address challenging interdisciplinary problems in this
region where planning and adaptation to environmental change is not already in
place. Issues of adaptation will be pursued in ways that embrace energy self-
reliance, identify an achievable and sustainable pathway to a resilient future,
and contribute to capacity-building for engineering in changing
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.