* 1927469
* AccelNet: Catalyzing international convergence research networks to transform human-computer relationships for the future of work
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Emily Moore, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 07/31/2024
* USD 665,353.00

The US workforce is changing, while technology is evolving at a rapid pace. The
US workforce is shifting to include greater minority diversity and older
workers, consistent with the changing demographics of the country. More workers
are engaging in work remotely and working in distributed groups, workplace tasks
are changing, and there is increasing reliance on technology to support work
efforts. As technology evolves, there are many under-explored opportunities for
new technologies to restructure workplaces and work tasks to support an
increasingly diverse population in developing new skills and accomplishing more
complex tasks with greater ease and fulfillment than ever before. This AccelNet
project has the goal of accelerating scientific discovery to benefit the US
workforce. In creating the Human-Computer Relationships at Work (HCR@W) network-
of-networks the PI team will bring together international member networks
including networks advancing inclusive technologies designed to support people
with diverse needs, advanced technologies designed for highly sophisticated
tasks, and educational technologies designed to support the learning of new
knowledge and skills. They will establish strong connections across disciplines
through student and researcher Fellows and Scholar-in-Residence programs, the
collective creation of target scenarios, and creating and testing prototypes of
novel interactions and contexts for work and workforce preparation in which
advanced human-computer relationships are central.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
Catalytic Accelnet project, the PI-team engages in a facilitated process of
reflection to identify common barriers and develop a set of community-wide
target scenarios to create a shared strategic vision and define critical
research priorities. The participants in this network-of-networks advance these
research priorities through collaboration at a series of conference workshops
and a Scholars-in-Residence program. At conference workshops, participants
gather to collaboratively address key topics identified as necessary for
advancements. Through the Scholars-in-Residence program, graduate students,
postdocs, and early career researchers cross international and disciplinary
borders on extended research visits to develop and test ideas that emerge from
network-of-network collaborations. Additionally, a facilitated online peer
mentoring program provides professional development opportunities for Fellows,
supporting the development of a strong social network and advancing knowledge of
convergence research and network leadership. Utilizing evidence-based practices
of network leadership and fair collaboration coupled with social network
analysis methods, the PI team tracks the growing network-of-networks, identify
further opportunities for alignment, and address network gaps and challenges.
Outcomes will include new international collaborations advancing research for
the future workforce, and novel technologies and human-computer interfaces that
are inclusive to the full spectrum of human diversity and capable of supporting
humans in learning and conducting complex work. Additionally, this project
advances the community's knowledge of effective network-of-network leadership
practices and professional development of network leadership and convergence
research for students, postdocs, and early-career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts. This project was co-funded by the Dynamics,
Control and Systems Diagnostics program (ENG/CMMI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.