* 1927827
* NNA Track 1: Pursuing Opportunities for Long-term Arctic Resilience for Infrastructure and Society (POLARIS)
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Elbert Howe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 3,018,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alaskan coastal Indigenous communities
face severe, urgent, and complex social and infrastructural challenges resulting
from environmental changes. Coastlines are degrading and this impacts
infrastructure that communities use on a daily basis, changing how people access
and hunt for food and other natural resources and conduct their lives. The
magnitude and significance of impacts are unclear as is how local communities
will respond to resulting disruptions and disasters. A major problem facing
researchers, stakeholders, and policymakers in addressing these issues is that
existing research is piecemeal. The whole picture of coastal communities is not
well understood, and ways to address problems they face are not as effective as
they could be. A changing environment drives changes to the populations of
Alaskan coastal Indigenous communities due to families and individuals
relocating either seasonally or permanently, which complicates efforts to
understand the relationship between environmental changes and society. These
challenges demand a robust, integrated, and convergent research platform to
identify the complexities of the issues and the ways communities can respond.
The POLARIS (Pursuing Opportunities for Long-term Arctic Resilience for
Infrastructure and Society) project supplies just that kind of research platform
for analyzing current and future needs in order to create resilient communities
in the face of a changing environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The POLARIS project
has identified three convergent research pillars to help communities adapt:
environmental hotspots of disruption to communities and infrastructure, food in
complex adaptive systems, and migration and community relocation. These pillars
are interwoven with five component processes: education, outreach, local
community engagement, international comparison and collaboration, and
evaluation. Research integrates the pillars where system responses and
uncertainties are predicted under several socio-environmental scenarios.
Researchers from a variety of fields are coming together with local community
members to conduct the research. The data and analysis created through surveying
local community members, modeling environmental changes, and conducting economic
research inform local, state, and national decision makers and leaders about how
to address infrastructure and social needs in the face of environmental changes.
In addition to the research and community focus of the project, POLARIS is
training junior researchers, graduate students, and undergraduate students in
interdisciplinary research as they participate in work across the pillars and
five components. This helps ensure that the rising generation of researchers is
well prepared to continue the crucial work to address the issues that the
project identifies well past its conclusion. In addition, local educators are
working with local communities to develop classroom tools to engage students in
K-12 settings. This integrated research project will enable communities to
become more resilient with both stronger societies, civic culture, and improved
infrastructure needed as the new Arctic continues to
emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this award is being provided by the
NSF Research Traineeship Program (NRT), reflecting the project's alignment with
the broader goals of interdisciplinary graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.