* 1927021
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Throughput Combinatorial Polymer Bioconjugates Synthesis and Application in Biocatalysis
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Antonina Simakova, BioHybrid Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2022
* USD 742,796.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project includes advancement of the field of white
biotechnology, which utilizes enzymes to create valuable industrial products. As
biological molecules, enzymes are more difficult to manipulate than conventional
chemicals and often need more extensive development before they can be adapted
to industrial or pharmaceutical manufacturing. This SBIR project will
demonstrate how enzymes' performance can be improved using stabilization with
special synthetic materials known as polymers. Enzymes are characterized by
precise, unique structure and function, which is in turn essential for their
role in catalysis of complex chemical reactions. Synthetic polymers, on the
other hand, despite being less precisely structured, can be rationally designed
to withstand or respond to chemical, thermal or biological conditions. The
synergistic fusion of enzymes and synthetic polymers results in an advanced
enzyme with improved chemical properties, leading to new manufacturing processes
for valuable products such as chemicals, biofuels, and pharmaceuticals; these
processes should require less energy, utilize fewer hazardous reagents, and
generate less waste. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes
to develop a combinatorial synthesis device that can feed high-throughput
screening of enzyme-polymer conjugates with desired properties (for instance,
temperature, pH- or organic solvent stability). To date, only low-throughput
synthesis and characterization methods have been applied to the preparation of
enzyme-polymer conjugates, limiting development to only few types of polymer
modification per protein and depending on stochastic guesswork to select the
variants tested. Thus, in order to fully benefit from the diverse set of
polymers currently available on the market, it is important to develop methods
to scale the identification of optimally performing enzyme-polymer conjugates.
This will be achieved through combination of high-throughput synthesis of
enzyme-polymer conjugates and high-throughput screening of attained properties.
The target application of the proposed research is focused on pharmaceutical
biocatalysis. Application of a high-throughput method will not only result in
faster research and development cycles, but also will accelerate our development
of fundamental knowledge of identifying protein properties that can be achieved
through polymer modification, thereby establishing this method for industrial
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.