* 1927040
* SBIR Phase II:  Improving Indoor Air Quality using a Biosilica Based Functional Paint &amp; Coatings Photocatalyst
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Nicholas Day, Diatomix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,167,050.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that it will provide a next-generation
commercial method of removing volatile organic contaminants (VOCs) such as
benzene, formaldehyde and methylene chloride from indoor air. These compounds
are potential carcinogens and also exacerbate allergies, asthma, and other
respiratory problems. Indoor air quality is generally 5 times worse than outdoor
air quality, and VOCs are prevalent indoors because they are emitted from
carpets, adhesives, plastic products, typical household chemical cleaners and
electronics. Children are especially sensitive to VOCs, and indoor environments
pose greater health risks because of the time spent indoors. Alleviating the
daily discomfort and financial burdens, estimated at around $50 billion annually
in the U.S., posed by environmental air pollutants such as VOCs can
significantly improve human health and comfort. The development and commercial
deployment of this new technology will also provide enhanced scientific
understanding of manufacturing for nanotechnologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus on
validating the ability of a biosilica-based photocatalyst to actively and
continuously improve indoor air quality by reducing total VOCs found in indoor
environments when the photocatalyst is added to floor and carpet coatings. VOCs
are emitted as gases from certain solids and liquids, and they include chemicals
potentially causing short- and long-term adverse health effects--especially
indoors, where concentrations may be up to ten times higher than outdoors. This
project will test the performance of this unique additive when applied to floor
and carpet coating systems to reduce total VOCs and will validate manufacturing
processes to achieve scale-up quantities needed for commercial production. The
technology works by first adsorbing VOCs and then degrading them to CO2 and H2O.
Coated surfaces in test chambers simulating a typical indoor environment will be
evaluated via continuous monitoring of airborne pollutants. It is anticipated
that the ultimate deliverables of this project would include validation of a
VOC-degrading additive for multiple products and advanced knowledge of nano-
manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.