* 1927069
* I-Corps: Information System for Primary Care Management
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,12/31/2019
* Dwight Streit, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
the routine clinic-based diagnosis and treatment of patients with cognitive
impairment, including various types of dementia. Given the aging of U.S.
populations, and the prevalence of dementia in elderly patients, patients with
cognitive impairment will be an increasing management problem in healthcare
systems. This project's information system will allow primary care providers to
manage complex cognitively impaired cases without needing a referral to
specialists, and without needing additional provider time with patients. Primary
care providers generally manage simple cases of mild cognitive impairment, and
refer more complex cases to neurologists, neuropsychologists, and geriatric
specialists, which can cause economic and patient-care problems. Specialty care
for cognitively impaired individuals can also be sparse outside of major
metropolitan areas, which causes serious challenges to the equitable delivery of
health care for rural and underserved communities. Primary care providers would
potentially benefit with increased revenue and better care of the patients.
Patients would potentially benefit from their care being managed by fewer
physicians, and have more rapid access to diagnosis and treatment. Society will
potentially benefit from lower population-health costs and improved healthcare
outcomes.

This I-Corps project proposes to develop an information system to manage
patients with cognitive impairment by providing primary care providers with an
integrated set of evidence-based screening, diagnostic, treatment and monitoring
modules. These modules will include a diagnostic test for cognitive impairment
based upon computer-analyzed electroencephalography (EEG) data using a new
technique based upon preliminary results. Because of its low cost, rapidity, and
non-invasive nature, EEG has great promise as an office-based clinical test for
brain diseases. However, to date, standard techniques of EEG analysis have not
been accurate enough for routine clinical use. Similarly, currently, there are
no tests that are FDA-approved for assessing cognitive impairments associated
with brain diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease. Another strong component of
this envisioned information management system will be its recommendation of care
plans personalized for each patient based on artificial intelligence-based
models. In addition, the information management software will have the ability
to connect the patient to other local services that are often needed by patients
with dementia and other brain diseases.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.