* 1927275
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: International Collaboration to Accelerate Research in  Robotic Surgery
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2025
* Gregory Fischer, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 08/31/2025
* USD 593,706.00

Robotic surgery offers the potential to minimize surgeon's overuse injuries,
promote faster, safer and lower-cost surgeries and to enable new approaches to
special surgical challenges. This requires an advanced, reliable and cooperative
man-machine interface that draws upon the relative strengths of each.
Fundamental knowledge about how best to capture the surgeon's expertise and
judgement and the machine's capabilities and shortcomings will drive these
advances. Furthermore, to change the practice of medicine, these data and
software must be broadly shared, and surgeons must be trained in the new
surgical model. This project will develop a shared knowledge base to enable
artificial intelligence (AI) to improve surgical practice. It will foster
international collaborations to prepare the next generation of researchers on
the conduct of robotic surgery and of international research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wide adoption of robotics in surgery,
especially the da Vinci robot for minimally-invasive surgery, may make possible
the use of AI to enhance surgical outcomes. However, no single nation can obtain
enough data to represent all types of surgery or to perform the extensive
testing that would be needed to validate these data. The goal of this AccelNet
project is to advance research in data-driven methods to capture data on the
surgical environment and surgical interventions to enable new systems that
assist the surgeon or even execute tasks autonomously. This effort links
multiple research networks that have already formed around shared, open research
platforms for medical robotics research, exemplified by (but not restricted to)
the da Vinci Research Kit (dVRK) and the Raven II surgical robot, which together
are installed at more than 50 institutions worldwide. Activities for
coordination and dissemination include workshops and tutorials, exchange of
personnel, highly-focused surgical robotics challenges, and the development of
data and software to be shared with the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts. This project was co-funded by the
Dynamics, Control and Systems Diagnostics program
(ENG/CMMI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.