* 1927197
* Microscale Mechanics of Temporomandibular Joint Articular Cartilage
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Itai Cohen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 07/31/2023
* USD 442,527.00

The mechanical requirements for the cartilage that lines the jaw - known as the
temporomandibular joint or TMJ - are particularly demanding. During chewing and
grinding, this tissue experiences repetitive loading with high levels of
compression and sliding. As a result, this cartilage fails quite frequently, as
is evidenced by the fact that 4-7 percent of the population of the United States
experiences TMJ disorders. Notably, the structure of the cartilage in this joint
is quite different from other joints, and how the structure of this tissue
relates to its mechanical function is not well understood. The long term goal of
this project is to understand the how mechanical properties of the articular
cartilage of the TMJ relate to the microstructure and composition of the tissue
in both health and disease. Such knowledge will increase understanding of how
the cartilage of the TMJ fails in individuals with TMJ disorders. The techniques
developed in this research will be incorporated into laboratory courses taken by
engineering and biology students, which will enable them to apply this approach
to a wide variety of tissues and organisms. Additionally, the PIs will develop
and implement courses and seminars on scientific communication for graduate
students, with direct outreach to students from under-represented populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a state-of-the-art technique that
enables measurement of the mechanical properties of cartilage to a high level of
spatial resolution while relating of these properties to the local composition
of the tissue. Imaging techniques include confocal elastography, paloarimetry,
and FTIR microscopy. Using this combination of mechanical testing and imaging
methods, this project will characterize the spatial, functional, and structural
basis of the mechanical properties of the TMJ. This will be include linear and
non-linear properties for both compression and shear loading based on surface
location, depth, and direction of shear force during normal loading scenarios.
The mechanical properties will be correlated via location with local
concentrations of collagen and aggrecan. Successful completion of this project
will provide foundational understanding of the microstructural basis for the
mechanics of cartilage from the TMJ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.