* 1927232
* Research Initiative: A Holistic Cross-Disciplinary Project Experience as a Platform to Advance the Professional Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Julia Fraustino, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 04/30/2022
* USD 199,997.00

To remain a world economic leader, the U.S. must develop an engineering
workforce who are more competent in their problem-solving skills considering
social dimensions of problems we face as a society. Today's engineering
graduates are well prepared in the technical aspects of the engineering. To
address the complex, multi-faceted problems facing the world today, engineers
also need to develop a wide range of nontechnical skills and work effectively in
multidisciplinary teams. This new breed of engineer needs to not only be a
problem solver, but also a problem definer, leading multidisciplinary teams of
professionals in setting agendas for future engineering grand challenges. This
project seeks to understand professional formation of engineering students and
equip engineering faculty with social science research expertise that will
enable them to address current w in the engineering curriculum. A cross-
disciplinary experience for engineering undergraduates is developed to solve a
contemporary engineering problem and to study the professional formation of
engineers. In this way, engineering students expand the problem-solving toolbox
beyond the realm of traditional engineering through a collaborative exchange
with social science disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;A Holistic Engineering Project
Course exposes students to global issues, broadens their outlook, increases
their professional skillsets, and can serve as a platform of future engineering
education that responds to engineering challenges and expectations of future
engineering graduates. A Cross-Disciplinary Team Learning model is designed to
assess the professional formation of engineers. Diverse sets of quantitative and
qualitative empirical data are collected and analyzed to validate the
theoretical model, and to assess the value of the Holistic Engineering Project
Course in the professional formation of engineers. The overarching research
questions are: (1) How effective is a cross-disciplinary open-ended problem-
based experience in the formation of future engineers and in preparing engineers
to address 21st century challenges we face as a society? (2) How effective is
the open-ended problem-based experience as a platform for instructing
engineering faculty in social science research methods? This research informs
engineering educators on much-needed understanding of effectiveness of cross-
disciplinary courses in engineering curriculum. Research findings on
professional formation through the Holistic Engineering Project Course can be
shared throughout West Virginia University and disseminated through conference
and journal articles to encourage other engineering faculty to use social
science research skills to expand their pedagogical approaches. In addition,
this holistic course approach provides a compelling opportunity to engineering
educators around the country to rethink the traditional approach to engineering
capstone experiences. The proposed project is expected to impact the engineering
PIs, who benefit from the guidance of faculty mentors in social science methods
and approaches. Through collaboration with different student
groups/organizations and department academic advisory board, underrepresented
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics students (e.g., minority,
women, first-generation college students from rural West Virginia) are
identified and recruited to participate in the capstone offerings. The research
contributes to the NSF?s Research Initiation in Engineering Formation program by
conducting research on the professional formation of engineers that introduce
three engineering faculty to social science research methods and allow them to
further extend engineering education studies in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.