* 1927325
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: Sustainable Capture and Conversion of CO2 to Chemicals and Fuels using Renewable Electrons (SCO2RE)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Jeffrey Reimer, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

Climate change driven by high accumulations of greenhouse gases such as CO2 in
the Earth's atmosphere threatens the sustainability of global societies. Carbon
capture, utilization, and storage (CCUS) is one of the technology areas that
could provide significant benefits in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, while
improving energy security and creating new opportunities for clean economic
growth. AccelNet-Sustainable Capture and Conversion of CO2 to Chemicals and
Fuels using Renewable Electrons (SCO2RE) will facilitate transformative
international research collaborations and exchange in CO2 capture and conversion
that effectively cross the boundaries of the natural sciences, engineering, and
the social and economic sciences. SCO2RE activities also include extensive
educational and training to prepare a US workforce with strong scientific and
engineering skills and a holistic understanding of carbon capture-related
issues. Participating members of SCO2RE include researchers across research
networks in the United States, United Kingdom, China, Switzerland, and South
Korea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AccelNet-SCO2RE targets to replace piecemeal,
individual efforts with a comprehensive international partnership-based
initiative addressing the scientific, engineering, economic, and public policy
challenges that currently inhibit the effective implementation of CO2 capture
and conversion technologies and the creation of a sustainable carbon cycle. The
links among research networks from a wide range of disciplines and expertise
will advance the development of transformative solutions to CO2 capture and
conversion to chemicals, fuels, and materials using renewable energy. Studies on
specific materials, reactions, and system components will focus on gaps in
research, such as novel materials for combined CO2 capture and conversion,
catalysis for effective CO2 activation and H2 generation. Systems engineering
studies will examine pathways to a balanced carbon cycle, and studies in
economics and public policy will ensure that science and engineering efforts
take into account these important aspects of developing the carbon capture and
conversion infrastructure. SOO2RE's activities will include workshops, webinars,
and Idea Tournaments designed to promote cross-disciplinary creative thinking.
SCO2RE's professional development and training program will include a
comprehensive educational plan targeted to increase the diversity of students
working in this area by leveraging established partnerships within universities
in different global regions. This international network-of-networks will develop
more effective research networks via student exchanges and joint-advising and
mentoring. Existing collaboration with industrial partners will also be extended
to other networks to accelerate the deployment of the developed technologies and
to provide additional training opportunities to students and early-career
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International Network-
to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the
process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. This project is co-funded by the Environmental Sustainability
(ENG/CBET) program as well as the CBET Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.