* 1927470
* Symposium:  Building Bridges from Genome to Phenome: Molecules, Methods and Models, Austin, TX; January 3-7, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Jonathon Stillman, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 14,993.00

This award will support a symposium, "Building Bridges from Genome to Phenome:
Molecules, Methods and Models," at the Annual Meeting of the Society for
Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) meeting in Austin, Texas, Jan. 3-7,
2020. The oral and poster presentations and related activities will cover a
broad range of scientific efforts to understand how genes can shape species-
specific characteristics while also giving rise to individual variation.
Understanding the mechanistic basis by which genes give rise to both stability
and variation in phenotypes is one of the Grand Challenges articulated by NSF.
Scientists in many disciplines are taking a wide variety of approaches to
dissect the mechanistic bases by which genes give rise to phenotypes, called
genome-to-phenome studies. The goal of this Symposium will be to build
connections among the most successful of these research efforts, as well as to
identify key gaps and future needs to accelerate and facilitate this critical
area of research. Activities of the Building Bridges Symposium are designed to
encourage and support presentations and participation by established and new
investigators, as well as postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate researchers
representing diversity in gender and ethnicity, and with expertise in the wide
range of disciplines represented within SICB. Taken together, the Symposium
activities aim to facilitate rapid and insightful progress toward understanding
the processes underlying constancy and variation, making it possible for species
to be resilient in a changing world. Presentations from the Symposium, and a
summary paper resulting from the Symposium and associated activities, will be
widely disseminated via publication in the SICB
journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Symposium is organized by members of the NSF-
supported Animal Genome-to-Phenome Research Coordination Network (AG2P RCN),
which was established five years ago. The AG2P RCN's first symposium and policy
workshop were conducted at the 2016 SICB Meeting. The white paper resulting from
that workshop emphasized the need to standardize and lower the barriers for
analysis of transcriptomic data, so that scientists from many disciplines and
research environments could develop consensus approaches for the "taking-off
point" for linking genomic with phenotypic diversity. Since 2016, there has been
a huge proliferation of experimental organisms as well as of large and complex
datasets describing various levels of biological organization, all aiming to
elucidate aspects of the genome-to-phenome framework. The 2020 Building Bridges
Symposium aims to identify and bridge gaps in this framework and the most
promising future directions for genome-to-phenome research. In addition to oral
and poster presentations, the Symposium includes an introductory session to
initiate exchange of ideas and contact information, (2) a Twitter feed to gather
comments from SICB members regarding major barriers to integrating data across
disciplines, levels of organization and models, and (3) a policy workshop to
outline a white paper identifying major gaps, key barriers and leading edges in
the field of genome-to-phenome research. The Symposium and related activities
will use an interdisciplinary collaborative model that will provide meaningful
professional and scientific development opportunities as well as formal and
informal opportunities for participants to network with each other across
disciplines, gender, ethnicity, and professional ranks. All presentations in the
Symposium will be published in the SICB journal and thereby will be widely
disseminated and have abroader impact on the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference is being co-funded by the Integrative Ecological Physiology and
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Programs within NSF-BIO-Integrative
Organismal Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.