* 1927290
* Collaborative Research/Research Initiation: What Practice Makes Perfect
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Haiyan Bai, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 94,956.00

Practice plays an important role in developing useful abilities for almost any
undertaking. Although practice has been studied extensively in competitive
sports and musical performance, it is understudied within engineering education.
With advancements in training and practice strategies, athletes and musicians
have kept setting new records. The gold standard for practice has been
discovered as "deliberate practice" which puts great emphasis on practice
specificity. To achieve superior performance, elite performers must practice
with tailored drills focused on specific skill deficiencies just as how they
practiced as beginners to gain rapid progress. In contrast, engineering students
rarely practice with such specificity. For example, students usually practice
with textbook problems which might exceed their current skill level. Such
practice will result in no or little progress and reduced confidence. It is
critical to engage students with effective practice to enhance learning
efficiency. The proposed study will examine the effectiveness of tailored
practice strategies in the gateway engineering mechanics courses (i.e., Statics
and Dynamics) which have a high impact on engineering student retention. Special
focus will be given to exploring what types of deliberate practice can help
students more effectively in the initial learning stage as well as in the later
retention phase. Additionally, this research initiation will also investigate
practice strategies which benefit engineering faculty in acquiring knowledge and
skills for conducting engineering education research. Findings and insights
gained from this research will expand the community of engineering education
researchers and expedite the adoption of evidence-based instructional
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;The study will be conducted at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University. The effects of three strategies (i.e., backwards faded practice,
modular practice, and spaced practice) on developing and consolidating problem
solving skills will be investigated in the gateway courses. Mixed-methods will
be used. Multivariate and univariate statistical models will be utilized to
analyze data collected from the counterbalanced research design with the benefit
of controlling confounding factors. Quantitative data will be collected to
analyze learning performance and qualitative data will be used to contextualize
quantitative findings as well as refine practice. The intellectual merits of the
project are manifested by advancing knowledge of practice design for mechanics
courses and beyond, generating information in greater detail about changes to
students' conceptual and procedure knowledge of mechanics through practice, as
well as providing insights on expanding the engineering education research
community. The broad impacts of the project are intrinsic to the research itself
because the findings from this project will not only impact 490 undergraduate
engineering students and enhance learning mechanics, but also have the potential
to improve learning in other applicable science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) areas in which practice serves as a major learning mechanism.
With Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University's increasing effort on recruiting
women, people with disabilities, and underrepresented minorities in the STEM
programs, the project will contribute in diversifying the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.