* 1927710
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: World Wide Web of Plankton Image Curation
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Robert Cowen, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2023
* USD 387,175.00

The capability to bring computer science and technology as well as large and
complex data sets to bear on interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary science is
emerging. It is therefore critically important to establish and enable
transnational frameworks so that data-driven scientific knowledge can transcend
disciplines and geographical borders, ultimately increasing the scientific
underpinnings of policy and action. International collaboration within global
environmental change research fields holds the potential to establish
international foundations for federated data integration and analysis systems
with shared services, bring together best practices from the public and private
sectors, foster open data and open science stewardship among the science
communities including related areas such as publishing, and encourage data and
cloud providers and others to adopt common standards and practices for the
benefit of all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a coalition of 29 funding
agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum Call for proposals on
Science-driven e-Infrastructure Innovation (SEI) for the Enhancement of
Transnational, Interdisciplinary and Transdisciplinary Data Use in Environmental
Change. SEI is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects
that bring together environmental, social and economic scientists with data
scientists, computational scientists, and e-infrastructure and cyber-
infrastructure developers and providers to solve one or more of the
methodological, technological and/or procedural challenges currently facing
inter-disciplinary and transdisciplinary environmental change research that
involves working with large, diverse and multi-source transnational data. The
SEI call will intimately link research thinking and technological innovation
toward accelerating the full-path of discovery-driven data use and open science
and enable a broader scientific community to benefit from the identified new and
potentially disruptive demonstrators or pilots toward
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific research is generating an increasing
number of digital images, from micrographs of cells to pictures of galaxies.
Automated instruments can capture many images, which are then processed
automatically to extract data from them. For this data to be useful to the
scientific community and benefit the general public, it needs quickly generate
output (even for millions of images), consistent, and easy to share. Digital
imaging can help determine how many organisms are present in a given
environment, how diverse the organisms are and whether these data change in
time. This technique is particularly useful underwater, where direct observation
by humans is difficult. The main goal of this project is to build a World Wide
Web of Plankton Image Curation applications that collect images of plankton (the
organisms that drift with ocean currents), allow scientists to name them
consistently, store associated ecological information (such as time, location,
etc.), and make all data easily accessible to the community. It will leverage
cutting edge advances in database design and machine learning to process
billions of images, will be hosted on public web servers to be easily
accessible, and will foster an atmosphere of collaboration and sharing that is
essential for the progress of science. This network of applications will be used
to tackle studies that have proved challenging, such as fast plankton monitoring
to assess ecosystem health, or global estimations of the distribution of
planktonic diversity and its contribution to carbon storage or ecosystem
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.