* 1927080
* SBIR Phase II:  Hardware and Software Systems for Testing Engineered Microorganisms
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Matthew Ball, Culture Robotics, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop technology to bring
biomanufactured products to market more rapidly. Today, biology researchers use
genetic engineering to turn microorganisms into living factories: Cells that
produce novel therapeutics, foods, materials, and fuels. This project will make
it easier for researchers to evaluate if cells are ready to be promoted from
lab-scale to production-scale. New methods for testing microorganisms will be
developed, and the cells' growth conditions and media will be evaluated. This
work will allow potential products to be optimized for potency, cost, and
production time, enabling researchers to bring their biomanufacturing solutions
to market more quickly. These biomanufactured products provide revolutionary
solutions to some of society's biggest challenges including biochmeical
production, climate change, plastic pollution, human health, and the
sustainability of our food systems.

This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop technology that will address the
challenges faced by researchers seeking to produce novel genetically engineered
systems at scale. Today, evaluating the efficacy and commercialization potential
of engineered microorganisms requires considerable empirical work, and this is
slowed down by legacy hardware and software systems. With the goal of improving
the time-to-market of these products, this project will create advances in the
fields of industrial biotechnology, bioinstrumentation, automation and
biological simulation. Evaluations of these techniques will be conducted using a
variety of standard organisms and processes. Systems will be tested for
increased predictive power and gains in efficiency. The overall objectives are
to extend automated cell testing to new types of microorganisms, to develop new
automated cell culture instrumentation and techniques, and to create new
statistical models of the dynamics of cellular growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.