* 1927020
* STTR Phase II:  Scalable fabrication of stable perovskite solar panels using slot-die coating technique
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Gregory Gibson, FAS HOLDINGS GROUP
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2023
* USD 708,030.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to advance the development of new low-cost
and high-efficiency solar cells. This process uses abundant natural resources as
the raw material, using a novel technology to make parts that can be printed on
plastic foils to significantly reduce manufacturing and installation costs. This
project will develop advanced manufacturing technology for the solar cell
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes to develop a
reliable, reproducible, and cost-effective upscaling of perovskite photovoltaic
(PV) devices using an industry-proven slot-die coating technique, to ultimately
produce flexible and rigid, highly efficient perovskite solar cells (PSC). The
efficiency of perovskite solar cells has surged to over 22% in recent research
and now rivals that of CdTe, and Si-based solar panels. Most research lab
perovskite solar cell devices are fabricated via spin casting and have a device
area of less 1 sq. cm. Despite the progress of perovskite solar cell technology,
three fundamental issues need to be addressed for commercialization: device
lifetime, controllable perovskite deposition, and improved manufacturing,
especially in the area of scalability. This project's objectives are to: 1)
produce a hybrid perovskite (HP) slot-die deposition solution for large solar
panels sized 600-1200 mm and beyond, 2) build slot-die coating solution for
perovskite-silicon tandem photovoltaic cells, and 3) conduct modeling and
reliability studies to optimize the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.