* 1927370
* The 39th Southeastern-Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations (SEARCDE)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Stefan Mancas, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 08/31/2020
* USD 23,000.00

This project supports participation in the thirty-ninth annual Southeastern-
Atlantic Regional Conference on Differential Equations (SEARCDE) at Embry-Riddle
Aeronautical University in Daytona Beach, Florida on October 26-27, 2019.
Starting its first conference at Virginia Tech in 1981, the SEARCDE is held
annually by various institutions in the Southeast region of the United States.
The conference provides a unique platform for all researchers in the field of
differential equations and applications and related fields to share their
research experiences, to disseminate recent results, and to establish
collaborations. The SEARCDE aims to promote research and education in all
aspects of differential equations and applications and related fields. Many
research experts, beginning researchers, and graduate students will be brought
together to give talks, to exchange recent research and new ideas, to discuss
open problems in the area of differential equations and applications and related
fields. Beginning researchers and graduate students will be able to learn from
plenary and invited speakers, interact with experts, and meet with colleagues to
discuss working problems. Women, minority, and underrepresented groups are
strongly encouraged to participate in the SEARCDE. The primary focus of the
conference is to create a friendly atmosphere for participants to share their
findings and recent progress, explore new techniques and discuss open problems.
The thirty-ninth SEARCDE will focus on three major areas: linear and nonlinear
analysis of differential equations, mathematical fluid mechanics and
mathematical biology, and numerical and computational methods of partial
differential equations. There will be five internationally renowned experts
giving three one-hour plenary talks and two thirty-minute invited talks on these
topics. Several researchers will give twenty-minute contributed talks divided
into six parallel sessions. Junior researchers and graduate students whose
research interests are closely related to these topics will benefit greatly from
this conference. Information about the conference can be found at
https://commons.erau.edu/searcde/2019-39th/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.