* 1927687
* SBIR Phase II:  Remediation of recalcitrant and emerging environmental organic contaminants of concern using bacterial approaches
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Raymond Sambrotto, ALLIED MICROBIOTA LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 761,620.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is addressing the critical societal need to remediate
toxic organic pollutants in soils and sediments. The proposed technology would
enable environmental goals to be met on many contaminated sites whose
remediation is currently limited by high costs. The technology would contribute
to the re-development of many billions of dollars in real estate by returning
properties to productive and appropriate use. The hybrid bacterial augmentation
and thermal technology provides a model for additional systems with other
bacteria uniquely suited to applications in emerging contaminants and water
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to commercialize a
bacterial treatment for the degradation of organic contaminants of concern in
environmental matrices such as soils and sediments. The thermally-enhanced
bioaugmentation technology evaluated in Phase I is based on a novel bacterial
strain and its enzymes that function at elevated temperatures and are capable of
degrading a variety of ring based, organic pollutants, including chlorinated
forms difficult to remediate. Pilot tests on soils contaminated with Total
Petroleum Hydrocarbons (TPH) demonstrated degradation for both TPH and for the
heavier poly-aromatic hydrocarbons (PaHs) on the EPA's list of priority
pollutants. Phase II goals are to expand these initial studies to the full
commercial scale of 100s to 1000s of tons of soil by working with established
environmental engineering firms with extensive experience in thermal treatments
of large volumes. To fully commercialize this new technology, the production
capacity for the biological agents also will be scaled up by over an order of
magnitude. The technology will be applied both ex-situ and in-situ as the
process evolves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.