* 1927557
* Investigation of Pore Pressure Migration During Piezocone Tests
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Diane Moug, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 101,211.00

The piezocone dissipation test, where an instrumented cone is advanced through
the soil column, is used throughout geotechnical engineering, environmental
engineering, and other groundwater-related fields. The test is routinely used to
characterize how easily water seeps through soil (i.e. soil permeability) which
is necessary for engineering analyses such as predicting rate of soil
consolidation settlements or predicting contaminant transport by groundwater
seepage. However, methods for interpreting these tests are limited due to
several major simplifying assumptions. The test is performed by advancing the
cone through the soil column and measuring porewater pressures at the cone
shoulder, then pausing penetration and recording how porewater pressures change.
Soil deformations around the penetrating cone induce an excess porewater
pressure field in saturated soil. Then when penetration is paused, excess
porewater pressures are recorded over time as they dissipate to hydrostatic
conditions in a dissipation curve. Available methods to interpret soil
permeability from dissipation curves assume that: (i) excess porewater pressure
migration is horizontal, and (ii) measured porewater pressure decay to
hydrostatic conditions is monotonic. However, there is a significant dataset of
non-monotonic piezocone dissipation tests, where measured excess porewater
pressure initially increases then decreases to hydrostatic conditions, which may
be due to vertical excess porewater pressure migration. This project will
investigate and characterize the causes of non-monotonic piezocone dissipation
tests, which will lead to improved piezocone dissipation interpretation methods
and more accurate characterization of soil permeability from the test data. The
project also includes demonstrations at K-12 engineering outreach events to
increase the engagement of Portland, Oregon grade school students with civil
engineering concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
characterize the mechanisms that contribute to non-monotonic piezocone
dissipation curves with a numerical piezocone model. This project hypothesizes
that vertical and horizontal excess porewater pressure migration contribute to
non-monotonic piezocone dissipation curves. It is also hypothesized that those
contributions are affected by soil stress history (i.e. over-consolidation
ratio), soil properties, hydraulic conductivity anisotropy, and penetration
drainage conditions. These hypotheses will be tested with numerical simulations
of piezocone dissipation in saturated clay using a direct axisymmetric
penetration model and the MIT-S1 constitutive model. The simulations will
investigate: (i) the role of soil stress history and soil properties on excess
porewater pressure distribution around the penetrating cone and subsequent
dissipation curves, (ii) the role of vertical and horizontal porewater pressure
migration on dissipation curves, (iii) the impact of hydraulic conductivity
anisotropy on vertical and horizontal porewater pressure migration, and (iv) how
the above factors are affected by partial drainage conditions during
penetration. The results of these analyses will be synthesized to suggest
interpretation methods for non-monotonic dissipation tests and to re-interpret
existing non-monotonic dissipation tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.