* 1927084
* SBIR Phase II:  Virtual Music helper, next-generation educational social platform for conservatory music practice and performance empowered by AI and AR
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Melody Fallah-Khair, eBibelot Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2021
* USD 800,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be in providing a unique, engaging and collaborative augmented
reality (AR) environment for users to create, practice and performing music
together. Research suggests that music enhances learning. Children who learn or
practice music have shown better STEM proficiency. However, studies also suggest
that children opt out of music education based on the false belief that they
lack ability or find the practice non-engaging and ultimately stop. The proposed
project addresses this with a mobile application and platform for users to
create, practice and perform music independently in an engaging, collaborative
Augmented Reality environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this SBIR Phase II project lies in the unique polyphonic pitch detection
technology that can help users detect and correct their mistakes. It also
provides a collaborative AR environment to remain engaged in creating or playing
music in "situated learning" methodology. The platform is designed initially for
English, Spanish, or Chinese communication for training on piano and several
other instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.