* 1927341
* Research Initiation: A Mixed Methods Approach to Examine and Foster Academic Resilience in Undergraduate Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nicola Sochacka, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,956.00

Helping engineering students improve their resilience skills could better enable
them to succeed in college and deal more effectively with future challenges.
Resilience is the ability to adapt well in the face of adversity. It is a
valuable skill because it helps employees successfully navigate difficulties and
overcome setbacks. But in technically challenging disciplines such as
engineering, little effort has been devoted to formally cultivating such skills.
This study will examine the role that resilience can play in improving students'
performance in challenging engineering courses. Students participating in the
study will complete resilience surveys and receive a resilience profile based on
their responses. In detailing students' specific resilience skills (e.g., the
extent of their perseverance, optimism, and self-control), this profile may help
students play to their strengths and develop strategies for working around their
weaknesses. Subsequent class discussions will consider the connections between
resilience and academic success. It is believed that students will benefit from
better understanding resilience, from becoming more aware of its role in their
performance, and from strengthening their resilience skills. To our knowledge,
this will be the first study of resilience in engineering education. The
findings could dramatically improve student and faculty understanding of the
importance of resilience in mastering technical material in engineering and
other disciplines involving science, technology, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will mix quantitative and
qualitative methods to explore resilience-achievement relationships among
students in core engineering courses. The research design is theoretically
informed by a model of resilience which includes risk factors, protective
factors, and positive adaptation. The quantitative data collection will be based
on the use of two resilience surveys that have been previously validated in
educational contexts, namely the Academic Resilience Scale and the Connor-
Davidson Resilience Scale. This study is underpinned by a commitment to
integrate research and practice, and to conduct research that directly benefits
students. The study will directly impact 342 undergraduate engineering students
who participate in the study by providing these students with access to their
individual resilience scores; facilitating in-class discussions of aggregate
correlations between dimensions of resilience and academic performance; and
providing opportunities for reflection on adaptive and maladaptive coping
mechanisms. The research design includes a focus on students identified as the
most and least resilient, as well as resilience-achievement relationships for
groups that are underrepresented in engineering and/or at-risk of failing or
withdrawing from their engineering studies. Research findings will be shared
through conference and journal publications, and via local and national
workshops that focus on the role that professional skills can play in learning
STEM technical content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.