* 1927432
* GOALI: A time-efficient analytical framework for optimal electromagnetic, thermal and structural design of switched reluctance motor
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Shuwang Li, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 05/31/2024
* USD 404,229.00

Switched reluctance motors (SRMs) have recently gained attention as a low-cost
replacement for permanent magnet (PM) machines, and as a high-efficiency
replacement for induction motors. These motors can operate in four quadrants and
wide speed-constant power range, which makes them a good candidate for
applications ranging from electrical vehicles (EVs) to HVAC systems to domestic
appliances. SRMs have concentrated windings on the stator and do not have
permanent magnets or windings on the rotor, which makes them an inherently low-
cost and good candidate for high-efficiency applications. This motor also has
double saliency, high starting torque and low inertia, which can be achieved
without large inrush currents. They are also inherently fault tolerant machines
since the phase windings are isolated from each other. Despite these advantages,
critical problems hindering the wider adoption of SRMs include high acoustic
noise, vibration and torque ripple, low efficiency, and power density. In
response to these challenges, this research proposes a new modeling paradigm for
simultaneous optimization of coupled electromagnetic and structural performance
in electric machines. It will also allow modeling of non-homogeneous conditions
and 3-D phenomena including acoustic noise and vibration. Successful completion
of both these objectives will lead to design techniques that are faster than
conventional numerical approaches. This method can be used to implement real-
time training of the machine model towards the development of high efficiency,
quiet switched reluctance motors, which can easily be extended to other motor
types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional approaches for prediction of acoustic
noise and vibration in machine design are usually based upon a deterministic
approach using finite element analysis (FEA), where the motor is modeled using
finite elements solving the partial differential equations (PDEs). Although FEA
can be used for problems defined on complicated domains, it requires full
discretization of the entire computational domain, which is not numerically
efficient. For example, to design a new machine, one must start with a base
shape and then tune parameters iteratively to meet the desired performance
requirements. Computationally, the domain needs to be discretized several times
and PDEs are solved iteratively to identify a relationship between the input
parameters and output performance, which makes it computationally intensive. The
proposed research will use a kernel free boundary integral method (KF-BIM)
approach to develop a comprehensive time and computationally efficient design
approach for electric machine design. The kernel-free boundary integral method
is a generalization of the classical boundary integral method. It allows the
formulation of variable coefficient elliptic PDEs in irregular domain into
boundary integrals, without requiring the analytical expression of the Green's
function. This approach will be used as a fundamental framework to develop a
fast approach to accurately model non-homogenous conditions and 3D phenomena
such as noise, vibration and harshness (NVH) and thermal behavior of the
machine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an inter-disciplinary effort with
contributions from Engineering and Applied Mathematics towards a cutting-edge
integrated motor drive design framework. Research outcomes will be disseminated
through active student engagement in the classroom and research lab, industry
collaboration and research presentations. The team will continue to work with
undergraduate students from Electrical and Mechanical Engineering in the EDEC
laboratory on hands-on tasks and industry-grade benchmarking. Participation by
female students and under-represented minority groups will be enhanced through
undergraduate Inter-professional Project (IPRO) courses, summer research
immersion projects and presentations to the City Colleges of Chicago, Society of
Women Engineers and Society of Hispanic Engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.