* 1927039
* SBIR Phase II:  Hacking Eye Movements to Improve Attention
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Joseph Snider, Brainleap Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 873,903.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research SBIR Phase II
project will be in standardizing attention assessment in elementary school
children. Teachers currently dedicate too much of their valuable time to tedium.
The standard school attention assessment calls for a highly trained teacher or
aide to observe a child for about fifteen minutes and record their attention
behavior every few seconds. The observer tracks behaviors including out of seat
time, audible noise, vocalization and so on. Teachers and aides recognize
several unappealing aspects of this process, e.g., it subjectively depends on
the observer, is not standardized across observers, and is too time-consuming to
provide more than an occasional snapshot of the full range of children's
attention skills. Worse, these difficulties affect the most vulnerable children
who may be experiencing challenges due to autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The time teachers must spend
evaluating children's progress limits that very progress. The resulting downward
spiral for these talented, intelligent, and creative young people can be avoided
if teachers can focus on teaching, rather than the current time-intensive,
unstandardized processes. With the current rise in rates of ASD and ADHD in
children nationwide, the reliable, simple, repeatable attention assessment tool
proposed in this project provides important data to meet schools' needs by
better using teachers' time while generating better outcomes for students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase II project lies
in the research and development critical to commercialize an objective attention
assessment tool that measures sustained attention, distractibility, attention
orienting, focus, and inhibitory control. The assessment tool uses eye-tracking
technology when children play gaze-driven games to allow monitoring of their
attention. Eye trackers use small cameras to measure where an individual's eyes
are relative to their head. From these data, eye trackers can tell precisely
where the person is looking on the screen, indicated by a cursor that follows
the person's gaze. The tool uses this cursor to control video games that were
specifically designed by researchers at UC San Diego to improve various
attention skills. With these games, children practice focusing and orienting
their vision and learn to ignore distractions. The primary goal of this Phase II
project is to test a statistically relevant sample in the target population of
school aged children to validate new attention assessment tools compared with
existing tedious, expensive, time-consuming tools. This research and development
links these new attention assessment tools to real school
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.