* 1927035
* Collaborative Research: Research Initiation: Writing Education Initiating Identity Transformation in Engineering Students-The Wri2tes Project
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Royce Francis, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,817.00

This project seeks to better prepare engineers for professional work by
understanding how experiences of learning to write in school help develop
students' capacities for engineering judgement and their identities as
responsible professionals. The engineering disciplines are rigorous in their
application of scientific principles, and these principles are directly
addressed in undergraduate engineering classrooms. However, engineers are also
called to make decisions that implicitly account for complex criteria, including
the welfare of those who use or are impacted by the systems they design and the
economic needs of their employers. As a result, in many ways engineering is an
art that requires practitioners to routinely navigate difficult tradeoffs that
require professional judgments. These judgments include often-conflicting
economic, ethical, social, and value-based dimensions, requiring engineers to
make well-reasoned decisions for the benefit of society. In order to best serve
the public, engineers need to communicate their judgments to engineers, non-
specialists, clients, and a variety of others. One key goal in all such
interactions will be to convey themselves as competent professionals; either as
insiders to other engineers, or as authoritative experts to those seeking their
advice. The art of engineering, in short, is tightly bound to the negotiation of
engineering identity: engineers must be able to practice engineering as art and
develop sound judgments that balance complex, competing objectives or
constraints, and they must simultaneously convey these judgments in ways that
will help them identify-and be recognized as-engineers. Despite this tight
connection, however, little work to date has investigated the relationship
between the writing engineering students do and the development of engineering
identities, particularly in terms of engineering judgment. &lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses this gap by exploring how students' experiences with writing
shape their identification with the engineering profession and the way they
convey engineering judgments to better ensure that tomorrow's engineering
workforce will best serve the needs of public. To investigate the ways students
produce engineer identities in written artifacts through which they expect to be
recognized as engineers, the project employs a two-phase qualitative case study;
Phase 1 uses semi-structured interviews and analyses of student work to explore
engineering identity production in writing, and Phase 2 uses those results to
design and study assignments intended to more effectively foster engineering
identity production in writing. The study is grounded in Gee's use of identity
as an analytic lens, Tonso's identity production theory, and Lea and Street's
academic literacy approach. In Phase 1, the case studies will focus on the ways
students produce engineer identities through their written projects. Course
documents (including assignments and related material) as well as instructors'
autoethnographic field notes on implementation will provide contextual data for
the case. In Phase 2, the insights from the initial cases will be used to design
appropriate teaching tools and approaches. Few studies in engineering identity
have investigated the role that navigating difficult tradeoffs in writing plays
in students' engineering identity construction. In addition, few investigators
have examined the ways in which the artifacts students produce reflect the
choices students must negotiate during their professional identity development
and production. This study contributes to our knowledge of how a critical
professional practice-writing-contributes to the development of students'
holistic engineering identities in ways that best prepare them to develop
products and systems that meet societies needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.