* 1927011
* SBIR Phase II:  Large Arrays for 5G MU-MIMO Wireless Access Operating in mm-wave Frequency Bands
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Sriramkumar Venugopalan, RF Pixels, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2021
* USD 749,987.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project focuses on the
development of a patented radio front-end supporting multi-user MIMO capability
for the 5G mm-wave infrastructure market that would enable cost efficient, high
data rate access wirelessly as opposed to cost prohibitive fiber-based data
connectivity. Cellular and Wi-Fi networks are hitting a spectrum bottleneck in
terms of their ability to offer higher data rates to densely populated areas and
the same in a cost-efficient manner to remote rural areas. Advent of 5G cellular
networks with new bands in the mm-wave frequency spectrum (between 28-70 GHz)
alleviates these issues. RF Pixels' innovative mm-wave radio front-end will
enable spectrum efficient communication through frequency re-use to spatially
separated users at a fraction of the cost compared to known solutions. Thousands
of mobile internet users can enjoy high data rates simultaneously without being
starved of spectrum. Data heavy paradigms connecting consumer devices and the
cloud, such as wireless virtual reality headsets and robotic personal assistants
can be implemented with ease. Virtual and augmented reality based remote
educational programs, online health care, smart cities, smart transportation and
other new low-latency services will be enhanced delivering major economic and
societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase II project proposes a revolutionary tile architecture that enables massive
multi-user MIMO techniques for mm-wave radio systems, without the hardware and
power consumption costs of full digital solutions. The radio can efficiently
reuse the spectrum between spatially diverse users with active beamforming.
Multitude of tiles will be used in a large array making it crucial to achieve
excellent power efficiency at the tile level. Tile-to-tile variations hamper
accurate beamforming requiring calibration. Beam discovery, refinement and
tracking of multiple mobile users simultaneously requires investigation. In
Phase I feasibility of a tile architecture that achieves multi-user MIMO and
scale to large element arrays was proven. This project will investigate clock
generation and coherent distribution to every tile in a large array for accurate
beamforming and interference cancellation. Turnkey approach for packaging and
antenna array design will be investigated. Impact of tile-to-tile variations on
beamforming accuracy and calibration algorithms to mitigate variations will be
studied. New algorithms will aim to achieve low-sensitivity to post-calibration
errors without much downtime. Beam management algorithms for accurate tracking
of mobile users compatible with guidelines of 5G NR standard will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.