* 1927578
* EarthCube Data Capabilities:  Machine Learning Enhanced Cyberinfrastructure for Understanding and Predicting the Onset of Solar Eruptions
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jason Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 855,585.00

Space weather is a term used to describe changing environmental conditions in
the solar system caused by eruptions on the Sun's surface such as solar flares.
Understanding and forecasting of solar eruptions is critically important for
national security and for the economy since they are known to have adverse
effects on critical technology infrastructure such as satellite and power
distribution networks. Solar eruptions are caused by complex dynamics of
sunspots which are often called solar active regions. The goal of this research
is to build data infrastructure to characterize the properties of solar active
regions from 1970 to now using advanced data from ground-based observatories and
satellite missions. The database and associated cyberinfrastructure, jointly to
be developed by physicists and computer scientists, will utilize advanced
artificial intelligence and machine learning. By using this advanced database, a
better understanding of the solar active regions and how they trigger solar
eruptions will be achieved. The project has significant education and training
components that will involve graduate students and junior researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build advanced computer infrastructure to
characterize solar active regions (ARs) and apply machine learning tools to
predict two most significant forms of solar eruptions: the solar flares and
coronal mass ejections (CMEs). The project will address two key science
questions: (1) Which parameters and physical processes are most important for
the onset of solar eruptions? (2) What is the accuracy of using these parameters
to predict solar eruptions? The work will utilize and interface with the
infrastructure developed under a previous EarthCube project. It will analyze
digitized and digital high-resolution data from the Big Bear Solar Observatory
(BBSO) from 1970 to now, current satellite mission data, as well as legacy data
for a more comprehensive archive of flares and associated ARs. Dynamic non-
potentiality properties of ARs will be derived using advanced imaging and
machine learning tools. Deep learning techniques will be used to trace
fibril/loop structures in the solar chromosphere and corona. Combining these
with coronal field extrapolation will provide novel parameters to describe non-
potentiality in ARs. Two new parameters will be derived that may be critically
linked to flares and CMEs: flow motions and magnetic helicity injection in flare
productive ARs. Based on flare/CME properties and important parameters derived
from hosting ARs, deep learning techniques will be further adapted to predict
the occurrence and energy range of flares and CMEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.