* 1927399
* Collaborative: Research Initiation: Uncovering the Effects of Stereotype Threats on Latinx Students' Success in Undergraduate Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Cristina Poleacovschi, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 11/30/2019
* USD 189,000.00

In the U.S., the number of Latinx students completing engineering degrees as
compared to their growing representation in the population is disproportionately
low. Latinx is the gender-neutral term used in lieu of Latino or Latina, refers
to individuals who identify with Latin American culture or race. Major factors
affecting Latinx? success include the everyday experiences where students fear
being judged by the negative stereotypes associated with their identity and
feeling at risk to conform to these stereotypes. These negative experiences are
known as stereotype threats and have been largely understudied among the Latinx
population. Stereotype threats, are one behavior that leads to negative campus
climate, especially among minority students who come from historically
marginalized populations. The climate in which Latinx experience college likely
has a direct effect on both the learning and social outcomes of these students.
Nevertheless, the nature and effect of stereotype threats on Latinx students'
success and persistence in engineering programs are wholly understudied.
Considering the growing initiatives to open access and improve academic
preparation of minorities, stereotype threats represent major barriers for
Latinx students in pursuing an engineering degree. This project investigates how
stereotype threats affect Latinx students' performance and persistence in
engineering programs. This project brings together an interdisciplinary
collaboration between faculty in engineering and education across two
institutions: Iowa State University, a Predominately White Institution, and the
University of Texas at San Antonio, a Hispanic-Serving Institution. Through the
use of focus groups, surveys , and mock engineering examinations, the
researchers are targeting three research goals : (1) identify the gender and
ethnic stereotypes that Latinx students experience in undergraduate engineering
programs and identify the coping mechanisms students adopt to address these
stereotype threats; (2) identify the effects of stereotype threats on student
success (i.e. solving engineering problems); and, (3) identify the effects of
stereotype threats on persistence indicators (i.e., self-efficacy, institutional
affiliation, and psychological well-being). This project has an important impact
on broadening participation of Latinx students in engineering, as results will
inform engineering educators and help justify efforts on creating a more
inclusive and supportive campus climate for all learners. As a result, this
research supports the development of a diverse and well-equipped engineering
workforce and provides a method for institutions to assess their progress toward
equity in the learning environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.