* 1927150
* Research Initiation: A Study of Biomedical Engineering Student Self-Efficacy Toward Design
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Sharon Miller, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The formation of workforce-ready biomedical engineers requires that students are
prepared to confidently approach complex problems. In the United States,
biomedical engineers will need to confront challenges in an environment of
rising healthcare costs, decreasing average life expectancy, and increasing
socioeconomic disparities in health outcomes. Solutions to these and other
contemporary problems will require new and innovative medical technologies,
suggesting that the future of biomedical engineering will be increasingly
design-oriented. The engineering design process provides a framework for the
type of open-ended problem solving required by grand challenges. The development
of critical thinking skills and application of these skills toward the design
process have been studied thoroughly by engineering education researchers; this
work has informed instructional techniques aimed at improving critical thinking
among engineering undergraduates. Much less has been done to investigate the
role of intrapersonal skill development in student design achievement; however,
substantial research on student self-efficacy (confidence) has informed freshman
engineering retention and gender gaps in engineering perseverance. This research
will provide new insights into the role of self-confidence in design achievement
among biomedical engineering undergraduates. Surveys and rubrics have been
developed to track design confidence and abilities as students progress through
a rigorous, multi-disciplinary, and gender-diverse biomedical engineering
program on an urban health-life sciences campus. Results from this study will
inform development of instructional techniques, educator training, and workplace
professional development. These impacts are relevant and transferable across
disciplines and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomedical engineering
programs have consistently awarded the second highest number of engineering
bachelor's degrees to women, yielding a gender-diverse engineering student
population from which to learn. Discipline-specific research of a biomedical
engineering student population would provide engineering educators knowledge of
student self-efficacy barriers that may limit design success. Applying a mixed-
methods approach, the social cognitive theory construct of self-efficacy defined
by Bandura will be used to investigate the following central research question:
To what extent and in what ways does continuous exposure to hands-on design
projects throughout a curriculum influence self-efficacy and design performance
of biomedical engineering students? Quantitative methods will specifically
inform the questions 1) Do biomedical engineering students report changes in
self-efficacy when continuously challenged with biomedical design situations?
and 2) Does self-efficacy relate to biomedical engineering student design
achievement? A third question 3) How do biomedical engineering students describe
their self-efficacy toward biomedical design throughout a curriculum will guide
qualitative inquiry and shape efforts to describe mediating variables. Finally,
this work will demonstrate the approachability and utility of social science
research for technical faculty looking to improve engineering formation
processes. Application of the self-efficacy framework to engineering design
education is highly relevant to the training of a diverse and competent STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.