* 1927679
* EAGER: Mapping Future Synergies between Deep Learning and Software Engineering
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Denys Poshyvanyk, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2020
* USD 82,828.00

The power of AI, more specifically, machine learning (ML), is enabling new
classes of software applications. Software Engineering (SE) goals such as
construction of correct software, and devising effective software development
processes for testing and debugging, require new techniques when ML is embedded
in a system, in order to test learning models, validate training data, and test
for valid results. Researchers have begun working toward improving the quality
and productivity of software for ML-learning-based applications. Conversely, SE
researchers are using ML to accelerate advances in the SE research in order to
achieve better results. This EAGER grant is for the purpose of assembling a
research road map in the intersection of ML and SE, and to make recommendations
for those doing research in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus mainly on a specific mode of learning called Deep Learning (DL). The
agenda is bidirectional: use of DL to accelerate research in SE, and SE to
address correctness and quality of DL-based applications. The project will
survey types of SE tasks where DL has achieved or promised significant advances,
and it will identify areas where DL-based applications have been studied and
improved by SE. The project will make available the current state of knowledge
and best practices for data gathering, representation and processing for this
research area and explore common infrastructure, architectures, data resources
and benchmarks. The project will construct a systematic literature review that
will become a living/growing repository of work in the SE/DL intersection for
future research and education purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.