* 1927743
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Biodiversity Scenarios: Towards monitoring, understanding and forecasting Global Biomass flows of Aerial Migrants
* GEO,RISE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Andrew Farnsworth, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 03/31/2022
* USD 179,965.00

Innovative research on the complex interaction of socio-economic and global
environmental trends on biodiversity and ecosystem services is needed to help
develop more informative scenarios for addressing environmental and human
development challenges. To overcome these challenges coupled natural-human
systems approaches and analyses are needed. These provide improved scenarios of
biodiversity and ecosystem services that couple the outputs of direct and
indirect drivers such as land use, invasive species, overexploitation,
biodiversity, environmental change, and pollution. The resulting models provide
a methodological state-of-the art that results in more accurate quantitative
assessments, better land use, and more effective ecosystem services. Employing
this methodology, this research project, which is an international coalition
between US scientists and five European nations, seeks to quantify the
magnitude, spatial extent and timing of aerial migrations (birds and insects),
and their functional relations to environmental and socio-economic variables.
Migratory bird and insect populations involve thousands of tons of animal
biomass that move through the air within and across continents at various times
of the year. Migratory flying animals play significant roles in shaping
ecosystems through a variety of transport and trophic effects that also
represent services and disservices to human infrastructure, agriculture, and
welfare. This project reveals the role these organisms have in shaping the
diversity of ecological communities, as well as providing information to allow
the better utilization of their related ecosystems services and reducing their
negative impacts. This requires the tracking and quantification of these species
and their movements across continents, i.e. over large spatial and temporal
scales. This study investigates past changes in important drivers of change such
as climate; the expansion of urban areas; deployment of energy infrastructure,
like wind farms; and changes in land use/agriculture. Data and results will be
modeled to develop projections for future changes under environmental and human-
induces scenarios. Current and archived radar data of biomasses of aerial
migrants will be used. Drivers resulting in changes in patterns of migrations
and local ecosystem function will be used to develop behavior-based models for
generating predictions under future changes. The broader impacts of this work
include international collaboration with scientists from five other countries
(UK, Belgium, The Netherlands, Finland, and Switzerland), the generation of data
to improve policy and resource management decisions, and information to help
reduce airplane damage from bird strikes. Other impacts include training a
postdoctoral scholar in interdisciplinary, international, team-oriented,
collaborative research and the creation of new software that allows others to
process data on aerial migrations in terms of variables such as weather,
climate, land use, wind, and light.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports US
researchers participating in a project competitively selected by a coalition of
26 funding agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum call for
proposals on "Scenarios of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services". The call was a
multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that contribute to
the development of scenarios, models, and decision-support tools for
understanding and solving critical issues facing our planet. The goal of the
competition was to improve and apply participatory scenario methods to enhance
research relevance and its acceptance and to address gaps in methods for
modelling impact drivers and policy interventions. It was also to develop and
communicate levels of uncertainty associated with the models, to improve data
accessibility and fill gaps in knowledge. Using this methodology, this major
international effort between the US and five European countries will addresses
challenging and pressing biodiversity issues related to aerial migratory species
(birds and insects) across scales from local to continental. For the project,
each country will fund its own scientists and their part of the overall project.
The interdisciplinary team consists of ecologists, meteorologists, and computer
scientists who will use the existing infrastructure of continental weather (and
other) radars to generate a standardized large-scale, long-term monitoring of
migratory aerial biomass flows, as well as develop sustainable data and
analytical infrastructure and workflows that that can be used by other present
and future stakeholders. Motivation for this study comes from the fact that
aerial migratory animals are an integral component of biodiversity and have been
declining at an alarming rate. Identifying their response to climatic and land-
use changes, light pollution and wind energy development is fundamental for
efficient conservation and mitigation of human-wildlife conflicts. Thus, this
research links various stakeholders from scientists to meteorologists to
conservation practitioners and policy makers and to the wind energy sector and
aviation safety. Goas are to develop (a) standard long-term and large-scale
monitoring of aerial migrations; (b) information to feed policies associated
with the proliferation of artificial light; (c) establish aerial migratory
species death-mitigation procedures for wind energy installations and aircraft;
and (d) policies for conservation of crucial (aerial) habitat, migratory
locations, and major migration time-periods that are essential for sustaining
migratory populations. Research will entail quantifying the magnitude, spatial
extent, and timing of aerial migrations; understanding their (functional)
relations with environmental and socio-economic variables; and projecting the
consequences of future changes in these variables on migratory populations. This
will be achieved by retrieving biological information from weather radar
networks using methods that rely on machine learning and statistical analyses to
quantify biomass flows of aerial migrants in Europe and North America. It will
also estimate the role of migrants in ecosystem functioning and how aerial
migratory biomass flows is impacted by external human induced
variables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.