* 1927090
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel, Noninvasive Comprehensive Aquatic TOol (CATO) for Sediment Management in Waterways
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Francis Parks, Akabotics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project represents a major
paradigm shift in the methodology by which waterways can be maintained for
optimum usage and water quality. Instead of the status quo in which water
quality is only periodically tested and sediment buildups are only removed in
massive quantities that can shock sensitive aquatic ecosystems, the system under
development offers regular water quality monitoring and regular sediment removal
at volumes less impacting to aquatic habitat. Shifting the paradigm of waterway
maintenance into a more regular process will allow for reduced pollutant levels
in waterways as pollutants are promptly removed instead of continuing to
accumulate toxins which, in turn, will increase property values, utilization,
and income within the marina industry. Additionally, embedded sensor
intelligence and continuous waterway monitoring will grant the dredging
regulatory agencies increased visibility and understanding of the health of the
marine life in the waterway and allow them to more closely monitor environmental
violations. With widespread adoption, the innovation could impact the technology
area of water robotics and potentially have far reaching benefits that assist
with water and energy security by keeping the inlet canal's reservoirs that
comprise our society's infrastructure clean and running at peak
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project aims to continue development of an intelligent suction tip via a
robotic platform for use in year-round sediment removal in waterways while
minimizing harm to marine species. The research seeks to contribute to the
knowledge base of marine life behavior and water-pollutant interactions through
addressing the need for waterway technologies designed specifically to satisfy
the requirements of waterway owners while being sensitive to marine life needs.
The project activities include continued technical development and refinement of
the environmental niche modeling and suction tip systems whose proof of concept
was developed during Phase I activities, refinement and ruggedization of
supporting subsystems in preparation for pilot testing, conducting closed
environment testing, conducting pilot testing in a local operational waterway,
determining a feasible manufacturing roadmap, and conducting pilot testing in an
operational waterway in San Francisco Bay while closely documenting its
performance and dredged material to determine marine species impact for report
to the regulatory agencies. Akabotics expects to prove that its innovative
approach has only a minimal impact to marine organisms while providing
regulatory agencies with increased oversight and will lay the groundwork for
approval to work outside of currently prescribed environmental work
windows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.