* 1927602
* Collaborative Research: Design and development of a multifunctional nanoplatform for augmented elastic matrix repair
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Chandrasekhar Kothapalli, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,873.00

Elastic fibers, which allow tissues to stretch and recoil like rubber bands, are
not naturally repaired or regenerated in adults following injury or with
degenerative disorders. Systems affected by such disorders, termed proteolytic
disorders, include skin (psoriasis), respiratory (emphysema), gastrointestinal
(irritable bowel syndrome), auto-immune (rheumatoid arthritis) and vascular
(aneurysms). This project will use biodegradable chemically-modified polymer
nanoparticles to study cellular processes contributing to the breakdown of
elastic fibers or stimulation of new fiber assembly and maturation. The
effectiveness of these nanoparticles in influencing elastic matrix repair will
be tested in structurally disrupted blood vessels maintained viable in a
dynamic/pulsating ex vivo (out of body) system. The broader impact of this work
will be the transformative potential of the nanoparticle technology in enabling
robust on-site elastic tissue repair in the context of cardiovascular disorders
which afflict millions worldwide. Thus interdisciplinary project will provide
opportunities for scientific education and research training of high school,
undergraduate and graduate students through development of educational modules
and through the well-established summer internship and outreach programs at
their respective institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project to
develop and test an innovative nanoparticle platform designed to augment on-site
regenerative elastic tissue repair, a continuing challenge in the field of
tissue engineering, and in functional restoration of tissues structurally
compromised in proteolytic diseases. The planned approach will (1) identify new
mechanistic regulators in proteolytically-injured tissues that can be modulated
with nitric oxide donor drugs to increase downstream elastogenesis and inhibit
proteolysis towards reversing ECM pathophysiology and (2) design and validate a
novel, actively targeted nanotherapeutic platform to enable on-site tissue
repair in a non-invasive manner. These approaches will be tested in the context
of reversing an example proteolytic disorder, abdominal aortic aneurysm. The
investigators have earlier established the pro-elastic matrix regenerative and
elastolytic enzyme-inhibiting effects of exogenous nitric oxide (NO), and
identified c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK; a stress-activated protein kinase
upregulated in proteolytic disorders) as a regulator of elastogenesis and
proteolytic activity. In this project, the investigators will test a hypothesis
that NO acts through JNK attenuation, and that this is a useful predictive
metric to optimize NO donor delivery doses to obtain significant improvements to
the quantity and qualitative measures of stimulated elastic matrix regeneration.
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles chemically modified to provide anti-
proteolytic and pro-elastogenic effects, and further modified with cathepsin K
(an elastase)-inactivating propeptide-derived sequences for active targeting to
the injured vessel wall, will serve to provide predictable, steady, and
sustained NO donor release for effecting in-tissue matrix
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.