* 1927082
* SBIR Phase II: High-performance, tunable silicon laser arrays designed for mass production
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Ashok Krishnamoorthy, Axalume Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,419,514.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is demonstrate new lasers for advanced
communication and sensing applications. The proposed work includes the design,
simulation, and testing of new lasers to meet rapidly-growing high-speed data
center optical communication and emerging automotive laser range-finding
requirements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project activities will include
the design, simulation, and experimental verification of hybrid, external-cavity
silicon-based optical sources to meet rapidly-growing high-speed datacenter
optical communication and emerging automotive laser range-finding requirements.
The project will demonstrate that a flexible electronic-photonic integration
process can be created to enable dense integration of silicon-photonic and
silicon-electronic circuits, independent of specific foundry or fabrication
production limitations. This process can be used to develop arrays of high-
performance, low-noise, and widely-tunable lasers for advanced optical
communication and sensing applications. The proposed project will address
existing laser mode-control issues and reduce back-reflection issues. The result
will be silicon-photonic lasers suitable for commercial production that will
demonstrate industry-leading semiconductor laser capabilities including low-
noise, narrow-linewidth, and wide tunability in single and multi-laser
chipsets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.