* 1927723
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: The Permafrost Discovery Gateway: Navigating the new Arctic tundra through Big Data, artificial intelligence, and cyberinfrastructure
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Chandi Witharana, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 624,651.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permafrost is ground that remains frozen
for at least two consecutive years. It occurs under approximately one fourth of
the northern hemisphere's land surface. In the far north, the permafrost is
continuous across the landscape and contains large amounts of ice in its upper
few meters. Thawing of permafrost has been observed at several locations across
the Arctic in recent decades, yet the complete extent of permafrost degradation
is not yet described. This is because it is difficult to directly measure
permafrost. However, the presence and health of permafrost can be inferred from
characteristic ground surface features. For example, permafrost can be detected
from detailed satellite images through the presence of 30-meter-wide ice-wedge
polygons. It is important to detect areas with thawing permafrost to identify
challenges for infrastructure that depend on a foundation of solid ground. This
project is developing the Permafrost Discovery Gateway, an online platform that
makes permafrost information more accessible and discoverable by the public. The
public includes industry, non-profit organizations, and people living and
working in the Arctic. Future workforce development includes the training of
graduate students and postdocs in remote sensing technology. Five early career
researchers are the lead investigators. The K-12 education community are
receiving virtual resources to help them interact with the Permafrost Discovery
Gateway. In addition, a collaborative art exhibition, an interactive digital
story, and an online Earth as Art gallery are displaying Arctic landscapes to
the general public. These tools enable diverse peoples of different technical
backgrounds to interact with permafrost knowledge across the entire Arctic. This
project informs the economy, security, and resilience of the U.S., the larger
region, and the globe with respect to Arctic change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main goal of this project is to develop supporting cyberinfrastructure to
harness information from high-resolution satellite imagery. This approach is
advancing the understanding of permafrost degradation across the entire Arctic.
This project is: (1) utilizing existing Big Imagery, (2) refining and developing
new automated remote sensing classification tools based on machine and deep
learning techniques, (3) applying the mapping tools to Arctic satellite imagery,
(4) making permafrost map products and tools publicly accessible, and (5)
enabling discovery through visualization and analysis tools designed with users
of the Permafrost Discovery Gateway. The project is producing a
cyberinfrastructure framework that also includes existing Arctic map products.
This framework, along with an engaged user community, is allowing researchers to
better quantify the spatial extent of permafrost degradation across the Arctic.
Potential controls (weather, topography, vegetation, soil properties) on
permafrost degradation are also being evaluated. The Permafrost Discovery
Gateway helps ensure information access to the broader research community and
encourage new partnerships around knowledge of Arctic
permafrost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.