* 1927994
* JST-NSF-RCN Joint International Workshop on Distributed Energy Management Systems, Tokyo, Japan, June 20-21, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Zhihua Qu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2020
* USD 49,900.00

This workshop proposal is to provide travel support for 20 US-based researchers
to attend an international workshop. The workshop brings together researchers
from U.S., Japan and Norway to share research outcomes and explore potential
collaborations, and it focuses upon fundamental issues in reliable integration
of distributed energy resources (DERs), resilient and efficient operation of
electricity grid, and secure infrastructure systems. The workshop covers such
topics as monitoring, modeling, data analytics, learning, control and operation
of transmission and distribution networks, especially those integrated with PV
generation, wind generation, storage, demand responses, and other DERs. Research
advances will be presented in relevant areas including but not limited to robust
estimation, real-time optimization, distributed control, and defense mechanism
for cyber and physical attacks. Electric vehicles, their interaction within
microgrids, and interdependence of infrastructure systems will also be
considered in the context of enabling smart and resilient communities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Unlike a traditional grid based on large-scale
centralized generation remotely located from consumers, a modern grid has
hierarchical information and control structures with a wide range of generation
and demand responses resources, including renewables, energy storage and
adjustable loads, as well as numerous intelligent electronic devices. Renewable
sources are inherently intermittent and uncertain. To become reliable, resilient
and secure, the grid must be capable of operating itself by incorporating
distributed computing, communication and control, rapidly detecting and
mitigating disturbances, robustly coordinating diverse generation sources and
demand responses, dynamically optimizing grid operations and distributed
resources, and effectively providing strong protection against physical and/or
cyber attacks. U.S., Japan and Norway all have made significant strides in
integrating DERs at high penetration levels, and the proposed workshop aims to
have global impact by bringing together top researchers from the three
countries, by showcase their extensive research and demonstration portfolios in
grid modernization, and by identifying key topics of power systems reliability,
security and resilience for further collaborative research. The two-day workshop
will be held at Bellesalle Roppongi, Tokyo, Japan, June 20th-21st,
2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.