* 1927071
* SBIR Phase II:  MetaMaterial for Seismic Energy Absorption
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Noemi Bonessio, MetaSeismic, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2023
* USD 916,940.00

The broader impact/commercial opportunity of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project stems from creating a paradigmatic shift in the
way we achieve seismic protection. The use of mechanical metamaterials fosters
new opportunities to increase current levels of seismic protection of buildings
and infrastructure, which could ultimately increase the resilience of
communities and save lives. Mechanical metamaterials are materials specifically
designed to have unprecedented properties. Evolving from a traditional system-
based design to a material-based design has the potential of creating seismic
solutions that are more customizable and easier to install than most of the
current technologies. This technology could replace current seismic protection
systems that are traditionally aimed at saving building occupants' lives, but
may not address the important equipment therein. An enhanced level of seismic
protection constitutes an immediate value for commercial activities and services
requiring continuity of operations after earthquakes. The extensive application
of the innovation has the potential of increasing the resiliency of communities
in seismic prone areas and reduce seismic related direct and indirect
losses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project addresses the need for increasing the seismic resilience of our critical
infrastructure, and in particular Information Technology (IT) facilities. The
projects will result in a revolutionary advance in the seismic protection of
vibration sensitive electronic equipment through the use of novel mechanical
metamaterials made with an innovative hybrid additive manufacturing (AM)
process. The feasibility of combining multiple AM processes to manufacture the
multi-component internal architecture of such metamaterials will be
demonstrated. In particular, the effectiveness of AM processes in combining hard
and soft materials in a highly-complex architecture will be addressed, with the
aim of enhancing the design space of the mechanical metamaterial. The effects of
this enlarged designed space on the seismic resilience of IT facilities will be
investigated by developing a specific seismic resilience framework. The
framework will be used to analyze and compare the seismic resilience of data
centers with traditional systems and highly customizable metamaterials, as
resulting from the manufacturing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.