* 1927216
* Collaborative Research: Structure and depth extent of lithospheric shear zones surrounding continental transform faults
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Thorsten Becker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,800.00

At continental transform faults such as the San Andreas, one tectonic plate
slides horizontally relative to its neighbor. Because such faults lie on land
and often in populated areas, the resulting earthquakes dramatically impact
local populations. It remains debated how plates deform beneath the shallow (~10
km), top layer where earthquakes are generated. At larger depths, underlying
rocks transition from brittle to ductile deformation. But whether the shear zone
underneath the fault remains narrow for tens of km, or whether deformation
widens right away is not clear. These different scenarios affect how faults are
loaded, and have significant implications for seismic hazard assessment. Here,
the team uses existing seismic records to investigate six major continental
transform faults. Deformed rocks often exhibit crystal preferred orientations,
fabrics, that can be detected with seismic waves. This is because rock fabrics
affect the wave velocity which then depends on the propagation direction. By
analyzing the anisotropy of seismic waves passing underneath the fault zones,
the researchers probe the geometry and extent of rocks deformation. They also
use geodynamic modeling constrained by geological observations; for given fault
geometries and deformation properties, they predict seismic anisotropy features
underneath the faults. By comparing observations and predictions, the team
unravels the deformation behavior of continental transform faults. The project
fosters an international collaboration with Australia and Switzerland. It
provides support and training to a female graduate student, and outreach toward
undergraduates and K12 students - notably from group underrepresented in
Sciences - and the public. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The team uses data from
existing deployments crossing six continental transform faults (San Andreas,
North Anatolian, Denali, New Zealand Alpine, Altyn Tagh/Kunlun, and Dead Sea).
It conducts full-waveform 2-D and 3-D modeling of teleseismic shear wave
splitting, as well as anisotropic receiver function analysis. The goal is to
image the shear zone and broader deformation field surrounding each transform
fault. The selected faults represent transforms of different ages and maturity.
Existing splitting observations show systematic contrasts between faults.
Combining high-resolution shear zone imaging and geodynamic modeling, the
researchers investigate the degree of strain localization in the lithosphere and
the shear zone geometry. They also study the possible roles of mechanical
anisotropy and inherited fabrics. This project is a critical step toward
establishing a model for continental lithospheric transforms and better
assessing the corresponding earthquake hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.