* 1927695
* Collaborative Research:  Role of endogenous carbon monoxide (CO) in hypoxia tolerant species
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Daniel Cannon, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 152,699.00

Often, carbon monoxide (CO) is thought of as a strictly toxic gas, but CO is
also naturally produced in the body from the breakdown of heme, a key component
of the primary oxygen-carrying protein (hemoglobin) found in red blood cells.
Members of the research team recently discovered that certain species of deep-
diving seals have moderately high concentrations of CO in their blood (similar
to those measured in heavy cigarette smokers). Currently, these are the only
species known to naturally produce such high levels of CO, which may elicit
strong protective effects on tissues that experience low oxygen or reduced blood
flow, as regularly occurs during diving. This project tests the hypothesis that
deep-diving seals produce higher concentrations of CO as a potential adaptive
mechanism to avoid injuries associated with their extreme diving behaviors. It
will investigate the source of the high CO levels in the blood, how the
production of CO is regulated, and the range of CO concentrations in blood and
tissues from several species of air-breathing divers. Species shown to produce
high concentrations of CO will be further examined to evaluate the potential
protective properties associated with the gas. The research has potential
applications that could assist in minimizing human reperfusion injuries (e.g.,
as a result of a stroke). The project is highly collaborative and includes three
Early-Career Investigators, two female scientists, one post-doctoral researcher,
and several graduate and undergraduate students. Several public education and
outreach activities are planned, including contributions to public education at
Ano Nuevo State Reserve in California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of
endogenously produced gas molecules on the regulation of physiological processes
is a rapidly expanding area of biological research. However, the interactions
between these molecules and their biological targets, and the adaptive roles
they play in wildlife, are currently unknown. This project investigates the
genetic and physiological mechanisms driving CO production and the potential for
the gas to elicit cytoprotective effects during hypoxia and/or ischemia in
diving mammals. The project tests the hypothesis that higher CO concentrations
result from elevated heme-protein stores and a high turnover rate of these
stores via short erythrocyte lifespans. It will also test whether CO has
beneficial effects in diving species, including cytoprotection, increased
hemoglobin-oxygen affinity, and altered mitochondrial function. The results from
this study will advance understanding of physiological adaptations for hypoxia
tolerance (e.g., in diving, high-altitude, or burrowing species). This
collaborative project supports three Early-Career Investigators and promotes
research training and education for one post-doctoral researcher, four graduate
students, and over 20 undergraduates across six institutions. Results from this
study will be incorporated into courses taught by the investigators. Broader
Impacts of the project include participation of underrepresented minority
groups, enhanced infrastructure for research and education at six institutions,
and broad dissemination of research and educational materials to enhance public
understanding of key scientific concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.