* 1927166
* EAGER:AI-DCL:Capture, Explain and Negotiate the Inherent Trade-offs in Machine Learning Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Mark Snyder, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 295,713.00

An outstanding issue with machine learning based decision-making algorithms is
the inherent trade-offs between different system criteria. There is an emerging
body of literature demonstrating trade-offs between fairness and accuracy, and
between different fairness notions. By improving fairness, overall accuracy
might decrease. Furthermore, different fairness notions are not compatible with
each other: well-established results show that common statistical fairness
notions are often mutually exclusive. Accurate understanding of such trade-offs
is critical for stakeholders and practitioners to appropriately use these
machine learning methods. The focus of this project is to take an
interdisciplinary approach to study, explain, and address the inherent trade-
offs between different system criteria in machine learning-based decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will develop methods to capture
trade-offs between different system criteria in machine learning algorithms.
They will develop visualizations and interactive interfaces to explain the
trade-offs between the models to the stakeholders. Finally, the project team
will explore social and technical innovations that let stakeholders navigate and
negotiate the fundamental trade-offs between different system criteria. The
project will disseminate the new knowledge in part through a MOOC
offering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.