* 1927418
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: Accelerating Discovery in Multilevel Network Science
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Santo Fortunato, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2025
* USD 979,855.00

1927418 (Fortunato) 1927425 (Vespignani). Humans live in an increasingly
connected world. And data on networks that capture connections of
transportation, trade, health, and communication are increasingly available.
These data offer scientists a chance to tackle some of society's greatest
problems, such as infectious disease, fake news, natural disasters, cyber-
attacks, and health care. However, advances in network science rely on improved
mathematical and theoretical approaches to properly model complex systems with
multiple, interdependent network layers. To address this, AccelNet-MultiNet aims
to link international expertise and provide formal infrastructure for joint US-
Europe scientific discovery in the field of multilevel, multilayer networks.
This network of networks will result in new methods and models to address
societal challenges and the next generation of networks science
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific agenda of this AccelNet project
focuses on two promising areas in network science: (1) theory and methodology,
specifically temporality, embeddings in vector space, information-richness,
reaction-diffusion processes; and (2) applications, including characterizing and
modeling the societal multiplex, multilayer and multi-omics biological network
analysis, resilience management during biological threats. A key feature of
AccelNet-MultiNet?s suite of training and collaboration tools will be an
intensive Fellows program. These 40 graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers will participate in a year-long webinar series open to the larger
scientific community, annual large-scale collaborative problem-solving
activities (Collabathons), and a semester-long immersive exchange program. In
addition, international leader meetings will bring together partners and
additional experts to set the agenda for the future of the multilayer,
multilevel networks field. These will result in Future Directions Research
reports outlining research priorities, strategies, and shared educational vision
in the field. An International Communication Competency training toolkit will be
developed to help scholars build basic skills for successful cross-cultural,
cross-national collaborations. Materials will be made publicly available through
a web-based portal, including the training toolkit, community-developed reports,
publications, webinar talks, and shared data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.