* 1927690
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Urban Migration in Long Term Context
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Gina Buckley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2021
* USD 22,812.00

Researchers seek to identify patterns of immigration over time and between
socioeconomic status groups in ancient, multi-ethnic urban centers to better
understand the role migration played in the maintenance of high population
numbers and to quantify the proportion of migrants between status groups. In
ancient urban studies, researchers often focus on the movement of large
aggregate groups of people to a region during the city's initial settlement and
the ultimate cause(s) of demographic collapse. While these events are crucial to
understanding how ancient urban centers first arose and were eventually
abandoned, more attention needs to be paid to how large populations were
sustained for long periods of time, some spanning hundreds of years. This
research will focus on how immigration in an urban setting contributed to these
maintenance efforts. Recent advances in archaeology allow researchers to
identify individual and group-level migration across time rather than observing
the movement of ancient people as a large, singular event. This doctoral
dissertation study will be one of the first to explore the impact of migration
over time on population maintenance in a pre-modern city and provide a direct
comparison of migrants between multiple tiers of status groups (lower-, middle-,
and higher-status producers and consumers). Doctoral student Gina M. Buckley,
under the direction of Kenneth G. Hirth, will conduct research at Penn State
University. This research will foster international collaboration with Mexico
(INAH), Canada (Western University Ontario) and Europe (Max Planck, Jena,
Germany) and the development of outreach communication to promote the acceptance
of migrant communities. Furthermore, all data obtained through this research
will be made available on an open-access platform to support future population
studies in pre-modern cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
research project will explore the migration patterns of socioeconomic status
groups from La Ventilla, a central neighborhood of Teotihuacan (located near
present-day Mexico City), the first multi-ethnic New World city to reach over
100,000 residents (200-600 AD). While it is well chronicled that immigration
from the surrounding region fueled much of the city's initial growth, it remains
unclear when multi-ethnicity developed here, particularly in the central
sectors. Research will test two hypotheses; (1) migration into the heart of
Teotihuacan was a continuous process over the entire occupation of this city
sector, rather than occurring primarily during its foundation, and (2) larger
proportions of lower-status individuals migrated into the center of the city and
have significant differences in "quality of life" indicators (skeletal markers
of health, age-at-death estimations, and diet) than those of higher status
groups. Previous studies of the city population have shown that individuals
towards the fringes of the city suffered from common pre-modern problems
including malnutrition and high infant mortality rates. Using a broad spectrum
of isotopic analyses (carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, strontium, and lead) combined
with absolute chronological control through radiocarbon dating of human skeletal
remains, researchers will determine if immigration was critical to population
maintenance for over 400 years of occupation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.