* 1927144
* Research Initiation: Formation of Engineering Identity Through Capstone Design Peer-Interventions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Carrie Myers, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The United States is facing a one-million-person shortfall in STEM professionals
within the next decade. To abate this shortfall, it is necessary for the United
States higher education system to educate additional STEM majors. It is widely
known that at least one third of college freshman will change their majors and,
unfortunately, students in STEM majors are even more likely to change majors
than their non-STEM counterparts. The development of an engineering identity
early in lower division undergraduates may decrease the number of students
transferring out of engineering programs within the first two years of college.
This proposal aims to enhance the engineering identity of freshman and sophomore
students studying chemical engineering by involving them in course-related
interventions. These interventions utilize senior chemical engineering students
as near-peer role models and simultaneously integrate content from the senior
capstone design course into-lower division, core chemical engineering courses.
It may be that students who leave engineering lack a strong engineering
identity, and growing this identity early in the curriculum will increase
persistence in the field. A desired outcome of this work is the increased
persistence of students within the chemical engineering program through this
near-peer mentoring program that uses senior level students as role models. A
second outcome of the proposed work is training the principle investigator in
educational research methods to increase the body of scientists equipped to lead
research endeavors in the area of engineering education research. This project
serves as a foundation for future work to examine formation of an engineering
identity as impacted by of the integration of senior students via their capstone
design projects into other areas of the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;This two-year
project aims to determine to what extent, relative to a control group, does
exposure to a peer mentor increase students' engineering identity development
over time compared to those who do not receive a peer mentoring intervention.
Year 1 introduces a cohort of freshman students in an introductory chemical
engineering course to senior chemical engineering capstone-design students
through in-class and out-of-class interactions centered around their design
projects. Year 2 will incorporate capstone-design into recitation sections of a
material and energy balances course taken by sophomore students via short
problem-based learning exercises facilitated by the capstone-design students.
The quantity and timing of the peer interactions and their impact on engineering
identity development will be measured. Finally, the research team will assess
the extent to which students perceive that peer-mentoring influenced their
engineering identity development, knowledge acquisition and persistence. The
theoretical framework on which the work is based incorporates both socialization
theory and role acquisition theory. Engineering identity will be assessed
through a validated survey instrument and compared between groups of students
who receive or do not receive the intervention. In addition to the quantitative
survey instrument, qualitative data regarding the student-perceived quality of
the interventions will be obtained through focus groups. Professional
development activities, meant to satisfy the mentoring component of the project,
will occur in tandem with the research plan and include: (1) the formal training
of the principle investigator in quantitative research methods through
completion of an online graduate certificate with a focus on education; (2) the
mentorship of the principle investigator through inclusion in the Discipline-
Based Education Research Group at the institution; and (3) inclusion of the
principle investigator at the weekly education research group meetings of co-
principle investigator. The simultaneous execution of the research plan and
professional development plan provides immediate context to the formal and
informal training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.