* 1927268
* Research Initiation: The Impact of Engineering Education Guilds - Understanding Vision, Quantifying Propagation, and Situating Among Other Faculty Resources
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Courtney Faber, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2022
* USD 199,999.00

The National Science Foundation and other organizations have spent, and will
continue to spend, millions of dollars each year supporting educational
innovation projects to broaden participation, improve student learning, and
positively impact undergraduate engineering students. However, for various
reasons, many of these educational innovations are never implemented beyond the
classrooms they were initially designed for. In an attempt to improve the
likelihood that educational innovations will be widely used, this research
examines ways in which educators develop, share, and implement new ways of
teaching. In particular, this project focuses on educational innovations that
are shared through "engineering education guilds," which are large groups of
faculty who are organized around a specific innovation (for example, the use of
reflection in engineering education). The goals of this research are to
understand (1) how the innovations championed by two well-established guilds
were designed to be easily adopted by educators and (2) what resources educators
use when adopting new ways of teaching, including the guild's role in that
adoption. If these goals are met, designers and users of educational innovations
will be better informed and supported in educational change development and
adoption, ultimately leading to an increase in the adoption of research-based
classroom practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the above goals, this
research employs multiple case study and multi-method approaches that combine
qualitative methods (interviews and open-ended survey response analysis) and
quantitative methods (network analysis). Interviews with guild leaders will
result in within- and cross-case reports that provide a rich description of the
pedagogical innovation championed by each guild and an assessment of the extent
to which each guild is following a dissemination or propagation paradigm. Guild
leader responses will be characterized using the Designing for Sustained
Adoption Assessment Instrument, which assesses innovations for the effectiveness
of their propagation intentions. Surveys of the guilds' primary and further-
removed participants will result in an understanding of how widely adopted the
innovation is and the construction of the resource networks used by faculty to
implement new pedagogical innovations. By combining two established concepts
(the dissemination/propagation paradigms and network analysis) in a unique way,
the understanding of how organizational intent can influence adoption of
innovative engineering education pedagogies/concepts will be advanced. This
understanding is useful not only in engineering education, where researchers are
continuously developing and studying new best practices in training the next
generation of engineers, but also in other fields where educational innovations
and research are seeking to broaden participation and improve the development of
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.