* 1927411
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions US-Sao Paulo: Integrating phylogeny, genetics, and chemical ecology to unravel the tangled bank of the multipartite fungus-farming ant symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Nicole Gerardo, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 385,064.00

Biodiversity is the source of many important foods, medicines, and other
products essential to human well-being. Yet, a great deal of biodiversity
remains hidden from view. We only have a superficial understanding of how
biodiversity originates, persists, and responds to a changing environment. Many
species are interconnected, which makes biodiversity complex to understand. This
research studies this interconnectedness, especially the interactions between
individual organisms. This research focuses on a group of tropical ants and the
fungus that they cultivate in their nests. This includes 245 species of ants,
their cultivated fungi, and other microbial organisms. The goal is to uncover
the hidden diversity of organisms within the ant-fungus relationship.
Discoveries from this research will reveal new diversity, especially diversity
arising from hidden interactions. These discoveries will also potentially be
developed into new technologies and medicines that benefit human society. This
project will train a new generation of biodiversity scientists as students. The
project will enhance international scientific collaboration with Brazil to
tackle global challenges. Finally, the general public will be engaged through
innovative communications making use of natural history
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will sample leafcutter ants and nests
widely across Brazil, Costa Rica, and Panama. These samples will focus on groups
of organisms where hidden diversity is expected. This includes the cultivated
fungi, parasites that attack these fungi, and bacteria that function in garden
defense. Both phylogenetic and taxonomic diversity will be assessed for all
these samples. Then a coupled comprehensive gene expression and natural product
profiling approach will be applied. This will allow the characterization of
genetic diversity as well as the functions of the ants' garden microbiomes.
Finally, the project will use cutting-edge techniques in natural products
research. The functional aspect involves characterizing and understanding the
chemical compounds used to signal, harm, help, and interact with the various
interacting organisms. This project benefits from the wide-ranging expertise of
the US-Brazil investigative team, whose research spans insect and fungal
taxonomy, phylogenetics, genomics, and natural products
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.