* 1927639
* Collaborative Research: TERRG: Thresholds in ecosystem responses to rainfall gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Amber Ulseth, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 02/29/2024
* USD 137,447.00

The biology and chemistry of streams change in response to changes in
temperature and rainfall patterns. Changes in temperature and precipitation may
lead to predictable changes in the biology and chemistry of streams, while other
changes are abrupt and unpredictable. In the face of environmental change, we
need to understand the environmental conditions that result in predictable and
abrupt responses to both the biology and chemistry of streams. This award will
support research on understanding biological controls and environmental
constraints on the structure and function of streams in South Texas. The
research will take advantage of a semi-arid to mesic rainfall gradient that
features an abrupt shift in stream community composition and ecosystem
functioning at 85 cm rainfall/yr. The research will consist of a mix of field
observations, manipulative experiments, and modeling. Training of undergraduate
(including minority) and graduate students and outreach via an established K-12
program will contribute to the project?s broader
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our understanding of why
subtle shifts in the environment can result in the significant and abrupt
reorganization of ecological communities. Spatial patterns in structure and
function of ecosystems along precipitation gradients indicate that threshold
effects are common and widespread. Therefore, understanding the mechanisms that
drive these patterns is essential for forecasting which regions of the world
will undergo rapid ecosystem shifts under future environmental change. Stream
ecosystems are particularly sensitive to changes in precipitation, but multiple
mechanisms can be invoked to explain observed threshold effects in streams.
These mechanisms include: 1) Changes in the quantity, quality, temporal
stability, and predictability of the resource base, which cascade up to higher
trophic levels; and conversely, 2) Changes in the temporal stability,
predictability, and average environmental conditions impacting community
structure, which then cascade down to ecosystem processes. By exploring these
alternate and potentially simultaneously operating mechanistic hypotheses in a
set of streams along a precipitation gradient in South Texas, the research will
capitalize on an ideal natural experiment along with a strong foundation of
preliminary data collected by the principal investigators. The results of this
study will in turn inform our understanding of how similar processes operate in
stream ecosystems around the world, and the basic principles will enhance our
understanding of these processes in all ecosystems. The award will support
training of undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral scholars, and early career
faculty at both a Hispanic Serving Institution and a primarily undergraduate
institution serving 40% minorities. Undergraduates will conduct independent
research and present the results at professional meetings. K-12 outreach and
adult education will be conducted through the SIU Center for Ecology and
Graduate Research Assistants Supporting Science (GRASS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.