* 1927929
* I-Corps: Acoustic monitoring of remote pumping equipment
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this acoustic monitoring technology
for remote pumping equipment is to help ensure the reliable and continuous flow
of critical products, such as public water or oil and gas while increasing
societal well-being and reducing industrial carbon footprint. The initial focus
will be on equipment such as compressors, valves or pumps located in a remote or
dangerous location. This novel acoustic method and the corresponding AI
analytics brings novel and advanced functionalities at a fraction of the cost of
existing methods. This allows users such as water companies or oil producers to
reduce the energy needs of their equipment while reducing downtime and enabling
early detection of many types of failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project further develops an acoustic monitoring platform for remote pumping
equipment. It is a full stack internet of things solution for the monitoring,
diagnostic and control of industrial equipment. Acoustic monitoring is a novel
method that uses sensors to detect complex issues in remote pumping equipment.
Simple surface sensors give important insight on the running condition of
underground or remote equipment by integrating acoustic sensing with AI
analytics. A control solution then adjusts the running condition of the
equipment to extend its lifetime and increase its efficiency. The proposed
industrial control solution aims to reduce down time, decrease leakage and
increase the efficiency and output of many industrial
pumps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.