* 1927115
* SBIR Phase II:  Bluebird: Integrated IoT for Educators and Learners
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Sibel Guler, Teknikio
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,010,993.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project develops a low-
cost gateway for hands-on exploration and advances knowledge of Internet of
things (IoT) fundamentals for educators and learners. The overarching goal of
the project is to transform the current STEM landscape with an alternative,
future-forward approach to designing connected devices, and to introduce a wide
range of students to creative applications of complex technologies. Cyber-
physical systems - commonly referred to as the Internet of things - are paving
new information pathways and will soon become the foundation of all trades from
medicine to publishing. These concepts need to be taught in a STEM curriculum
but today are rarely even mentioned in a K-12 classroom. The end-product will
help fulfill the NSF mission of preparing youth to lead scientific innovation
and hold successful careers by building the technologies of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Phase II project develops an unparalleled educational
tool enabling users to build simple yet full-cycle IoT systems. The product
exposes the underlying architecture of IoT and leads users through the concepts
of electronics, collaborative coding, data security, and social impact. The main
technical innovations are: 1) the design of small footprint, low-cost hardware
with onboard communications components; and 2) the accompanying software
platform that supports collaborative coding with multiple networked devices,
while maintaining the highest level of security and privacy features to protect
student data. Currently, IoT systems in the EdTech market have several layers of
custom-built technology and outdated components. This project offers widely
accessible hardware and software IoT building blocks with full functionality.
Students will devise projects that activate objects remotely by giving them
attributes, emotions, and behaviors. Additionally, they will gain awareness of
the social implications of their projects, as they consider how the objects'
attributes change and respond within the scope of a network and invent cause-
and-effect interactions in an end-to-end IoT system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.