* 1927258
* Nonlinear Phenomena in Stochastic and Deterministic Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Svetlana Roudenko, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 09/30/2022
* USD 324,108.00

Wave motion is common for many real-life phenomena, from water waves to electro-
magnetic or gravitational waves. While investigating wave-like processes, it is
important to understand how the waves form, how they travel, whether they form a
stable or an unstable structure, and if certain initial conditions lead to
formation of singularities (like tsunamis, rogue waves, or rough turbulence).
Understanding the evolution in time of such processes via various mathematical
models is a goal of this project, and it will include studying various wave
phenomena with or without stochastic elements. These wave-type phenomena are
fundamental in nature, yet we are still at the dawn of their full analytical and
numerical descriptions. This project is aimed at advancing the frontiers of the
science of wave phenomena with applications to the real-life manifestations in
nature. Students at all levels, from undergraduate to post-doctoral, will be
involved in this research and receive training for their careers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at understanding the global behavior of
solutions to nonlinear stochastic and deterministic dispersive partial
differential equations, where the nonlinearities cause a significant difference
in global behavior compared with the linear time evolution. One such nonlinear
structure is a solitary wave, or soliton, which has a specific shape, exists (in
the mathematical sense) for all time and in some equations travels in particular
directions, while in other equations it oscillates periodically. Whether such a
structure is stable or unstable and how it might be influenced by the external
random perturbations is important in applications, and if unstable, it is
important to investigate what it leads to. Typically, instability (the case when
solitons are unstable) means that a singularity will form: for example, a freak
wave in the ocean or a self-focusing burn in laser optics. Thus, it is very
important to investigate the question of soliton stability, which is to be
studied in this project in both stochastic and deterministic settings and via
analytical and numerical approaches. A special thrust will be given to the study
of formation of singularities, for example, collapses and concentrations. The
research program starts from advancing the soliton stability theory as well as
understanding the singularity formation process for the stochastic generalized
Korteweg-de Vries equation, then progressing to one of its higher dimensional
generalization (the little explored even in pure deterministic case but
important in quantum mechanics and fluid dynamics) Zakharov-Kuznetsov equation,
where questions of asymptotic stability, existence and the description of
singularities is proposed for investigation. Using the analytical and numerical
techniques the nonlinear Hartree equation with the non-local potential will be
investigated, with the special emphasis on understanding the spectral structure.
This type of equation arises in general relativity as well as in quantum
mechanics, and so is important to study in that context. Finally, questions of
description of global behavior of solutions in a wave-type equation, such as the
nonlinear Klein-Gordon equation, will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.