* 1927653
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Workshop on the Economics of Information Security (WEIS)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Samuel Ransbotham, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2021
* USD 12,000.00

This project supports students attending the 18th Workshop on the Economics of
Information Security (WEIS). WEIS is an annual event that serves as a leading
forum for interdisciplinary scholarship on information security, combining
expertise from the fields of computer science and electrical engineering,
economics, social science, business, law, and policy. Participation in WEIS is a
critical part of the educational experiences of students with interdisciplinary
interests related to security and privacy. WEIS provides them an opportunity to
interact with senior researchers and be exposed to leading work in the field.
The support requested in this proposal will enable the participation of students
who otherwise would face financial challenges to attend WEIS due to travel
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student travel grant will support approximately
12 graduate and undergraduate students. Funds will be used to offset airfare,
lodging and conference registration fees. The grant will support advanced stage
graduate students with papers appearing on the program, students from
underrepresented groups including women, undergraduates and underrepresented
minorities, and students attending WEIS for the first
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.