* 1927074
* SBIR Phase II:  Venous Valve Prosthesis as a Cure for Chronic Venous Insufficiency
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Austin Walker, INNOVEIN, INC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,371,596.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to develop a medical device for valve
replacement treatment of chronic insufficiency of the veins (CVI). Currently, no
definitive treatment option exists to address the underlying cause of the
disease, valvular reflux, which leaves millions of patients with chronic venous
ulcers, skin thickening, and pain for years to decades. When brought to market,
the proposed novel prosthetic valve and delivery system will provide a viable
curative therapy superior to current treatment options and mitigating
complications associated with existing valve prostheses, such as thrombosis and
valve incompetence. The proposed product will curtail substantial health care
expenditures associated with CVI, such as wound care, hospitalizations for
infections, and associated secondary procedures. Because implantation of this
valve does not require the complex or invasive surgical interventions of
existing technologies, its use also will avoid expenses associated with open
surgical procedures and rehabilitative care. The commercialization of this
innovation is expected to benefit CVI patients, while significantly reducing
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project aims to develop a novel,
reliable, and marketable prosthetic valve and delivery system for the treatment
of incompetent veins. In Phase I, a design was created for a device that
exceeded laboratory and animal benchmarks. Phase II proposed development
improves the design for broader deployment by demonstrating the the valve's
ability to minimize thrombosis as well as the capability to be produced at
scale. Phase II objectives are to: 1) Develop and produce the next generation
valve for in vitro and animal testing; 2) Compare safety of valve designs in an
in vitro study; 3) Demonstrate the safety and efficacy of the leading design in
a chronic animal study; 4) Complete biocompatibility testing on the design to
ensure it is appropriate for human testing; and 5) Establish manufacturability
of the device. These steps will provide the foundation for future clinical
trials to demonstrate safety and efficacy of the device in
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.