* 1927623
* Large Scale Continuous Layer-by-Layer Assembly of Paper-based Nanocomposites for High Fidelity Multifunctional Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jaehyun Chung, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 359,993.00

Paper is a ubiquitous material invented in ancient China comprising cellulose
fibers tangled and twisted with each other forming a porous network. Today?s
ever-digitalized world has spurred new interests in paper as a low-cost,
sustainable, flexible, lightweight and biocompatible platform for portable
electronics. This project will provide the framework for the incorporation of
nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and cellulose nanofibrils (CNFs),
into fibrous networks, with the goal of enabling easy scale-up manufacturing of
paper-based nanocomposites (PBC). The grant provides fundamental knowledge for
the development of a continuous layer-by-layer assembly process, mimicking
industrial papermaking, to manufacture strain sensors with electrical
conductivity, enhanced strength and high sensitivity to external stimuli for
multifunctional sensing applications. This novel process has the potential to
reinvigorate the pulp and paper industry and benefit the U.S. economy and
promote the progress of science by changing the way smart materials and
electronic devices are manufactured and used for applications such as wearable
devices, healthcare applications, structural monitoring systems, soft robotics,
and electronic skins. The interdisciplinary approach encourages the
participation of diverse individuals including women and underrepresented
minority groups in engineering research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
layer-by-layer assembly of paper-based nanocomposites in a continuous web former
can overcome several limitations existing multifunctional sensors have, ranging
from cost, flexibility, durability, and mechanosensitivity. This fundamental
study is to fill the knowledge gaps on interface tailoring for the incorporation
of well-dispersed nanoparticles at high content into auxetic fiber networks, and
on microcrack-assisted manipulation to control the disconnection-reconnection of
percolated conductive structures in paper-based nanocomposites. Auxetic paper
nanocomposites possess a negative Poisson's ratio, meaning they expand biaxially
during stretching, in direct contrast to conventional materials, which endure
transverse Poisson compression under tension. Bidirectional expansions in
auxetic materials contribute to moving electrically conductive nanoparticles
away from one another, thereby improving the sensitivity of stretchable
resistive sensors. Numerical simulations are performed to understand the
coupling between mechanical motion and electron transport in auxetic materials,
while experimental research is conducted to verify the model, test the
hypothesis that structural Poisson's ratio and strain concentration can be
tailored to achieve ultrahigh mechanosensitivity, and establish process-
structure-property relationships in paper-based multifunctional
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.