* 1927880
* Category II : Ookami: A high-productivity path to frontiers of scientific discovery enabled by exascale system technologies
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Robert Harrison, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2025
* USD 6,653,157.00

The State University of New York proposes to procure and operate for at least
four years the first computer outside of Japan with the A64fx processor
developed by Fujitsu for the Japanese path to exascale computing (i.e.,
computers capable of 10^18 operations per second). The ARM-based, multi-core,
512-bit SIMD-vector processor with ultrahigh-bandwidth memory promises to retain
familiar and successful programming models while achieving very high performance
for a wide range of applications including simulation and big data. The testbed
significantly extends current NSF-sponsored HPC technologies and will enable the
community to evaluate and demonstrate the potential of this technology for
deployment in multiple settings. Through integration with NSF's Extreme Science
and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE), the system will be widely
accessible and fully leverages existing cyber infrastructure including the XDMoD
monitoring system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What does this mean for science?
Compared with the best CPUs anticipated during the deployment period, A64fx
offers 2-4x better performance on memory-intensive applications such as sparse-
matrix solvers found in many engineering and physics codes. For nearly all other
applications, performance is also better or competitive. This transformational
performance should be available nearly out of the box, with additional
performance possible from tuning. To the scientist or engineer this means faster
time to solution with significantly less programmer effort. The target class of
applications to be enabled are memory-bandwidth intensive with 32GB/node memory,
with significant gains anticipated for many other applications. Analysis of
XSEDE workload shows 86% of all jobs (85% cycles) will fit within the available
memory per node and that the majority of jobs are memory-bandwidth intensive.
Finally, we have concrete plans to substantially broaden participation in
science and engineering research by partnering with external organizations at
the institutional, regional, and national levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.