* 1927130
* AccelNet-WOU: International Research Network for Nuclear Astrophysics (IReNA)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Timothy Beers, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

Multi-messenger astronomy, using electromagnetic radiation (radio waves, visible
light, X-rays, gamma rays), neutrinos, and gravitational waves, is providing
unprecedented observations of extreme astrophysical environments, such as
supernovae and merging neutron stars. The diverse range of nuclear and
astrophysics that needs to be synthesized to answer open questions about the
universe cannot be obtained by a single country. The International Research
Network for Nuclear Astrophysics (IReNA) project connects research networks and
capabilities across disciplines and geographic boundaries to advance
understanding of the origin of chemical elements and the nature of dense nuclear
matter. This network of networks links the U.S. Joint Institute for Nuclear
Astrophysics Center for the Evolution of Elements (JINA-CEE) with similar
undertakings in Europe (ChETEC), Japan (UKAKUREN), Germany (EMMI and The Milky
Way system), and the international NuGRID network. IReNA creates the
communication channels and collaborative structures needed for rapid scientific
response to new multi-messenger discoveries. Exchange programs, innovative
workshops, and retreats will foster network communication and training of the
next generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-messenger
astronomical observation of supernovae and merging neutron stars is leading to a
better understanding of and further questions on the origin of chemical elements
and the physics of dense nuclear matter. For multi-messenger data to become true
windows on the universe, an unprecedented amount of astrophysics and nuclear
physics associated with the various messengers and their interactions must be
understood. The IReNA project brings together U.S. and international networks
with complementary capabilities to exchange and synthesize data, models, theory,
and expertise in astrophysics and nuclear physics. The research goals are to
advance our understanding of element formation in stars, stellar explosions, and
neutron star mergers through new nuclear physics experiments, nuclear theory,
advanced computational modeling, and new observations of the distribution of
elements in stars across our Galaxy. The expanded collaborations will enable
synthesis and exchange of data sets across international communities and expand
capabilities far beyond what would be possible by any individual
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.