* 1927651
* Collaborative Research: Nanoimprinting of High Aspect-Ratio Nanostructures in Thermoplastic Polymers Using Metallic Glass Roller Molds
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Donggang Yao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2023
* USD 283,077.00

This collaborative research team uses a multidisciplinary approach to
investigate the feasibility of scalable imprinting of thermoplastic polymer film
surfaces enabled by the use of metallic glass roller molds. Thermoplastic
polymers with high aspect-ratio nanoscale features exhibit versatile properties
and are highly desired in numerous applications such as solar cells, transparent
conducting films and photonic crystals. Manufacturing such films with nanoscale
features using roll-to-roll (R2R) nanoimprinting has been developed for reactive
polymers but has been a challenge for thermoplastic polymers because they are
typically over 100 times more viscous and require significantly higher
imprinting pressure. Hence, there emerges a need for the development of a
precise and durable roller mold for thermoplastic nanoimprinting. This
collaborative project involves two institutions, one leading investigations into
the design and roll-to-roll manufacture of the high aspect-ratio nanostructures
in thermoplastic substrates, the other directing efforts in characterization and
modeling. Results from this research forms the scientific basis for successful
transfer of the novel manufacturing technology to industry and enables economic
production of nanodevices for applications in energy, healthcare, automotive,
and telecommunication. The project further enriches curriculum development,
particularly in the interdisciplinary area of nanomanufacturing, and broadens
the participation of women and underrepresented groups in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental research to explore a
viable nanomanufacturing process using a mechanically robust metallic glass
roller mold for continuous production of high-fidelity thermoplastic
nanostructures. Metallic glasses are a class of high strength metals that can be
processed like plastics in their supercooled liquid state into large-scale
geometries with feature sizes down to 10 nm. The project involves several tasks.
(1) Investigations into the transfer of planar nanostructures onto the curved
surface of metallic glass coated roller molds. (2) Identification of the
thermomechanical processing window for roller nanoimprinting of metallic glasses
without crystallization. (3) Utilization of proximity heating to enhance the
replication precision. (4) Characterization of the replication fidelity of the
imprinted nanostructures. (5) Performance of numerical modeling of roll-to-roll
based nanomanufacturing processes. Fundamental contributions are anticipated
regarding the nanoscale dynamics of metallic glasses and thermoplastic polymers
during continuous nanoimprinting. Particularly, the research advances the
understanding of (a) rheology and processing-microstructure-property relations
in metallic glasses and thermoplastic polymers at nanoscale, (b) crystallization
of metallic glasses in the supercooled liquid regime, and (c) precise control
and optimization of material?s thermomechanical history in nanoscale
fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.