* 1927326
* Refining the bounds of Marine Isotope Stage 5a and 5c peak sea level: Insights from 3D modeling of glacial isostatic adjustment
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jessica Creveling, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 266,580.00

Marine terraces and other geological markers of an ancient ocean's shoreline can
constrain the height of sea level for past warm periods with similar or less ice
than exists on Earth today. However, geoscientists must be careful to correct
for local tectonic displacement and motion of the Earth's crust that arises from
the growth and melt of ice sheets when stating that a geological marker's
present elevation equals the height of sea level long ago. In the case of the
latter, continental ice sheets, like those that existed across Canada and the
northern U.S. at the last glacial maximum, loaded down the glaciated crust and
created a raised bulge that extended south as far as Florida/Caribbean and
southern California/Baja California on the east and west Coasts of North
America, respectively. This physics is similar to the deformation caused by a
person sitting on a soft mattress. Like the mattress analogy, when continental
ice sheets melt (the person stands up), the loaded portion begins to bounce
back, or rebound, and the raised portion begins to relax down, or subside. For
the Earth's crust, however, the adjustment from being loaded to unloaded takes
many, many thousands of years to complete. For this reason, geoscientists use
computer models for how Earth's crust deforms to "correct" the elevations of
geological markers for past shorelines and therefore determine past sea level
heights; by assuming that the Earth has a simple, layered, internal structure,
that looks like a concentric jaw-breaker candy in cross-section, geoscientists
can model Earth's deformation on a desktop computer. Here the investigator
proposes to update this computer model with more realistic lateral and vertical
layers of Earth's composition as determined from seismic-wave imaging of Earth's
interior (much like an ultrasound). The PI proposes to use more powerful
computers to complete this modeling effort. The PI will compare the computer
model outputs to a compilation of published elevations of globally distributed
marine terraces and geological shoreline markers for two periods of warmth
during the last ice age that occurred ~80 and ~100 thousand years ago. This
research will refine estimates of global sea level and during these past
intervals of ice-age warmth. The proposed research will train a PhD student in
sea level research methods; together with the Oregon Museum of Science and
Industry (OMSI), the scientists will create a hands-on activity of how
geologists use the geological archive of ancient sea level and global
geophysical models of Earth's structure to understand the stability of ice
sheets during past climate states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global geophysical
models of glacial isostatic adjustment (GIA) utilize the geographic pattern of
past sea level reconstructed from marine terraces and other shoreline markers to
determine global mean sea level (GMSL), and equivalent ice volume, during past
warm periods. A compilation of published elevations of globally distributed
markers for Marine Isotope Stage (MIS) 5a and 5c high stands, ~80 and ~100 ka,
respectively, offer the opportunity to examine the magnitude of peak GMSL
arising from an orbital precession cycle. Recent GIA analyses of regional
subsets of this global compilation of geological markers have produced
discrepant estimates of MIS 5a and 5c peak GMSL that vary between ~5 to 40 m
below present sea level. These analyses adopted independent one-dimensional
models of Earth's viscoelastic structure- that is, depth varying but laterally
homogenous- that best fit regional subsets of paleo-sea level markers. However,
these 1D models could not fit the full suite of geological constraints from
around the globe, thus introducing biases into GMSL reconstructions. Here, the
investigator propose to adopt a three-dimensional finite element model of GIA
that captures both the lateral and radial complexity in Earth's viscoelastic
structure as inferred from recent studies of high-resolution seismic shear wave
tomography in order to improve the fit between numerical predictions of the
geographically variable pattern in sea level arising from GIA and a global
compilation of geological indicators of MIS 5a and 5c peak sea level. This
exercise will refine estimates of MIS 5a and 5c peak global mean sea level and
further constrain cryosphere stability during these past intervals of relative
ice-age warmth. As such, the proposed research represents a timely opportunity-
and necessary next step- to further our understanding of the magnitude and rate
of cryosphere change as evidenced by the geological record. Finally, the results
of this project will be directly relevant to ongoing studies of seismic hazard
(for example, across the U.S. Pacific coast) through refinements of regional
rates of tectonic uplift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.