* 1927930
* Secondary Amine-Containing Organic Micropollutants as Precursors of Previously Uncharacterized N-Nitrosamines in Wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Teng Zeng, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,480.00

Freshwater scarcity is a major challenge both nationally and globally. Many
municipalities are considering wastewater reuse as a viable solution to
augmenting water supplies to address this issue. One major concern about
implementing wastewater reuse stems from the potential public health risks
caused by exposure to wastewater-derived pollutants such as N-nitrosamines.
Despite this recognition, there remain gaps in our knowledge regarding the
formation and prevalence of these compounds. This project will address this gap
by investigating the fate and reactivity of precursors that serve as the source
of N-nitrosamines in wastewater. Successful completion of this research will
benefit water utilities in their ability to monitor N-nitrosamines and assess
treatment efficiency of advanced treatment technologies. Regulatory agencies may
also find project results useful to assess the risk of N-nitrosamines. This
project will provide valuable research training opportunities for
underrepresented high school and college students to broaden opportunity and
diversify the Nation's STEM workforce. The outreach program will promote direct
knowledge transfer to the scientific stakeholder communities, while improving
the scientific literacy of the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;N-Nitrosamines are
contaminants of potential public health concern for planned and de facto reuse
of municipal wastewater effluent. To date, research on N-nitrosamines has
focused primarily on N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) and a few other aliphatic or
cyclic species. Relatively limited knowledge exists regarding the sources,
identities, fate, and risks of uncharacterized N-nitrosamine species. The
overall goal of this research project is to address this knowledge gap by 1)
examining the yields and formation mechanisms of N-nitroso derivatives upon
chloramination of secondary amine-containing pharmaceuticals and pesticides; 2)
establishing the relative importance of secondary amine-containing
micropollutants as precursors of uncharacterized N-nitrosamines in full-scale
wastewater treatment and reuse facilities; and 3) evaluating the impacts of
photo- and biotransformation processes on secondary amine-containing
micropollutants in wastewater-impacted surface waters. The approach will include
both high resolution mass spectrometry and chemiluminescence assays of field
samples and bench-scale testing to accomplish the proposed research tasks. An
outreach and education plan will seek to broaden participation of
underrepresented high school and undergraduate students in environmental
research; incorporate research methodologies and outcomes into the environmental
curriculum at Syracuse University; and disseminate research results to the
broader scientific community, stakeholders, and lay public to improve monitoring
and mitigation strategies for N-nitrosamines and their precursors in
wastewater.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.