* 1927042
* SBIR Phase II:  Hydro-financial modeling architecture for the automated optimization of low basis risk indices
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Matthew Marshall, Lotic Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 948,945.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will result from improved financial resilience
of hundreds of thousands of water-dependent businesses and municipalities
currently threatened by hydrologic volatility and severely strained ecosystems.
This SBIR research will enable the seamless integration of scientific and
financial modeling for the water economy. The innovation lowers the costs and
improves the performance of two climate risk mitigation investments: 1) Green
Infrastructure (projects that emulate or protect nature in order to ensure clean
water supply for commercial and public use); and 2) weather insurance contracts,
which provide businesses and utilities with financial relief from droughts and
floods that hamper their operations. With 50% of the global population projected
to face water scarcity by 2050 (according to the UN), and $10B in economic value
destroyed annually by floods, droughts, freezes in the US, these new approaches
to risk mitigation are crucial to reducing water demand stresses through a free-
market approach to water resource conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to eliminate technical
barriers currently hindering seamless data and model integration for hydrology
and finance. The Phase I project validated technical feasibility by
demonstrating the utility of a semantic web technology to provide end-to-end
modeling solutions for quantifying hydro-financial risk. Phase I established
that the technology 1) greatly improves the interoperability between massive
heterogeneous data sets and models for quantifying hydrologic-financial risk,
and 2) enables data and models to be linked through a tamper-proof distributed
network. The Phase II project builds on the technological foundation to deploy a
production environment for running a suite of models encompassing ecosystem
services, hydrology, and actuarial sciences. The project builds foundations for
AI-enabled decision support tools. If successful, this research will enable
significant reductions in the time and costs associated with modeling the
financial value of investment in natural water infrastructure, generating
comparisons between a wide range of water projects and financial structures
seamlessly and without compromising scientific rigor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.