* 1927635
* Collaborative Research: How Does Lower Continental Crust Form? A Petrochronological Investigation of the Ivrea Zone
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Bradley Hacker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2022
* USD 186,584.00

Continental crust occupies about 40 percent of the surface area of the Earth and
is critical for the sustenance of habitability. Whereas the upper continental
crust is known to be dominated by sedimentary rocks formed by the erosion of
mountains, the composition and origin of lower continental crust is not well
understood. The prevailing paradigm is that the lower crust is made of dense
rock, rich in the elements iron (Fe) and magnesium (Mg), emplaced as rising
melts from the mantle below. However, metamorphosed sediments are common in
sections of lower crustal rock that are now exposed at the surface of the Earth.
This research addresses the question: How are sediments incorporated into the
lower crust? This question is addressed via a reconstruction of the pressure-
temperature-time history of a characteristic section of the lower crustal, the
Ivrea-Verbano Zone in Italy, to evaluate competing hypotheses for the formation
of lower continental crust. The research project incorporates a new
collaboration between Penn State, UC Santa Barbara, and the University of
Lausanne, supports the training of two graduate students from under-represented
groups, and engages undergraduates in academic research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Characterizing how lower continental crust forms is
fundamental to understanding crustal evolution, development of body forces, flow
of crust, and chemical differentiation of the Earth. Using a suite of
complementary techniques, this project tests three hypotheses for the formation
of the Ivrea-Verbano Zone: Burial, Crustal Underplating, and Relamination.
Detrital zircon U-Pb dates are used to determine how sediment deposition ages
vary with depth. Lu-Hf garnet dates are used to bracket the timing of prograde
garnet growth and residence at peak temperatures. Metamorphic zircon and
monazite U/Th-Pb dates + trace-element abundances obtained by laser-ablation
split-stream petrochronology enable assessment of the timescale over which the
Ivrea Zone was assembled. Petrologic constraints are derived from
pseudosections, optimal thermobarometry, and trace- element thermometry. In
conjunction, these techniques facilitate reconstruction of the downsection
variation in prograde P-T-t paths and peak metamorphic conditions. The complete
dataset is used for rigorous testing of the three hypotheses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Tectonics program
and the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry program in the division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.