* 1927285
* Student Participation Grant for 2019 IEEE Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems (MWSCAS)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Randall Geiger, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2022
* USD 15,000.00

This award supports student travel for attending the 62nd Midwest Symposium on
Circuits and Systems (MWCAS) to be held in Dallas, TX in August 2019. The MWCAS
is a premier international conference in the field of circuits and systems.
Other than tutorials, keynote and plenary lectures by leading experts in the
field, the conference will be attended by academic and industry researchers and
students to present their recent work both in lecture sessions and poster
sessions. The conference will host a student paper competition to encourage the
best students to keep abreast of the most modern technologies. Recipients of
this grant will selected from the pool of those students presenting papers and
will be paid part of their expenses for travel and registration at the
conference. US citizens and permanent residents will be given the highest
priority in the selection process. The experience gained by the students in the
process is going to be an invaluable component of their education. Due to a good
number industrial participants in the meeting the experience will also help them
to secure positions in industry, thus contributing to the much needed
technological workforce of the United States. The selection committee will pay
due attention to include women, minority and other underrepresented groups for
providing support from this grant.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical areas
covered by the conference will, in general, be electronic circuits and systems
relevant, among other problems, to modern computing hardware technologies. More
specifically, the broad spectrum of topics to be covered will include, but will
not be limited to: Analog and Mixed Signal Integrated Circuits, Bio-Inspired
systems and Green Technologies, Neural Networks &amp; Neuromorphic Engineering,
Artificial Intelligence including Deep Learning and Robotics, Internet of Things
(IoTs), Autonomous Systems, Radio Frequency Microwave and Optical Systems,
Image/Video Processing and Multimedia Systems, Power Management Energy
Harvesting and Wireless Power, Trusted Electronics and Security, MEMS and NEMS
Technologies, Nano-electronics and Nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.