* 1927620
* Next Steps for Functional Genomics:  A Workshop
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2021
* Keegan Sawyer, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 07/31/2021
* USD 327,444.00

This award is to support a workshop convened by the National Academy of Sciences
to discuss goals, strategies, and technical needs to facilitate research in
functional genomics that will contribute to the advancement of basic knowledge
and its translation into applications that would benefit society, e.g.,
conservation, evolutionary studies, agriculture, energy, defense, human health,
and other sectors. The workshop draws on information and ideas from experts in
this field and others. Workshop participants represent, primarily, the
biological sciences, with additional input from genomically-relevant
environmental sciences, bioinformatics and data science, and other pertinent
communities. The workshop will delineate the current state of the science, what
lessons have been learned thus far, what impediments there are to further
progress, and areas where additional investments could help move the field
forward. The workshop presentations and discussions will be documented in a
proceedings report authored by rapporteur(s) in accordance with National
Academies guidelines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since the release of the first draft
of the human genome in 2001, the genomes of hundreds of organisms from all
branches of the tree of life have been sequenced. The availability of these gene
sequences, as well as a variety of new technologies, provide the ability to
study genes, transcripts, proteins, and their interactions on a genome-wide
level. Although this genomic information is of great value, there has been no
broad systematic effort to understand the function of genes in the many
sequences that have been generated as yet. Thus, the value of the gene sequences
for application to basic science, conservation, evolutionary studies,
agriculture, energy, defense, human health, and other sectors has not yet been
realized. This project represents a step in the direction of establishing new
approaches to understanding gene function. The workshop will foster a high-level
discussion to identify new ideas on what additional research NSF can support to
tackle the scientific unknowns of functional genomics and develop the needed
tools and infrastructure to better connect gene discovery to an understanding of
gene function. What are the challenges and opportunities and what are the next
steps to advance the science? Could the ability to predict phenotypes from
genotypes find common ground around a set of principles that characterize
biological systems? These are among the most significant questions for the
future of the life sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.