* 1927990
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: The impact of climate change on Greenland's glacial fjords, ecosystems, and local communities
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Christopher Little, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2021
* USD 38,409.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hundreds of glaciers around the Arctic
flow into ocean fjords that are several miles wide, tens of miles long, and
thousands of feet deep. Glacial meltwater and sediments released into the fjords
make their waters nutrient-rich to the extent that glacial fjords, all over the
Arctic region, are characterized by prosperous marine ecosystems, featuring a
high density of seabirds, marine mammals, and fishes. As a result, many Arctic
settlements are located near glacial fjords that, through their ecosystems,
support hunting and fishing and contribute to the regional economy. As the
Arctic warms, however, glaciers are melting and retreating, and ocean waters are
expected to warm, thus affecting these glacial fjord ecosystems and the human
communities they support. Within this project, researchers will take advantage
of new projections of how the glaciers and the ocean will change, combined with
improved understanding of glacial fjords and their ecosystems, to investigate
change at two distinct glacial fjords in Greenland. The long-term goal of this
project is to provide relevant planning information to the two communities in
Greenland and develop a method that can be applied to other communities around
the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international research team, composed of
glaciologists, oceanographers, marine ecosystem scientists, and social
scientists, will use available data and hold discussions with community members
to identify the relevant socioecological system components and linkages for two
glacial fjord systems, one in Northwest Greenland and one in Southeast
Greenland. This systems understanding will be combined with glacier and local
climate (ocean and atmosphere) projections to determine how climate projections
can be optimally utilized for sustainable planning and adaptation. This research
will involve synthesis of existing information and co-production of knowledge
with the two communities. A final workshop involving Greenland Government
officials and other Arctic organizations will be used to develop a framework
that can be applied throughout the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.