* 1927023
* SBIR Phase II:  Human Like Robotic Grippers Using Electroactive Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Lenore Rasmussen, Ras Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 942,688.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of a durable artificial
material capable of life-like motion, contracting and expanding like human
muscle when controlled by low voltage (12-volt batteries). This material also
will replicate human grasp by sensing mechanical pressure across a dynamic
range, from gentle touch to high impact. The initial application for this
material will be to give tactile sensing to fingertips of robotic grippers.
Existing actuators cannot provide streamlined expansion and contraction to
manage a good grip while dynamically sensing grip pressure. As an extension to
the robotic gripper, this material could provide a lightweight, intuitively
easy-to-operate prosthetic hand. Other applications include creating pads for
prosthetic sockets to maintain perfect fit; padded liners in football and
workplace helmets to absorb forces and communicate impact frequency and
severity; shoe inserts for athletic and therapeutic footwear absorbing force
attenuation, measuring step frequency, and measuring foot positioning;
adjustable lumbar support for seats; switchless consoles for the cockpit,
armrests, and dashboards of automobiles; and many others. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will advance robotic grippers by adding a
material with sensing capability, with implications for prosthetic hands and
other applications. In robotic grippers and prosthetic hands, there is a trade-
off between strength and dexterity; furthermore, the sensory perception has not
yet been well developed. For grippers, initial gentle pressure has been absent
from grip processes, inhibiting handling of delicate objects. The materials
under development are shape-morphing and extremely sensitive as pressure
sensors. The research objectives and methods/approaches of this project are to:
1) advance the actuation speed and durability of these materials through
synthetic and architectural strategies; 2) characterize the speed and detectable
pressures through oscilloscopic analysis and amplification circuitry; 3) tie the
shape-morphing and sensing attributes together through controlled feedback
loop(s) into off-the-shelf grippers, using robust user-friendly electronics; 4)
determine durability through long-term cycle testing of contraction/expansion
cycles and typically encountered grip pressures (millions of cycles for each
test method); and 5) produce sophisticated robotic grippers with tactile-like
touch and compare the strength and dexterity with those of the human hand. The
goals and scope of this project are to optimize both the shape-morphing and
sensing features of these materials and use biomimetic design, particularly
around the pincer grip and anatomy of the first and second digits (thumb and
index finger), with the anticipated result of replicating human
grasp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.