* 1927342
* Support for US Participants in the Workshop Quantum Gravity in the Southern Cone.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Jorge Pullin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 9,900.00

This award supports the participation of a group of junior US scientists in the
"Quantum gravity in the Southern Cone" workshop with the Latin American Quantum
Gravity Research Network in Bariloche, Argentina and Valdivia, Chile. The
workshop will allow the US scientists to showcase the research done in the US in
an international setting. It will also be a great opportunity to network with
and potentially recruit junior Latin American talent. Latin America has been a
traditional source of new and diverse talent for the US research enterprise in
this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award funds a mixture of experienced and
junior US researchers' participation in the eighth Quantum Gravity in the
Southern Cone workshop in Bariloche, Argentina and Valdivia, Chile in December
2019. The Quantum Gravity in the Southern Cone Workshops were started by the PI
and Professor Rodolfo Gambini in Uruguay with NSF support and have been
successfully continued in Argentina, Chile (there in conjunction with an NSF-
PASI) and Brazil. The workshops have also spawned the creation of an informal
network of Latinamerican researchers in quantum gravity that now runs the
meetings. They provide a unique opportunity for junior researchers to meet world
leaders in their fields. Having a workshop involving several of the leading
figures in the field, this project has a broader impact: it seeks to bring
junior researchers and students in Latin America into contact with the experts,
something they usually do not have the chance to do. It also seeks to
consolidate ties between a formal regional network of researchers and US
scientists. A goal of this project is to establish long term collaborations
between researchers in the network and US researchers. This workshop is also an
exceptional opportunity for broadening the participation of underrepresented
groups and for junior US scientists and students to meet and share knowledge
with experts from the international community in a stimulating
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.