* 1927628
* ISS/Collaborative Research: Studying the Effects of Microgravity on 3D Cardiac Organoid Cultures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Binata Joddar, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2024
* USD 339,744.00

Exposure to microgravity during spaceflight is known to lead to cardiac atrophy,
which is a reduction in tissue mass of the heart that causes debilitating
changes in heart function. Cardiac atrophy can also present itself in patients
suffering from cancer and other diseases, including muscular dystrophies,
diabetes, sepsis and heart failure. Because cardiac atrophy is not well
understood, this project seeks to improve fundamental understanding of cell and
tissue function during progression of cardiac atrophy. Undertaking this research
is an interdisciplinary and multi-institutional team comprised of biomedical
engineers and scientists with complementary expertise in cardiac tissue
bioprinting and cellular and molecular biology. Using the micro-gravity
environment of the International Space Station (ISS) to induce atrophy, the team
will use bioprinted heart tissue to study changes in tissue function. The
knowledge gained will support an improved understanding of how and why cardiac
atrophy occurs, which may lead to improved treatment strategies. The project
will also develop a workshop for K12 students around tissue engineering on the
international space station as well as implement a seminar for medical students,
interns, and residents about the benefits and challenges of transitioning
research from an Earth-based laboratory into space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
objectives have been established for this project. First, to compare and
contrast the morphology, viability, and altered energy metabolism in 3D
bioprinted cardiac organoids under microgravity and Earth's gravity. Second, to
study the epigenetic changes in 3D bioprinted cardiac organoids under
microgravity and assess how these changes may affect the development of cardiac
atrophy when compared to Earth's gravity. Specifically, the team will engineer
and validate a chip design for culturing of cardiomyocytes, fibroblasts and
endothelial cells to investigate underlying biological and signaling mediators
responsible for damage to cells during microgravity exposure, leading to
possible cardiac atrophy. Findings may suggest that epigenetic events could be
one of the mechanistic bases for microgravity&amp;#8208;induced gene expression
changes related to cardiac atrophy and may facilitate the development of
countermeasures to prevent the adverse effects of microgravity or other atrophy-
inducing pathologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.