* 1927384
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Aging, frailty, and foraging ability in wild male primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Benjamin Finkel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 17,811.00

While longevity is often described as a uniquely human trait, other apes like
chimpanzees also have extended lifespans, living twice as long as monkeys or
lemurs. However, we don't fully understand the effects of aging on apes in the
wild or which aspects of human longevity are unique. This doctoral research
project will investigate how wild male chimpanzees age physiologically and
behaviorally with a focus on how aging impacts foraging ability, which may
reveal how frailty impacts fitness. The findings will help clarify whether
chimpanzees' feeding behavior and performance change with age, and whether
foraging could play an important role in shaping their patterns of senescence.
This research will fill gaps in our knowledge on the senescence of male primate
skeletal biology and may help to clarify whether fertility maintained late in
life contributes to the evolution of extended lifespan. The investigators will
engage in educational activities in the United States and near the research site
in rural Uganda, and foster international research collaborations and capacity
building. In addition, the continued presence of researchers in Kibale National
Park helps protect one of the last tropical rainforests in all of East Africa,
which is notably one of the principal strongholds of chimpanzees in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will investigate aging in male
chimpanzees living in an exceptionally large community at Ngogo, Kibale National
Park, Uganda. The investigators will assess the physiological traits of adult
male chimpanzees at various ages to assess how bone density, body mass, chewing
ability, and energetic status may decrease in old age. To this end, the research
will non-invasively collect and analyze fecal samples to assess chewing
efficiency as well as urine samples to measure insulin biomarkers (an indicator
of energetic status) and collagen biomarkers to investigate decreases in bone
density. Behavioral observations will also be carried out to assess how these
physical changes may impact movement, food selection, ingestion rates, mating
effort, and sociality. Through a systematic study of aging male chimpanzees'
physiology and behavior, this research aims to elucidate the processes of aging
and its impact on fitness in wild animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.