* 1927067
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Photosensor Technology-Enabling the IceCube Cosmic-Neutrino Experiment (South Pole) to Open a New Window on the Universe
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Ivan Ferenc Segedin, PHOTONLAB, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2021
* USD 727,126.00

The broader/commercial impact potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to allow for a new generation of
ultrasensitive experiments on previously inaccessible scales by enabling
detectors of ultrahigh energy cosmic radiation, neutrinos, dark matter and more.
In addition, the technology addresses societal needs, including advancements in
medical imaging and nuclear security. In the medical application, the same core
technology can enable the production of cost-effective ultrasensitive whole-
body-enclosing medical scanners for new preventive low-dose cancer screening of
a symptom-free population. For nuclear security applications, this technology
can enable widespread and cost-effective detection of illicit fissionable and
radioactive materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a
novel particle detector, designed initially for cosmic neutrino radiation. The
extreme environment calls for changes to existing detector technology, both in
terms of component design and systems engineering. Pairs of modified
photosensors will need to be packed into each detector unit. Other engineering
challenges include the high-voltage supply architecture, as well as the optical
path. The entire system needs to be engineered to operate at -70 degrees C. This
project will deliver modified photosensors, additional components and
interfaces, as well as conduct prototype testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.