* 1927709
* Collaborative Research: A New Baseline for Antarctic Blue and Fin Whales
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Matthew McCarthy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2022
* USD 243,152.00

Blue and fin whales are the two largest animals on the planet, and the two
largest krill predators in the Southern Ocean. Commercial whaling in Antarctic
waters started in the early 1900?s, and by the 1970's whale populations were
reduced from thousands to only a few hundred individuals. The absence of data
about whale biology and ecology prior to these large population reductions has
limited our understanding of how the ecosystem functioned when cetacean
populations were more robust. However, an archive of baleen plates from 800
Antarctic blue and fin whales harvested between 1946 and 1948 was recently
rediscovered in the Smithsonian's National Museum of Natural History that will
shed insight into historic whale ecology. As baleen grows, it incorporates
circulating hormones, and compounds from the whale's diet, recording continuous
biological and oceanographic information across multiple years. This project
will apply a suite of modern molecular techniques to these archived specimens to
ask how blue and fin whale foraging and reproduction responded to climate
variability, changes at the base of the food web, and whaling activities in the
early 1940s. By comparison with more modern datasets, these investigations will
fill major gaps in understanding of the largest krill predators, their response
to disturbance and environmental change, and the impact that commercial whaling
has had on the structure and function of the Antarctic marine ecosystem. This
project will improve stem education through annual programming for middle and
high school girls in partnership with UNCW's Marine Quest program. Public
outreach will occur through partnerships with the Smithsonian and the
International Association of Antarctic Tour Operators to deliver emerging
research on Antarctic ecosystems and highlight the contemporary relevance and
scientific value of museum collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Examination of
past conditions and adaptations of polar biota is fundamental to predictions of
future climate change scenarios. The baleen record that will be used in this
study forms an ideal experimental platform for studying bottom-up, top-down and
anthropogenic impacts on blue and fin whales. This historic baleen archive
includes years with strong climate and temperature anomalies allowing the
influence of climate variability on predators and the ecosystems that support
them to be examined. Additionally, the impact of commercial whaling on whale
stress levels will be investigated by comparing years of intensive whaling with
the non-whaling years of WWII, both of which are captured in the time series.
There are three main approaches to this project. First, bulk stable isotope
analysis will be used to examine the trophic dynamics of Antarctic blue and fin
whales. Second, compound-specific stable isotope analyses (CSIA-AA) will
characterize the biogeochemistry of the base of the Antarctic food web. Finally,
analyses of hormone levels in baleen will reveal differences in stress levels
and reproductive status of individuals, and inform understanding of cetacean
population biology. This project will generate a new public data archive to
foster research opportunities across various components of the OPP program, all
free from the logistical constraints of Antarctic field
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.