* 1927553
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: Permafrost Coastal Systems Network (PerCS-Net) -- A Circumpolar Alliance for Arctic Coastal Community Information Exchange
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Anne Jensen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen Lips
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,627,077.00

1927553 (Jones) 1927137 (Xiao) 1927373 (Tweedie) Permafrost coastal systems are
one of the most rapidly changing components of the Earth's systems. The
Permafrost Coastal Systems Network (PerCS-Net) project will fill fundamental
knowledge gaps in science, engineering, and societal issues associated with
permafrost-affected coasts in the Arctic by linking over ten existing national
and international networks. PerCS-Net will position our nation alongside
international collaborators to empower new research communities, diversify
Arctic researchers, engage in the co-production of knowledge, and promote long-
lasting team science required to face the known and emerging challenges of the
changing Arctic. This network of networks will develop internationally
recognized protocols for quantifying and synthesizing information on the impacts
occurring in coastal permafrost systems. It will also provide a framework to
assess risks to local and global economies and to transfer knowledge that will
lead to adaptation strategies across Arctic regions. PerCS-Net will promote
synergy across networks to foster the next generation of students, postdoctoral
scholars, and early-career researchers charged with identifying potential
solutions to changes occurring in the Arctic system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
is no place more representative of the challenges faced at the intersection of
natural, social, and built systems than the Arctic. PerCS-Net will develop a
transdisciplinary umbrella network to synergize existing datasets, expand
observations in space and time, integrate in-situ sensing techniques, coordinate
goals among networks, and engage in synthesis efforts. The new knowledge will
inform intergovernmental agencies as well as international research and outreach
programs to make science-based decisions and policies in adapting to permafrost
coastal system dynamics. Network activities include annual in-person meetings at
national and international venues, monthly webinar meetings, outreach in Arctic
coastal communities, synthesis publications, and student and early-career
researcher personnel exchanges. Expected outcomes of PerCS-Net will integrate
into a framework for transformative knowledge sharing from individuals and
organizations cooperating across political, cultural, and disciplinary borders
to address critical science, engineering, and social issues in response to
permafrost coastal systems in the changing Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts. This project was co-funded by the
Arctic System Science Program in the Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.