* 1927550
* SaTC: EDU: Preparing cybersecurity advanced professionals for teaching next generation of cybersecurity workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Diane Murphy, Marymount University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 481,761.00

The "Preparing Cybersecurity Advanced Professionals for Teaching Next Generation
of Cybersecurity students (CyberTeach)" project will prepare 30 experienced
cybersecurity professionals, currently enrolled in a doctoral program in
cybersecurity, to become effective educators at the high school (dual-
enrollment), community college, and 4-year university levels. There is currently
a shortage of cybersecurity educators and academic jobs in cybersecurity vastly
outnumber applicants. Only 20% of traditional cybersecurity PhD students are
selecting academia, most going to the private sector, and so a different
approach is necessary. This project is designed to remove some of the barriers
for working cybersecurity professionals to enter academia. Evidence,
particularly in the STEM field, indicates that stronger knowledge of education
principles and practices, leads to better teaching. The result of this project
should be additional and more diverse educators, including females, with
extensive cybersecurity experience, who can offer better cybersecurity education
to address the current shortage in the cybersecurity workforce. The curriculum
and project assessment results will be widely disseminated for application at a
variety of community colleges and 4-year institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project develops a credentialing program for high-level cybersecurity
professionals, currently enrolled in a cybersecurity terminal-degree program, to
expand their skills in areas such as innovative teaching strategies, engaging
students in the classroom, assessing student learning through different
strategies, incorporating student research into a course, and preparing for the
workforce. Doctoral students learn how to teach from educational professionals
based on the science behind the education field and apply their cybersecurity
knowledge in a structured manner to a diverse set of students. The doctoral
students practice what they learn in one or two mentored teaching semester-long
assignments at a variety of institutions. Education and cybersecurity faculty
evaluate the effectiveness of the teaching throughout the designated courses and
provide guidance from curriculum development to assessment. Results of these
courses are evaluated against other courses taught by doctoral students who have
not been through the credentialing program. Students are incentivized to
participate in the credentialing program and to teach by tuition-reimbursement
grants for their doctoral programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.