* 1927785
* NNA Track 1: Arctic impacts and reverberations of expanding global maritime trade routes
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Thomas Ravens, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 3,018,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the Arctic thaws, new opportunities
for resource exploration and the opening of new trade routes are expected.
Increased passage of commodities through these routes and the related
industrialization of the Arctic will introduce both opportunities and risks.
These will require international agreements and rules of governance to maintain
global stability and protect not only the commercial viability of the U.S.
Arctic, but also the local peoples, environment, and natural resources. These
new opportunities in the Arctic have impacts that reverberate across the globe.
This project focuses on creating the mathematical, geophysical, computational,
and social knowledge systems needed to understand how the changing Arctic
impacts world trade flows and supply chains and to understand the risks to the
Arctic's natural and social ecosystems and governance. The research supports
U.S. national security interests, addresses global economic welfare, and
facilitates greater resilience to new threats to Arctic communities while
allowing for sustainable Arctic development and economic growth. Educational and
outreach activities include the use of multimedia to disseminate findings to
multiple audiences, both academic and non-academic. Also, the investigators plan
to conduct dialogues with local stakeholders and conduct international
workshops. Lastly, the project fosters the promotion and retention of women and
underrepresented minorities in engineering, including native Alaskans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops state-of-the-art numerical models to
enhance a high-resolution sea-ice forecasting system to predict Arctic sea ice
thickness, ice ridge stability, storm surges, and risks posed to ships from
icing. To support maritime infrastructure and improve coastal resilience, models
based on arctic coastal dynamics at a variety of scales will also be developed.
Creative approaches to improve learning and risk reduction behavior is
incorporated into an assessment of risk management from the anticipated increase
maritime traffic and related commercial activity. Indigenous approaches to
information sharing will be combined with contemporary participatory data
collection techniques to develop early warning signs for conflict. Co-production
of knowledge with local communities will provide insights that can contribute to
models of decision-making under conditions of uncertainty and these will be
validated in workshops with local stakeholders. Finally, a variety of techniques
ranging from stochastic and robust optimization to game theory are used to
develop scalable, globally convergent algorithms. The investigators aim to
generate a solutions method that can exploit risk predictions from ice physics,
coastal dynamics, and social/governance insights to forecast expected cargo
traffic through Arctic passageways over time, along with corresponding changes
to traffic flows along alternative world trade routes and supply
chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.