* 1927702
* Big Ten Academic Alliance Summit on Advancing Undergraduate Women in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Lily Young, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 49,999.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by promoting strategies and opportunities to improve the
representation and success of women of color in STEM. Equal access to scientific
inquiry and STEM careers is an important goal for the National Science
Foundation and for the nation as a whole, yet minority students, particularly
women of color, are not participating in the scientific enterprise in numbers
representative of the general population. This workshop proposes to identify
challenges and strategies to address this inequity within the context of the
institutions of the Big Ten Academic Alliance. Faculty and administrators from
the Big Ten campuses will gather at Rutgers University on June 5-8, 2019 to
engage in discussions with campus leaders and campus climate experts to identify
challenges and develop strategies to promote achievement and advancement of
undergraduate women of color in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will
examine survey data collected from Big Ten campuses to identify effective
strategies and practices in use on individual campuses. Inter-university working
groups will then develop plans for implementing these strategies across
campuses. Working groups will establish program goals and develop plans for
effective evaluation. Workshop results will be collected in a written report
circulated to Big Ten provosts and distributed to national outlets. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.