* 1927755
* Nitrous oxide cycling in the Western Arctic Ocean from stable isotopic and concentration data
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Annie Bourbonnais, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 12/31/2020
* USD 116,720.00

Nitrous oxide is a potent greenhouse gas in the troposphere and an ozone-
depleting substance in the stratosphere, yet its sources and sinks in the ocean
are neither well-quantified nor well understood. Nitrous oxide is both produced
and consumed by microbial processes; it is produced by different processes
dependent upon the amount of oxygen present locally. The Arctic Ocean may
represent an important source of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere. High nitrous
oxide saturations were recently observed in productive shallow Arctic shelf
waters. The proposed research will test the hypotheses that productive shelf
regions of the Western Arctic Ocean (e.g., Chukchi and Beaufort seas) stimulates
nitrous oxide production and contributes to offshore transport of nitrous oxide
toward the central Arctic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Besides developing an important
baseline data set for the Arctic science community, this project will contribute
to STEM workforce development in numerous manners. It will support an early-
career female scientist during the formative years of her career. It will
provide summer educational research opportunities to undergraduate students. It
will develop seminars for elementary school teachers and provide short classroom
presentations at a local public school and contribute to an afterschool non-
profit effort devoted to providing high quality educational programs to at risk
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this proposed research is to
evaluate nitrous oxide cycling in the Western Arctic Ocean from its
concentrations, stable isotopes and isotopomers. The project will use isotopic
and isotopomer measurements from both shelf and offshore waters to constrain
estimates of nitrous oxide cycling in the Arctic. The data will be used to
evaluate 1) the pathways of nitrous oxide production from either nitrification
following organic matter decomposition in the water column or coupled
nitrification-denitrification in the sediments and 2) how these processes
influence nitrous oxide exchanges between the surface layer and the atmosphere.
Comparisons of observations at coastal and shelf stations in the Bering and
Chukchi seas with those offshore in the Deep Canadian Basin will allow the
evaluation of the effects of mixing and long-range transport on geochemical
signals. The measurements will also serve as a baseline for future assessment of
change. The project profits from leveraging of other investments by NSF and the
principal investigators? international collaborators, benefitting from
measurements and samples collected during the U.S. GEOTRACES Arctic section and
the 2016 CHINARE Arctic cruises.