* 1927160
* SBIR Phase II:  Mnemonic Optimization of Music and Songs
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Lana Israel, Muzology, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,404,926.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project further investigates music-based techniques
that can result in effective and efficient learning and instruction. Music as a
bedrock of culture can transcend entertainment and enhance learning. Music
directly activates neural systems that support memory, attention, motivation,
and emotion. Accordingly, music is a powerful medium that not only heightens
learner engagement but also facilitates retention of information. While music
has long been recognized for its mnemonic properties and is widely used as a
memory aid in the context of early childhood learning (e.g., the ABC song),
music-based educational products for the broader K-12 market are less pervasive.
This project focuses on the optimization of musical structures to support
effective and engaging mathematics instruction. The goal of this project is to
offer music as a credible pedagogical tool. Specifically, this project offers
music as a learning medium that can be used beyond rote memorization and instead
teach mathematical skills, processes, and procedures in an engaging manner that
makes math accessible to all learners. Mathematical fluency is a critical skill
in a society that continues to become more technological; it also creates
broader career opportunities for students and undergirds the U.S.'s national
competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research features
two innovations: 1) optimization of learning-based musical forms based on
distinct mathematical information types; and 2) creation of a non-linear,
dynamic platform to deliver the content. Using computational musicology
techniques as well as experimental studies, the first innovation involves
creation of mathematically accurate music videos based on unique creative and
structural parameters that are determined by the type of mathematical
information being taught. The second innovation focuses on delivery of the
music-based content and involves significant technical and creative
investigation to produce a dynamic, non-linear mechanism for presenting the
material in a manner that still feels continuous and compelling to the student.
Together, both innovations underlie a synergistic learning solution designed for
premium learner engagement and to support self-paced, adaptive learning. This
project will result in high quality, digital math instruction that is accessible
to all learners through use of effective, engaging, and relevant instructional
methods. The desired outcomes are eliminating proficiency gaps in math education
and achieving equity in students' educational success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.