* 1927563
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: Arctic Urban Risks and Adaptations (AURA): a co-production framework for addressing multiple changing environmental hazards
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Schmidt, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,128,919.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is increasing
vulnerability of Arctic urban communities to natural hazards such as unstable
permafrost, wildfire, and rain-in-winter events. These hazards put residents and
property at risk and impose economic costs, and households, businesses, and
governments must adapt to these interacting hazards. This research is developing
detailed maps showing how the occurrence of these three natural hazards has
evolved simultaneously in the Municipality of Anchorage and the Fairbanks North
Star Borough, Alaska, and Whitehorse, Yukon, Canada over the past several
decades, and how they might change over the next 40 years. The interdisciplinary
research team of economists; permafrost, fire, weather, climate, and
environmental scientists; and policy experts conducts transdisciplinary research
on Arctic natural hazards and their impacts on the natural and built
environments and society. The research team works closely with local governments
and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), Indigenous groups, insurance
companies, and residents to co-produce knowledge on the costs, risks, and
actions taken to mitigate and adapt to these hazards. The team and stakeholders
collaborate to determine optimal ways to measure the effects of hazards on
society and the built environment, identify trade-offs and interactions, develop
a multiple-hazard risk assessment, and generate options for future adaptive
planning. This project is one of the first to include effects of climate change
on private as well as public infrastructure, a gap which has limited the
understanding of effects of climate change in Alaska. Results provide a
framework that other Arctic communities can use to assess risks and reduce
economic damages due to climate change and provide examples to increase
resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities over four years include:
(1) spatial modeling and mapping of natural hazards and their interactions; (2)
gathering data to assess perceived risks, values at risk, and adaptation costs
with interviews, property owner surveys, and citizen science; (3) economic
modeling of costs and risks; and (4) developing in a series of scenario planning
workshops an adaptive policy framework that can be used to adapt to and mitigate
multiple hazards and reduce future costs and risks. The research helps partner
communities make better-informed decisions regarding how and where to build and
manage public and private infrastructure and finance public services. This
framework can be used by other Arctic communities to assess risks and reduce
economic damages due to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.