* 1927822
* Multifunctional Optomechanics with Structured Material
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2024
* USD 431,798.00

The use of light to control mechanical systems is of broad importance in
technology and science. However, planar mirrors experience an optical force only
in the direction of the incident light. Consequently, to move such structures in
the opposite direction requires a restoring force that may not exist or may not
have suitable characteristics. More generally, being able to control the motion
of material, depending on the spatial and spectral properties of the incident
light, would offer impact in applications as diverse as optical communication
and computing and molecular biology. The goal of this project is to investigate
the relationship between the strength and direction of the optical force and the
nanometer-scale arrangement of material from which the object is made. This is
expected to lead to a new class of multi-functional optomechanical components
that will allow, for example, remote and energy-efficient control for all-
optical data networks, as well as actuators having a wavelength-dependent
response. Also, more control over force and torque than exist with current laser
beam tweezers will provide for new dimensions in molecular biology. In addition,
the project should be important for propulsion because of the possible strength
and regulation of the optical force imparted by a laser. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in the research and a learning module to
excite young people to pursue studies in related disciplines will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves two research topics. The
first is the development of a design methodology for optomechanical devices
based on metal and dielectric structures that provide pushing (in the direction
of the incident beam) and pulling (in the opposite direction) forces. Numerical
field solutions yield force density in the material and hence the force and
torque on the structure can be determined. This model provides a means for
device design. While the primary focus is membrane implementation, generalized
principles should ensue. The second topic is the experimental demonstration of
key optomechanical device principles. Work with structured films on silicon
nitride membranes will lead to implementation strategies with silicon films that
will allow large-area devices. The experiments will evaluate pushing and pulling
forces, and investigate ways to use the same structure to realize bidirectional
forces based on the character of the control light (most simply, wavelength, but
potentially the spatial control of the incident
light).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.