* 1927119
* Research Initiation: Collaborative Proposal: Diversifying Paths through Engineering with Extra-/Co-Curricular Participation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Holly Matusovich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 59,898.00

While most current research in teaching and learning is performed in the
classroom, evidence suggests that the quality of a student's learning is also
affected by experiences outside of the classroom (i.e. extra-/co-curricular
experiences). Engineering students in particular have available to them a rich
variety of learning opportunities outside of the classroom - such as competition
teams, undergraduate research experiences, and service learning organizations -
which reinforce and strengthen the knowledge they gain through engineering
coursework. The goal of this project is to determine the impact of engineering
students' participation in extra-/co-curricular activities on their development
into professional engineers. Understanding the specific benefits that
engineering-focused extra-/co-curricular programs offer to students will allow
those in career and academic advising positions to provide targeted advice to
students on how to personalize their pathways through college engineering
program, focusing on topics that are interesting to them and finding avenues for
strengthening existing skills or learning new ones. The extra-/co-curricular
setting also gives students a relaxed, enjoyable opportunity to practice
engineering skills in an authentic environment, leading to improved confidence -
a feature that is particularly important for students from underrepresented
groups in engineering - and a more technically competent engineering workforce.
Further, although certain features of the engineering-focused extra-/co-
curricular experience may be challenging to reproduce in a classroom setting,
other features may provide inspiration for alterative teaching practices which
can enhance learning within the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
answers two fundamental research questions: (1) What specific features of
students' academic and professional development are affected by engineering-
focused extra-/co-curricular participation, and (2) What specific features of
extra-/co-curricular activities most influence students' academic and
professional development' The research has a two-phased design where the first
phase implements the Statics Concept Inventory, the Engineering Professional
Skills Assessment, and a self-efficacy survey to measure achievement of learning
outcomes including mastery of fundamental engineering concepts, development of
professional skills, and self-efficacy. In the second phase, participants from
Phase 1 are recruited for interviews in order to uncover possible explanations
for the research findings in Phase 1. The approach used in this work will lay
the groundwork for other scholars in non-engineering disciplines to perform
assessments of their own discipline-specific extra-/co-curricular activities to
determine if similar patterns exist. The framework used in this research will
also allow other scholars to explore factors related to engineering-focused
extra-/co-curricular participation which are not covered in this research, for
example, determining how the extra-/co-curricular experience uniquely affects
engineering students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.