* 1927574
* SBIR Phase II:  Air Quality Monitor For IoT Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2022
* Francisco Baltazar, Aerodyne Microsystems Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2022
* USD 744,631.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve health and save lives while
addressing a market opportunity of over a billion dollars per year. Worldwide
particulate matter air pollution is responsible for nearly as many deaths as
cancer, and more than malaria and AIDS combined. The goal of the project is an
inexpensive, consumer market air pollution sensor that offers performance
comparable to laboratory instruments costing hundreds to thousands of dollars.
The proposed technology has important societal benefit as it will help mitigate
the negative health effects of air pollution in the environment, home, and
workplace. The proposed project contributes to scientific knowledge and
understanding by developing novel air pollution analysis techniques and enabling
a highly-sensitive, portable, and low-cost monitor for studies of air pollution.
Markets for the sensor include smart homes, smart cities, green buildings,
automobile cabin monitoring, air purifiers, industrial hygiene, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will investigate a novel
sensor for monitoring particulate matter air pollution. Existing air pollution
monitors are expensive, large, and power hungry. The monitors on the consumer
market use optical techniques that provide only a proxy estimate of pollution
levels and are unable to detect ultrafine particulates which have diameters
smaller than 100 nanometers. These ultrafine particulates pose serious health
risks. The sensor of this work employs thermophoretic deposition of airborne
particulates from a sample stream onto an acoustic wave resonator, and
determines the mass deposited by measuring the frequency shift of a sustaining
electronic oscillator circuit. The monitor of this work detects particulates
from a few microns in diameter to ultrafine, and provides a true mass
concentration measurement of the pollution, which is acknowledged as the
industry gold-standard. Key activities of the proposal include the development
of innovative techniques to collect and analyze particulates and to improve the
sensor stability and lifetime. Anticipated technical results include enhanced
monitor longevity, improved level of detection, improved manufacturability, and
a significant reduction in power consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.