* 1927486
* AI-DCL: Fairness for the Allocation of Healthcare Resources
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Shimei Pan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 297,928.00

The goal of this research project is to develop machine learning techniques for
the fair allocation of healthcare services such as those provided by Medicaid.
Although such programs provide crucial services to vulnerable populations, many
of the individuals who most need these services languish on waiting lists due to
limited resources. Machine learning models can potentially improve this
situation by predicting individuals' levels of need, which can then be used to
prioritize the waiting lists. Providing care to those in need can prevent
institutionalization for those individuals, which both improves quality of life
and reduces overall costs. While the benefits of such an approach are clear,
care must be taken to ensure that the prioritization process is fair. The
researchers also plan to address this issue directly by developing fairness
definitions and corresponding fair learning algorithms for the task of learning
to rank. The proposed techniques for fair prioritization of healthcare have the
potential to save lives, as well as taxpayer dollars. This project aims to lead
to a deployed solution for Medicaid prioritization in the state of Maryland,
where over 8,000 individuals have died on the Medicaid waitlist since the
state's Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act began, according to a
2018 report from the Foundation for Government
Accountability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a machine
learning intervention to the processes of ranking individuals in order of
priority for receiving healthcare services. The researchers will apply their
methods to Medicaid data, which they will access via their ongoing collaboration
with colleagues from the Hilltop Institute, a nonpartisan research organization
which is dedicated to community-oriented healthcare analytics; they will also
evaluate their methods on a public dataset to facilitate research
reproducibility. A key goal of the project is to promote fairness in the
ranking. In meeting this goal, the project will extend the capabilities of fair
machine learning definitions and algorithms to tasks that have not previously
been addressed including survival and temporal modeling. To predict individuals'
health status, the research team will use survival models to estimate the risk
of future institutionalization, such as relocating to a nursing home. The team
will use also Cox proportional hazard models; the multiplicative relationship
between covariates and risk will serve to aid explainability. The fairness
definitions and the corresponding fair learning algorithms for these models will
yield risk scores that can then be used to prioritize waiting lists. For
waitlists deployed in practice, it will be necessary to continually re-rank the
list since individuals enter and leave the list (due to death or
institutionalization, for example), and since covariates change for those who
remain on the list; reranking should ensure that individuals who need care will
eventually reach the front of the list. The proposed work crosses the boundaries
of multiple disciplines (machine learning, fairness, health IT, feminism and
civil rights) to solve an urgent real-world problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.