* 1928398
* FW-HTF-RM: Improving Construction Work Performance through Human-Centered Augmented Reality
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Matthew Hallowell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,137,869.00

The construction industry in the United States accounts for nearly 15% of Gross
Domestic Product and over 6% of the total workforce. The construction industry
is responsible for renewing US infrastructure to meet daily needs for clean
water, transportation, and living space. Recently, construction has experienced
significant workforce shortages that have precipitated the need to deliver craft
workers with optimal information to construct infrastructure efficiently,
safely, and in a manner that promotes future workers' social and economic well-
being. A growing body of literature has demonstrated the exciting potential of
augmented reality (AR) and artificial intelligence (AI) to transform workplaces,
but most existing studies focus on office, factory, and medical workers. This
project aims to explore if and how these technologies specifically improve work
performance in construction. In current construction industry practice, design
information is provided to construction workers through two-dimensional plans
and written specifications. New technology is beginning to enable design
information to be represented in multi-dimensional models that simulate the
construction process and aid with visualization. As AR and AI technologies
mature, it is posited that they can promote more effective construction via
enhanced access to information. However, it is unclear how innovative
information should be presented with AR to best support future construction
work. Additionally, as AI is considered for the creation of project information,
we must understand how the perceived origin of a design from either humans or AI
impacts the user's trust of the information and self-confidence in subsequent
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, researchers will test two main
hypotheses: (1) How and to what extent the level of detail of design information
delivered in AR impacts dimensions of work performance and (2) How and to what
extent the perceived origin of design information impacts trust in the
information and self-confidence in decisions. Secondary hypotheses will test how
level of detail and perceived origin of design impact spatial reasoning; methods
and timing of planning; and anticipation of errors and safety hazards. These
hypotheses will be tested via an experiment where the level of detail of design
information is manipulated and errors, safety hazards, and uncertainty are
purposely embedded in the test task. The experiment will involve a scale model
of an actual construction project. Two hundred craft workers and two hundred
undergraduate students will participate in the research experiment to represent
expert and novice skill levels in the study conditions. In addition to
quantitative analyses, interviews will be conducted with the study participants
after each experimental trial to explain the results. This research will have
the potential to build new knowledge on what and how design information can be
best delivered to future craft workers using emerging technologies to enable
efficient, safe, and high-quality construction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.