* 1928622
* Building Capacity: Improving STEM Graduation Rates through Engaged Learning
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Said Bettayeb, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,499,930.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase the number of
underrepresented minority and low-income students who earn STEM bachelor's
degrees from the University of Houston-Clear Lake (UHCL), an HSI designated
institution. In metropolitan Houston, with its high concentration of aerospace,
petroleum, and biomedical employers, approximately one-third of jobs are in STEM
fields. Houston ranks among the nation's top cities for job growth and for STEM
workers. Over the past decade, Houston employers in growing STEM fields relied
heavily on recruiting workers from other states and countries, citing a lack of
qualified local residents. Despite the abundance of career opportunities in STEM
fields, underrepresented minority and low-income students are not obtaining STEM
degrees at a rate that keeps pace with the demand for qualified employees. This
project will develop new student support infrastructures and create new
opportunities for engagement in STEM research and professional activities.
Expected outcomes include more students who successfully complete STEM gateway
courses on their first attempt, increased retention in STEM majors, and improved
STEM graduation rates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UHCL proposes an ambitious five-
year project to address two Track 1 priorities. Evidence-based activities will
address "Critical Transitions" by developing new support infrastructures for
transfer students from two-year institutions and students enrolled in gateway
courses. The project will address "Innovative Cross-Sector Partnerships" by
collaborating with the UHCL Office of Strategic Partnerships to develop student
research opportunities, internships, and career mentoring with leading regional
companies in the aerospace, biomedical, petrochemical, and technology sectors.
The project has three goals: (1) Use targeted outreach efforts, pre-college
programming, and scholarships to attract new students to STEM majors; (2) Use
social and academic support services to increase the retention of students
enrolled in STEM majors; and (3) Use academic support services and data to
increase the number of graduates in STEM majors. Proposed interventions include
collaborative learning centers, mentoring, student organizations, student-led
research, and financial support. This project examines the impact of these
interventions on producing a qualified, diverse STEM workforce with the research
skills, the communication skills, and the networking skills necessary to be
successful in STEM careers. Data collected from each of the activities will be
used to answer four research questions: (1) What is the impact of proactive
interventions on retention and graduation for transfer students in STEM fields;
(2) What is the impact of proactive interventions on retention and graduation
for college students in STEM fields; (3) What forms of ongoing academic and
social support yield higher retention and graduation rates for students in STEM
fields; (4) What forms of career preparation produce higher placement rates in
the STEM workforce. Project activities will be extensively evaluated with
quantitative and qualitative data collected throughout the program's
implementation. Project results and best practices will be disseminated via
conference presentations, peer-reviewed journal publications, and formal and
informal events each year so that elements can be replicated at other
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Science Foundation HSI Program
aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.