* 1928750
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Articulatory and Corpus Study of Relative Timing among Consonants, Vowels, and Tones
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Jason Shaw, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2022
* USD 10,239.00

A core topic of study in linguistics is the tacit knowledge that speakers have
about their language. For all spoken languages, part of this knowledge includes
how the speech organs, including the lips, tongue, and velum, are coordinated in
time to produce speech. Additionally, many languages also distinguish words from
each other using different pitch patterns, called tones. This project
investigates whether tones interact with the coordination of other speech
organs, drawing together several types of data from the understudied Tibetan
language. Methodologically, the project integrates experimental measurements on
the physical movement of articulators with audio data gathered in Nepal,
harnessing the variation found between speakers in the diaspora Tibetan
community to understand basic principles of how tones, consonants and vowels are
coordinated in time. Broader impacts include the publicly available deposit of
audio recordings to enable future work by linguists and community members,
capturing a snapshot of a language undergoing rapid change.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Co-PI, a doctoral student at Yale University, will analyze
acoustic and articulatory data of Tibetan as spoken in its diaspora, an
understudied language with significant variation between speakers. One aspect of
the variation is that some speakers have retained tone while others speakers
have lost tone contrasts. The main hypothesis is that the presence of lexical
tone alters the coordination of articulatory gestures, with articulatory and
acoustic consequences resulting from the balance of competing demands of
laryngeal and supralaryngeal aspects of speech production. This study extends
analysis of acoustic data collected by the co-PI in Nepal to a corpus of
spontaneous speech. The corpus analysis is crucially informed by an experiment
on the articulatory kinematics of Tibetan. The experiment uses electromagnetic
articulography (EMA) to track the movement of the tongue and lips together with
acoustic recordings. Besides providing a test of the main hypothesis in
laboratory speech, analysis of co-registered acoustic and kinematic signals will
establish acoustic measures of relative timing that can be used in the corpus
analysis. The corpus study will evaluate hypotheses in naturalistic speech data,
allow consideration of a wider range of factors influencing timing, further
assess variability within and across speakers, and provide a valuable resource
for future research. This project will contribute to scientific understanding of
the mental representation of tone and the timing relations among oral,
laryngeal, and tonal gestures, combine corpus and articulatory methods, draw
evidence from variation, and advance research on a less-studied
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.