* 1928671
* Catalyzing New Practices for the San Joaquin Valley to Innovate Effective Teaching Pedagogies in Lower-Division Mathematics and Chemistry Courses
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Joy Goto, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 905,470.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to design, deliver, and
test new practices for teaching in STEM at three Hispanic-Serving Institutions
which are part of the California State University (CSU) system in the San
Joaquin Valley: CSU Stanislaus, CSU Fresno, and CSU Bakersfield. The project
will develop and offer innovative summer retreats, called Ideas Labs, for STEM
faculty to engage in a novel collaborative process to adapt and develop High
Impact Practices (HIPs) using explicit Creative Problem Solving (CPS)
methodology.The project will enhance each institution's Faculty Learning Program
(FLP) to provide faculty development on HIPs during the academic year. The aim
of the project is for STEM faculty to use HIPs in their teaching of mathematics
and chemistry courses to improve students' academic performance and retention
rates. Air pollution will serve as an overarching theme for the content platform
which will be used to enhance the pedagogy in both mathematics and chemistry
courses. This project has potential to significantly impact the retention and
graduation rates students in the collaborating HSIs, and increase the numbers of
underrepresented students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be led
by three HSIs with a focus on faculty development, including part-time faculty
and adjunct faculty, to improve their teaching practice in ways that will
improve student achievement, retention, and motivation. Each of the three
collaborating institutions will focus on STEM disciplines that present the
greatest challenges for their students. CSU Bakersfield will focus on Chemistry,
CSU Stanislaus will focus on mathematics, and CSU Fresno will focus on
mathematics and chemistry. A team of social science and STEM researchers will
lead the project to assess the how the Ideas Labs retreat and FLP better equip
STEM faculty to employ HIPs in their pedagogy to enhance student learning. In
particular, the project will assess the impact on how the Ideas Labs and FLP
improve the persistence and success of the Hispanic, first generation, and/or
low-income students in lower-division STEM courses. Project findings seek to
represent impact on a large, diverse group of students at the three
collaborating HSIs to generate new knowledge on how both new and current HIPs on
lead to a more equitable STEM learning experience. The new HIPs designed through
the Ideas Lab will be disseminated and shared broadly through various
modalities, including presentations at conferences and CSU system meetings and
also a project website. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.