* 1928326
* Probing physical limits in TRPV1-magnetogenetics with micro-magnetic devices
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Michael Cahalan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2023
* USD 389,292.00

Ion channels are gates that control the flow of ions across the cell membrane.
Activation (opening) of ion channels triggers cascades of critical signaling
processes in cells and tissues. Most ion channels are activated in response to
chemical or electrical stimuli, though some called mechanosensitive channels
specifically respond to mechanical forces such as stretch or shear stress.
"Magnetogenetics" is a method that uses magnetism to remotely and noninvasively
control mechanosensitive channels to affect gene expression. This project will
engineer a magnetic system to amplify and spatially target magnetogenetic
responses. Magnetic nanobeads or iron-sequestering proteins will be attached to
the mechanosensitive channels, and engineered magnetic fields will be applied to
manipulate channel behavior. This new system of ion channel control will be used
to study the response of mechanosensitive channels to a range of force. The
research is expected to yield new understanding on the biophysics of
mechanosensitive ion channels and inform new strategies on how to target or
activate such channels remotely. The methods developed could potentially be
applied to a variety of biological processes that depend on mechanical signals.
The education program is focused on teaching broad skills among younger (and
often underrepresented) students, encompassing design, fabrication, simulation,
and biotechnology. The investigators seek to create long-term interest in STEM
by introducing younger students to integrative projects that link from design
and fabrication in engineering, to studying and analyzing the response of
biological systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core goal of modern biomedical
engineering remains the development of tools that can engage and control the
underlying machinery of living systems. This project will develop integrated
magnetic devices to spatially-control and amplify biomagnetic response in
TRPV1-magnetogenetic cells. These tools will first be used to comprehensively
characterize magnetogenetic Ca2+ signaling. This will be accomplished by: (1)
Interfacing micro-magnetic amplifier devices to such cells (that would behave
like massively-parallel, tunable magnetic traps), and (2) Varying the magnetic
volume of nano-magnets tagged to TRPV1. The magnetic systems will create the
highest static or time-varying magnetic field / magnetic-field gradients ever
elicited in magnetogenetic systems, and will generate channel-tagged mechanical
forces that exceed the theoretical force required to open TRPV1 channels. In
addition, detailed studies on how static or time-varying magnetic field, field
gradient, pull-rate, and nano-magnet volume interact over 2D space to polarize
cellular Ca2+ signaling will help clarify (or refute) magnetogenetic behavior.
The project will address emerging controversy on the viability of, and physical
mechanisms behind magnetogenetics. Magnetic approaches to manipulate ion
channels carry tremendous, as of yet unrealized potential to enable non-invasive
tools to control biological behavior. The investigations of this project are a
critically important step to both laying out the limits of magnetogenetic
control and clarifying how such strategies may be practically utilized. Cells
will be comprehensively probed at both the single cell and massively-parallel
scales in-vitro, using modern techniques in calcium imaging, patch-clamping, and
combined single-cell imaging/probing. It is anticipated that these systems will
yield new insights on the physics of mechanosensitive channels under highly-
localized stimuli and realize a new platform for in-vitro neuroengineering, as
TRPV1 ion channels are abundant in the nervous system and play an important role
in many functions, e.g., the regulation of pain. Such tools may additionally
uncover new insights on the mechanotransductive nature of a wide variety of
proteins due to their scalability in data collection, protein targeting, and
mechanical force generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.