* 1928368
* "Developing Meaningful Mathematics for Student Success Through a Collaboration Between Community College and High School Faculty"
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Barbara Gilbert, Central New Mexico Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,824.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions Program, this Track 2 project aims to enhance student success in
mathematics by developing a year-long dual-credit College Algebra/College
Readiness Skills course. More than half of the students entering Central New
Mexico Community College place into developmental mathematics courses, which can
set STEM majors back in their degree progression by up to two years. The College
Algebra/College Readiness Skills Course will be designed to support student
success in Algebra, enabling students to enter calculus, a required course for
many STEM majors. The College Algebra/College Readiness Skills Course will be
designed by a professional learning community that includes high school and
college mathematics faculty. The Course will be offered to high school seniors
and to Central New Mexico Community College students, with the aim of enhancing
student success in the transition to college-level mathematics course work. By
participating in the professional learning community, college faculty will also
gain insight about how to provide a better learning experience for first-year
students. By better preparing students for success in college algebra courses,
the project has the potential to support an increase in the number of students
who successfully pursue STEM degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
enhance college readiness and completion of college algebra. This goal will be
accomplished through collaborative development of a contextualized College
Algebra/College Readiness Skills Course by mathematics faculty at Central New
Mexico Community College, Albuquerque High School, and South Valley Academy High
School. The faculty will identify how to improve students' mastery of
mathematics and increase students' development of the skills needed to be
successful in college STEM courses. By building on the knowledge of high school
and college mathematics teachers, the Course may better equip students for
successful transfer into the community college, as well as provide a novel link
between the collaborating institutions. The project will investigate the
following research questions: (1) How does the Professional Learning Community
affect teaching practices? (2) In what ways does curricular inclusion of college
readiness and a contextualized approach to mathematics prepare students to
succeed in subsequent college-level STEM courses? and (3) Does the College
Algebra/College Readiness Course improve student success in first-year college
STEM and mathematics courses? To address these questions, the project will use
quantitative and qualitative data, including student academic performance in
mathematics and other STEM courses, and data from focus groups. The cross-
institutional professional learning community infrastructure may be a replicable
model for other institutions that seek to enhance the transition of students in
the first year of college mathematics and other STEM courses. Project outcomes
will be shared both regionally and nationally through conference presentations,
and the curricula will be shared through an open-access, online platform. The
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI)
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.