* 1928784
* Collaborative Research: Wafer-Scale, Defect-Free Assembly of Three-Dimensional Plasmonic Nanoarchitectures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Chi Hwan Lee, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2023
* USD 358,385.00

This grant supports research that contributes fundamental new knowledge in the
manufacturing of three-dimensional functional nanoarchitectures with
applications in light manipulation, thus promoting basic science and technology
in the fields of plasmonics and advanced manufacturing. Guided manipulation of
light through periodic patterns of three-dimensional plasmonic nanoarchitectures
provides remarkable opportunities to harness light in a way that cannot be
obtained with conventional optics. However, its practical implementation remains
challenged by the low-yield, time-consuming, and limited scalability of
conventional fabrication processes that largely rely on the use of
nanolithography. This research studies a new nanomanufacturing process based on
three-dimensional nanoassembly to fabricate the plasmonic nanoarchitectures. The
integration of three-dimensional nanoarchitectures with diverse substrates is
increasingly preferred for broad applications in imagers, sensors and lasers,
which greatly benefits the U.S. economy and society. The project is
multidisciplinary and involves mechanics, optics and advanced nanomanufacturing.
It provides excellent educational opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students and fosters interest in science and engineering in women and under-
represented minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fabrication of three-
dimensional (3D) plasmonic nanoarchitectures largely relies upon the utilization
of conventional nanolithography techniques that involve the use of either
electron-beam, focused ion-beam, or beam interference. However, significant
challenges exist in adopting these conventional techniques for diverse
substrates including flexible or curved surfaces, especially, since they are
principally designed to form nanopatterns on the flat surface of radiation-
sensitive materials with the assistance of thermal or chemical post-treatments.
This research is to develop a new nanomanufacturing technique that achieves
deterministic assembly of 3D plasmonic nanoarchitectures on suitable receiver
substrates in a way that allows the donor wafer to be reused for cost-savings.
The process involves the use of water under ambient conditions without
additional need of chemical, thermal or mechanical treatments, thereby
substantially extending the type of receiver substrate to arbitrary materials.
The collaborative research involves experiments to elucidate critical
controlling parameters and underpinning solid-liquid interactions supported by
multiscale/multiphysics computation modelling to predict manufacturing process
parameters and their control with integration of atomistic simulation. The 3D
plasmonic nanoarchitectures are integrated with hybrid pixel imagers to
demonstrate the enhancement of their detection
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.