* 1928832
* Catalyst Project: Creating and Evaluating a Culturally Representative STEM Curriculum Supported by Next Generation Science Standards
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Catherine Quinlan, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 05/31/2023
* USD 205,168.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution.
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Howard University will study how the lived experiences, heritage, and
accomplishments of people of Black African heritage can be used to create a
culturally representative STEM curriculum, and subsequently develop and
implement a culturally representative STEM curriculum supported in the Next
Generation Science Standards. Undergraduate students participate in this project
as researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use the cultural
resources of the Gullah people of South Carolina, along with best practices in
science education pedagogy, to create science lesson units that are culturally
representative of African Americans. The cultural resources of Black students
who attend a Historically Black College and University will also inform the
interest and direction of the science unit modules created, even as students
learn about science in the Gullah regions. The science units will be implemented
in various workshops with pre-service teachers, in-service teachers, and science
educators. Participants will engage in inquiry, discussion, and hands-on
activities supported by the three dimensions of the Next Generation Science
Standards. The research will use the best practices of qualitative research
methods, qualitative data collection and analysis, and schema theory as an
applied cognitive theory, along with pre- and post- questionnaires, adapted to
explore the following research questions: How do participants' attitudes and
views of the nature of science change? More, specifically, how do participants'
feelings, attitudes, and views about the social, racial, and cultural
embeddedness and nature of science change? How do participants' understandings
about the involvement and participation of African Americans in science change?
How do participants' pedagogical and science content knowledge change? How do
participants use their cognitive resources to understand and engage in science
that is culturally embedded in the lived experiences of the African American
Gullah people? This research has implications for embedding the cultural
underpinnings of African Americans into Western science in the K-12
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.