* 1928614
* FW-HTF-RL: Collaborative Research: Future expert work in the age of "black box", data-intensive, and algorithmically augmented healthcare
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,548,000.00

The nature of expert work is changing. Technological advances such as artificial
intelligence and data science increasingly enable new computerized tools and
products that make predictions and recommendations which were previously made by
human experts. However, many of these new tools are "black boxes" whose inner
workings are often not understood by their users, place demands that create
cognitive load, and de-emphasize abstract problem solving. As these technologies
are being deployed, there is little understanding of how they affect experts'
work practices, perceptions of the value of work, and the expert-client
relationship. Foundational research is needed in order to understand and improve
work in an age of data-intensive enhanced cognition, especially in healthcare
where such new technologies are rapidly changing expert work. This project is
expected to transform the future of expert work through a combined redesign of
technology, workflow, and interactions. It will lead to: a healthier and better-
informed population; efficient deployment of human capabilities in restructured
healthcare occupations; healthcare providers reducing the proportion of time
spent on repetitive tasks while increasing time devoted to value-adding,
meaningful activities; guidelines on design and delivery of cognition-augmenting
expert advice; and students who are well versed in cross-disciplinary research
on cognition-augmenting technologies in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's goals are: i) to study the relationships between experts, patients,
and technologies in a multidisciplinary way; ii) to develop new ways for these
technologies to serve experts and clients; and iii) to make expert work more
responsive, value-adding, and meaningful. The project includes two strands. In
the "Understand" strand, the interactions between experts, clients and
cognition-augmenting technologies are examined. In the "Shape" strand, the
project lays the foundations for technological and organizational interventions
that will make the interactions between experts, clients, and technology more
effective and empowering. With a multidisciplinary team including researchers in
computer science, human-computer interaction, dynamical systems, and
organization alongside with medical clinicians, the project will contribute: i)
scalable approaches toward quantifying the benefits and drawbacks of cognition-
augmented interactions, as well as measuring information flow in relationships
between experts, clients, and cognition augmenting technologies; ii) insights
into when, why, and how cognition-augmenting technologies are experienced as
expertise enhancing, rather than degrading; iii) data-driven methodologies to
predict the effects of technical and organizational interventions on experts'
work and experts' interaction with patients; iv) novel tools and workflows for
experts and clients to interact with black-box cognition-augmenting
technologies; v) modeling how representation of problems can be embedded in
expert; and vi) systematic exploration of explanation and dialogue interventions
with regard to how they affect experts' work and expert-client
relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.