* 1928720
* Using Targeted Constructivist Instructional Modules to Increase Undergraduate Students' Confidence, Knowledge, and Skills in Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Colin Nicholls, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,853.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 2 project will develop constructivist
instructional modules that help students learn mathematics through
interdisciplinary, open-ended mathematical problems. Teaching mathematics via a
constructivist approach may not only help students learn mathematical concepts
and skills, but also gain confidence in doing mathematics. By increasing student
success in mathematics, this project seeks to increase the number of students
enrolling in STEM degree programs. Many students in open-access colleges need
support to develop the mathematics knowledge and skills needed to progress in a
STEM program. This project seeks to identify the key mathematical concepts and
skills needed for success in both college mathematics courses and in the
workforce. The project will develop stand-alone instructional modules that teach
mathematical topics through active student engagement in mathematics. Since each
instructional module will be complete and independent, the modules have the
potential to complement lower-level mathematics courses in a variety of
instructional settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to increase the
number of declared pre-STEM majors persisting into credit-bearing STEM courses.
The project will complete a pilot test to design constructivist instructional
modules that both develop mathematical concepts and reinforce application skills
needed for success in subsequent mathematics courses. The modules will include
open-ended problems and activities that require students to justify and present
solutions, which are also skills desired by potential employers. The project
will assess the impact of the constructivist instructional modules and
associated support activities on student learning outcomes and course
completions. The project will also investigate the impact of the modules and
support activities on the ability for students to apply mathematical knowledge
in new situations. The project seeks to develop materials that could be shared
with other institutions seeking to enhance student learning and completion of
lower-level mathematics courses. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program
will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.