* 1928669
* Recognizing Signatures of Slow Slip in Plate Boundary Observatory Borehole Pore Pressure Data
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Patrick Fulton, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2020
* USD 80,813.00

Within the past 15-20 years, large unusual earthquakes that slip over the course
of days to weeks, rather than seconds, have been discovered to repeatedly occur
along subduction zone faults. Although these slow slip earthquakes do not create
seismic shaking, recognizing their occurrence is important because they can
influence the potential of regular earthquakes and tsunamis. These slow slip
earthquakes are sometimes associated with extremely quiet seismic rumblings, but
are otherwise identified through continuous Global-Positioning-System monitoring
that reveals small motions occurring at dedicated stations. The aim of this
study is to evaluate a potential complementary method for identifying these
events through the use of groundwater pressure data. As a fault slips, it
squishes and relaxes the water saturated rocks below the ground like a sponge.
With sensitive instruments within wells / boreholes, the resulting water
pressure changes can sometimes be observed. This project seeks to improve the
ability and speed at which slow slip earthquakes are detected by incorporating
the analysis of groundwater pressure data from existing monitoring facilities
along the Cascadia subduction zone within the United States Pacific Northwest.
The project will study and robustly identify water pressure changes associated
with fault slip and will support graduate students to conduct research as part
of the project. The results will be disseminated through published papers and
public presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will detect and analyze
suspected signatures of subduction zone slow slip hidden within continuous pore
pressure records from Earthscope's Plate Boundary Observatory borehole array.
The science is motivated by an aim to improve our understanding of the temporal
and spatial distribution of slow slip within subduction zones. Hydrogeologic
signatures of fault slip behavior can provide an additional constraint on large-
scale slow slip beyond seismic tremor detections or transients in continuous
positioning measurements. Suspected pore pressure signatures of fault slip,
however, must be differentiated from unrelated local hydrogeologic disturbances
and meteorological effects. This study addresses these issues by analyzing
existing borehole pore pressure data during known large-scale slow slip events
and uses signal processing and statistical techniques with a variety of data
types to improve the robust identification and discrimination of suspected
signals. The results are expected to improve our understanding of the
hydrogeologic response to fault slip, help further assess the timing and extent
of large-scale slow slip events, and potentially provide a real-time
statistically-based slow slip detection algorithm independent of continuous
positioning data or seismologic observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.