* 1928591
* Developing Reliable Educational Avenues to STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Patrick Rice, Florida Keys Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,917,670.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to build institutional
capacity in STEM, particularly marine science and technology. To achieve this
goal, the project seeks to improve student perceptions of STEM and to increase
the number of students who enter STEM programs and pursue STEM careers. Project
activities include implementation of innovative teaching strategies, use of and
research about the effectiveness of technologies such as virtual reality, and
development of effective pathways to STEM careers. By developing a STEM
Ambassador program, the project will provide opportunities for undergraduates to
participate in STEM outreach to K-12 students. The undergraduate STEM
Ambassadors will share their experiences and provide real-life examples about
what makes STEM interesting and how to be successful in STEM. The project will
also engage students in undergraduate research and professional internships to
help them develop skills needed in the workplace. The project team will
investigate the effectiveness of innovative technologies, such as virtual
reality, to actively engage students and elevate their interest in STEM and STEM
careers. Expected outcomes of the project include increased recruitment and
retention of students in STEM programs, thus contributing to increasing the
diversity of the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to: (1)
increase student interest in STEM careers; (2) increase retention and completion
of students who participate in the project activities relative to non-
participants; and (3) increase the successful transition of undergraduates into
the STEM workforce. The project seeks to generate knowledge about: (1) how
virtual reality can be a tool for increasing student interest in STEM programs;
(2) how participation in the project activities affects student retention and
completion in STEM programs; and (3) how paid professional internships affect
student preparation to enter the STEM workforce. The project will analyze data
from surveys, student tracking systems, and institutional sources to complete a
comparative study of outcomes of project participants versus non-participants.
The project intends to develop a reproducible model for creating reliable and
realistic educational pathways from K-12, through academia and into the STEM
workforce. Project results will be shared through webpages and social media,
conference presentations, scholarly and professional publications, and through
the Community College Undergraduate Research Initiative (CCURI) network. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.