* 1928208
* Geosciences EarthCube Community Office
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2019,05/31/2023
* Catherine Constable, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2023
* USD 6,640,474.00

The EarthCube effort aims to transform the way that geosciences research is done
by encouraging researchers and technologists to work together to share data and
scientific outcomes and to harness the data revolution. The EarthCube Office
(ECO) is responsible for developing and spreading tools that make it easier for
geoscientists to share their data. This office is also responsible for
supporting EarthCube's core organizational and governance units including: the
Leadership Council, Technology &amp; Architecture Committee, Science Committee,
Council of Data Facilities, as well as others. ECO manages EarthCube's business
operations and community engagement, including its online presence. The broader
impacts of this project include outreach to geoscientists, supporting science
education, and management of the Annual Meeting. In addition, EarthCube will
help to make the products of scientific research more openly available. ECO will
strive for full transparency in operations and will look to the community for
input on needed service evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EarthCube Office
provides organizational support to EarthCube, and facilitates developing and
sharing scientific resources through two activities: facilitation of EarthCube
governance and data discovery and access. As part of the data discovery and
access task, the ECO will collect relevant cyberinfrastructure and tools in the
GeoCODES Registry, and increase awareness and exposure to these resources. As
part of facilitation of EarthCube governance, the ECO will provide continuity to
the existing EarthCube community while looking toward the future to expand
EarthCube's reach across geosciences disciplines. Fundamental work includes
designing outreach and education activities for researchers interested in
acquiring the skills needed to ensure their data practices are Findable
Accessible Interoperable Reusable (FAIR) and beyond. ECO will offer pertinent
data science guidance and support to EC projects, to help them apply the latest
machine learning, data mining, big data analytics and other tools to their
research. Increasing development and access to technology innovations, and
nurturing a community of technically-savvy and engaged geoscientists will build
capacity in the geoscience research ecosystem. This will include opportunities
for scientists who might not otherwise interact with EarthCube. This project is
jointly supported by the Directorate for Geosciences and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.