* 1928875
* Collaborative Research:  Rainfall variability and the axes of tree-grass niche differentiation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jesse Nippert, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2024
* USD 240,749.00

The savanna biome, in which a discontinuous tree layer coexists with a
continuous grass layer, has a worldwide distribution. Increasingly, research
suggests that the relative proportion of tree and grass biomass in savannas is
strongly influenced by rainfall patterns, with higher rainfall leading to
greater woody biomass. Despite mounting evidence for rainfall effects, however,
it is unclear if more rainfall leads to greater tree biomass in savannas because
of deeper water infiltration, changes in rainfall intensity, or because the
length of the growing season increases with the amount of annual rainfall. This
question is important because we cannot accurately predict future changes to the
savanna biome without a detailed understanding of how tree and grass species
respond to rainfall patterns. This project will seek answers to this and other
questions using a South African savanna as a model system. North American
savannas have been largely replaced by forests, and the reasons for this are not
fully understood. Results from this project can be used to inform the
restoration and maintenance of savannas in North America and elsewhere, as well
as to predict with broad generality how the savanna biome might change in the
future. The project will also introduce undergraduate students to the ecology of
savannas through a multi-year field course and educate local communities about
the role of rainfall variability on natural resource
availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine experimental,
observational and modeling approaches to test alternative hypotheses about the
relationship between rainfall and tree to grass ratios in savannas. The research
has three specific aims: (1) identify the rainfall regimes that favor trees over
grasses, (2) identify the functional traits and tradeoffs that differentiate
savanna trees and grasses, and (3) develop and test a mechanistic model of tree
and grass dynamics as a function of rainfall. The core element of the study will
be a field experiment that will manipulate the timing, seasonality and depth
distribution of rainfall, and monitor the response of a multi-species assemblage
of known-age trees embedded in a grass matrix. In addition, the project will
examine functional differences (e.g., drought tolerance, water use efficiency
and functional rooting depth) between six tree and six grass species using
greenhouse, growth chamber and field experiments. Finally, the project will use
parameter estimates from this second component to develop and test a mechanistic
model of tree growth and tree to grass ratios based on whole-plant traits, and
validate the model under field conditions by comparing modeled and observed
changes in tree to grass ratios to rainfall manipulations in the field
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.