* 1928395
* Seismic Interferometry and Data Assimilation for Lithospheric Structure and Anisotropy Across Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Ritzwoller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,167.00

Alaska is composed of crustal fragments sandwiched in between old continental
crusts in Asia and North America. Because of plate tectonics, Alaska continues
to move relative to the stable parts of North America. Active seismicity is
found across most of the state which generates hazards such as earthquakes,
volcanic eruptions, and potential tsunamis in coastal areas. Alaska has been
built by a wide variety of geological processes. This makes it an ideal natural
laboratory. Its active southern margin is particularly complex. There, the
Yakutat microplate collides with the North American plate; a result of the
under-thrusting of the Pacific Plate in the Aleutian subduction zone. The recent
deployment of numerous seismometers across Alaska provides an unprecedented
opportunity to image the underlying geological structures. Here, the team
develops new tools and models in 3D the seismic velocities in the crust and
uppermost mantle to a depth of 120-150 km. A series of models are generated from
the seismic data. They include an isotropic component which details the
geometry, temperature and composition of the subsurface structures. The models
also account for directional variations in seismic wave propagation; this
provides information about past and on-going deformation processes. Outcomes of
the project will improve the understanding of seismogenic processes in Alaska,
including megathrust earthquakes that endanger the population centers. The
project also provides partial support and training in cutting-edge seismology to
several graduate students. The team will share the developed codes and analyses
with the scientific community, allowing their application to other regions of
the World.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the team measures the Rayleigh and Love
wave velocities derived from ambient noise and earthquakes, accounting for their
azimuthally dependence. The researchers use complementary data such as receiver
functions. This helps produce more refined, higher resolution lithospheric
models. Novelties include the application of three-station interferometry and
the inversion for the tilted elastic tensor. All data are interpreted within the
framework of a Bayesian Monte Carlo inversion. A distribution of accepted models
is generated from which model uncertainties are estimated. Scientific objectives
include (1) imaging the under-thrusting lithosphere along Alaska's southern
margin as well as the overlying crust and mantle wedge; the goal is to search
for slab tears, flat slab regions, slab edges, and thickened lithosphere. The
team investigates as well (2) how crustal thickness differs beneath the Alaska
and Brooks ranges and to what extent these and other ranges are compensated
isostatically. They look for evidence of (3) anisotropy from corner flow around
the edges of subducting lithosphere and (4) whether Yakutat lithosphere differs
from that of the surrounding regions. One goal is also to (5) determine the
geometry of contact between cratonic and deformed lithosphere. The seismological
models will be archived and shared with the broader geoscience community via the
IRIS-DMS. 3-D models and other higher-level data products are delivered to the
public through dynamically updated, open access databases at University of
Colorado, Boulder (transitioning to GitHub). These include dispersion maps,
receiver functions, surface wave observables like H/V ratios, and research
codes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.