* 1928869
* Properties and Phase Equilibria for Product and Process Design (PPEPPD) International Conference, May 12-16, 2019, Vancouver, Canada 2019
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Joan Brennecke, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 04/30/2020
* USD 21,564.00

This grant will provide travel support for US-based researchers to attend the
Properties and Phase Equilibria for Product and Process Design (PPEPPD)
International Conference, that will be held from May 12-16, 2019, in Vancouver,
Canada. The purpose of PPEPPD is the sharing of state-of-the-art techniques to
further product and process design that will fuel world-wide economic growth in
the chemical and related industries, and allow us to model new processes for
achieving more efficient separations and meeting lower greenhouse gas emission
goals. PPEPPD 2019 will bring together the most important international
researchers in the application of molecular thermodynamics to industrially
relevant product and process design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPEPPD 2019
International Conference will provide an opportunity for exchange of ideas on
the cutting edge of techniques for thermophysical properties and phase
equilibrium measurement and estimation, and identify the challenges in the
growing areas of alternative energy resources and storage, gas and oil upstream
and downstream processing, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, marine and saline
systems and processes, nanotechnology, and sustainability. American
participation is essential for making contributions to the general knowledge
base, for building awareness of global activities, and for fostering
international collaborations. The US-based researchers supported by this grant
will have the opportunity to interact with academic and industrial researchers
from around the world and exchange ideas on the latest advances on molecular
thermodynamics research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.