* 1928377
* Collaborative Research: Dating Deformation with Titanite
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* George Gehrels, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2021
* USD 115,621.00

Much of our understanding of the geologic history of the Earth comes from
radiometric dating of Earth processes. Currently, Earth scientists have a
difficult time placing narrow constraints on the precise time that a fault
occurs deep within the crust of the Earth. This project combines two state-of-
the-science techniques to directly date the time of faulting along a key fault
zone in southeast Alaska, and thereby date when ancient earthquakes occurred.
Development of this new analytical technique will enable considerable future
research and understanding of how Earth materials deform. In addition, this
research project will provide training and research opportunities for a female
graduate student and several undergraduate students. Visits to local elementary
schools will enable potential future scientists to experience the methods and
results of Earth science research, with direct implications for earthquake
hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project consists of two
principal objectives: 1) develop the mineral titanite as a tool for dating high-
temperature deformation by a combined microstructural and microgeochronology
approach, and 2) apply this tool to the evolution of the spectacular Coast Shear
Zone and Great Tonalite Sill in the Coast Mountains orogen of southeast Alaska.
Research methods will incorporate a field study to understand qualitatively the
evolution of a mid- to deep crustal intra-arc shear zone and synkinematic
sheeted-sill complex exposed in the Coast shear zone of Alaska and Canada.
Titanite analyses will include electron-backscatter diffraction maps of titanite
microstructure, and laser-ablation split-stream inductively coupled plasma maps
of titanite composition that incorporate U-Pb dates. These data will allow
assessment of the physical and chemical processes that affected the crystal, and
the identification of crystals whose U-Pb distribution reflects high-temperature
deformation. Because titanite is a widespread crustal mineral, this technique
should have broad application globally and enhance our understanding of how
crust deforms and orogens assemble and change through
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.