* 1928319
* Collaborative Research: Processes that Regulate Vertical Accelerations in Supercell Updrafts
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Christopher Nowotarski, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 437,757.00

The especially intense updrafts in supercell thunderstorms facilitate the
production of large hail, tornadoes, extreme rainfall rates, and prolific
lightning. As a result of their great impacts on society, considerable research
efforts are warranted to better understand and predict the environmental factors
that contribute to the vertical accelerations that give way to supercells'
impressive updrafts. This collaborative research effort will utilize numerous,
innovative high-resolution numerical modeling experiments coupled with
observational datasets in order to understand the forcing for supercell updrafts
at various heights over a range of realistic near-storm environments. Thus, this
work has tangible broader impacts to society through its potential to improve
understanding and forecasting of supercell thunderstorms and their related
hazards as well as through training of a new generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by a current lack of comprehensive understanding
in these areas, this research will investigate the following scientific
questions: (1) How do low-level stability, low-level shear, and low-level storm-
relative flow conspire to determine a storm's effective inflow layer? (2) How do
concurrent changes in low-level stability and shear, as occurs during the
evening transition, influence the ratio of air ingested from different layers
and the vertical profiles of buoyant and dynamic pressure accelerations in the
lower portion of a supercell updraft? (3) How might the connection between
storm-relative flow and updraft width influence an updraft's profile of buoyant
and dynamic vertical accelerations? These questions will be answered using
numerical simulations with a range of realism from highly idealized to real-data
simulations of observed storms, wherein quantities such as the effective inflow
layer, updraft forcing, and entrainment will be compared and verified via dual-
Doppler radar observations when available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.