* 1928946
* Collaborative Research: Interactions between the Tonga-Lau subduction system and the Samoan plume
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Songqiao Wei, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 283,591.00

A fundamental goal of solid earth science is to improve our understanding of the
Earth’s interior evolution, which is driven by mantle convection. There are
three primary components of the mantle convection system: 1) subduction where
one tectonic plate (slab) descends into the Earth’s interior along an oceanic
trench, 2) plate spreading at mid-ocean ridges where the majority of seafloor is
created, and 3) buoyant upwelling, or mantle plumes, where hot and less dense
materials rise from the deep earth to the surface to create volcanoes like the
Hawaiian islands. Locations where these three systems interact—including the
Tonga oceanic trench, Lau back-arc spreading centers, and Samoa volcanic
islands—provide unique opportunities to investigate these competing mechanisms.
In this study, the juxtaposition of the Samoan plume and the northern edge of
the Tonga-Lau subduction system is used to investigate mantle flow in a slab-
plume setting, and to understand how the distinctive compositional and thermal
characteristics of plume materials are distributed. The project provides
training for graduate and undergraduate students and a postdoctoral
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary project, consisting of
seismic imaging, geochemical analysis of submarine lavas, and geodynamic
modeling, is used to investigate the Tonga-Lau-Samoa system. Seismic
observations will be obtained from an 18-month deployment of 30 Ocean Bottom
Seismographs (OBSs) and 5 land seismometers (including 3 permanent stations) in
the northern Tonga-Lau and Samoa regions. Several different seismic imaging
techniques will provide 3-D velocity models of the upper mantle, precise
earthquake locations will image the slab tear and associated deformation, and
the variation of seismic velocity with direction will provide constraints on
mantle flow. Lava samples will be dredged at 10 seamount locations east of the
Tonga Trench to better understand subduction inputs into the northern Tonga
Trench with the goal of understanding the distribution of enriched mantle
material in the Lau Basin. The samples will be analyzed for isotopic
compositions allowing identification of possible sources of non-Samoan hotspot
materials in the Lau Basin, which is critical for geochemical interpretations of
mantle flow. A series of geodynamic models will simulate slab-plume interactions
with a variety of possible configurations. Using the integrated history of time-
dependent mantle flow in the models, the predicted thermal structure and mantle
textures can be directly compared with seismic and geochemical
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.