* 1928313
* FW-HTF-P: Augmenting Cyber-Physical-Human Collaborative Cognition and Designing Future Human-Automation Interaction in Complex Manufacturing and Operational Environments
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Jianxin (Roger) Jiao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 149,446.00

Augmenting collaborative cognition is envisioned to be important to bolster
human cognition with technologies through human-automation interaction in future
complex manufacturing and operational environments. This project investigates
the theoretical foundation of augmenting collaborative cognition from the
perspectives of cyber-physical-human analysis and model-based decision support.
The goal is to develop mathematical and computational models and tools to
advance basic research for understanding human cognition augmentation regarding
such critical issues as cognitive state sensing and assessment, human-automation
interaction adaption and control, as well as group decision making in human-
automation systems. Key research issues include effective cognition and
perception learning, trust dynamics modeling, human cognitive performance
prediction, and human-automation interaction optimization. The focus on
collaborative cognition entails a human-automation mutual adaption strategy for
augmenting human team cognition and collective intelligence. The ultimate goal
of this project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research
infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying
future technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This convergent project will provide new
insights into cognitive interactions between workers, technologies, robots, and
machines in future factories, empowering adaptive task abilities to improve both
productivity and worker experience. It contributes to a deeper understanding of
augmented manufacturing and operational environments of the future by amplifying
cognitive capacities and leveraging human cognitive burden with artificial
intelligence and smart automation. The proposed work has the potential to
establish a new paradigm for augmenting human collaborative cognition, which
will shed light on the economic and societal impacts on the future of work. The
research results will be incorporated into new interdisciplinary engineering
curricula to enrich undergraduate and graduate education. The testbed and
prototype implementation will offer a unique opportunity to deploy new
curriculum through the Makerspace to enhance a human-centered open design and
innovation culture and promote mass customized education and learning experience
for students to be exposed to multidisciplinary
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.