* 1928554
* Improving the Transition of Community College Students into University STEM Programs Through Cross-Enrollment
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Brian Sato, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to diversify the pool of
STEM graduates with bachelor's degrees. The project intends to accomplish this
goal by increasing student transfer rates from community colleges to four-year
institutions through cross-enrollment in STEM courses. A cross-enrollment
program enables students who are enrolled at a community college to also be
enrolled in courses at a four-year college. Cross-enrollment programs provide
low-cost opportunities for students to become acquainted with a four-year
institution's campus by experiencing courses at that institution. This project
seeks to increase the number of students participating in cross-enrollment STEM
courses with emphasis on increasing cross-enrollment for racial and ethnic
minorities. Participating in cross-enrollment programs could enhance a student's
confidence in their ability to complete STEM courses and could thus increase
transfer rates of community college students into STEM bachelor's degree
programs. This project is a collaboration between the University of California,
Irvine and three community college partners, Irvine Valley College, Orange Coast
College, and Saddleback College. The project team aims to identify the effects
of cross-enrollment participation on a student's probability of transferring to
a four-year institution and to identify and test methods for improving cross-
enrollment programs. Cross-enrollment programs that include community colleges
with diverse student populations have the potential to increase transfer rates
and thus diversify the pool of STEM graduates at four-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine community college students' perceptions of
the benefits of and barriers to cross-enrollment in STEM courses. Based on
findings from focus groups and surveys with community college students,
administrators, and STEM faculty, the study team will design and implement
interventions to increase the number of community college students who are
cross-enrolled in STEM courses at the University of California, Irvine. This
study aims to examine the effects of cross-enrollment on community college
students' probability of transferring to a four-year college and to provide
evidence about how to improve the cross-enrollment experience for students in
STEM programs. Students will be randomly assigned to receive information alone
or information plus additional supports, such as parking passes and vouchers for
books and course materials. These students will be followed for up to three
years, enabling the project team to examine which supports are most effective
for increasing cross-enrollment in STEM courses and to study the effects of
cross-enrollment on eventual transfer to a STEM major at a four-year college.
The partnership between a four-year university and three area community colleges
could be a model for other institutions seeking to expand and diversify the
pathways into STEM programs. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.