* 1928842
* Catalyzing Student Success: Implementing Cyberlearning Tools in Large Introductory Courses in the Chemical Engineering Pathway
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 293,118.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE:EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by improving student learning and retention in chemical
engineering. Retention of students pursuing chemical engineering degrees is
essential to the future STEM workforce, but deficiencies in introductory
coursework are a barrier to degree persistence and completion. The objective of
this project is to implement cyberlearning tools in introductory courses in the
chemical engineering curriculum. It is expected that these tools will increase
student success in the courses, thus improving retention of students in the
chemical engineering major and graduation of chemical engineers who are prepared
for the workforce or advanced education. The project plans to achieve the
objective by developing and testing a chemistry- and chemical engineering-
focused online dashboard that is integrated into the University's online
learning management system. The dashboard will include badges to visualize
student progress in the course, a leaderboard to motivate study behavior and
help-seeking, and rewards to provide immediate feedback about mastery of key
chemistry or chemical engineering concepts. The results from this project have
the potential to increase understanding about how cyberlearning tools can
motivate students in chemical engineering coursework. The results also have the
potential to provide foundational knowledge about effective use of cyberlearning
tools in other STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite research showing
positive impact of cyberlearning on engagement and academic achievement, only a
small number of studies have focused on large enrollment STEM courses. In
addition, few of these studies incorporate robust measures to rigorously and
systematically assess students' behavioral, cognitive, and affective changes.
This project aims to fill this gap by developing and testing a student dashboard
that tracks student accomplishments and motivates them to use the software to
improve their performance in introductory courses. Dashboard development and
testing will occur with three study cohorts of students in multiple, large
enrollment, undergraduate courses, including general chemistry. The development
process will benefit from a rigorous evaluation framework, including an advisory
board of national experts, to provide formative and summative feedback on the
project progress. Project deliverables include (1) development of an online
dashboard, (2) evaluation of the dashboard using surveys, online data, and focus
groups, and (3) dissemination of project outcomes through presentations,
publications, a website, and social media. The quantitative analysis of
behavioral outcomes and motivational surveys will be complemented by a
qualitative analysis of how students made sense of the dashboard and what role
the dashboard may have played in their emerging identities as engineers. The
novel data collection will triangulate findings to offer a detailed
understanding about how student motivation and academic achievement in chemical
engineering interact and are informed by the use of a chemical engineering-
focused online dashboard. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.