* 1928837
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 International Conference on Computer-Aided Verification (CAV)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Thomas Wies, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This travel grant provides support for 15 US-based students to attend the 30th
Conference on Computer-Aided Verification (CAV) to be held in New York City,
July 15-18th 2019. CAV, one of the premier conference in formal verification, is
dedicated to the advancement of the theory and practice of computer-aided formal
analysis and synthesis methods for hardware and software systems. The conference
covers the spectrum from theoretical results to concrete applications, with an
emphasis on practical verification tools and the algorithms and techniques that
are needed for their implementation.

This travel grant will enable career development and learning opportunities for
US-based and/or US citizen graduate students. Attending conferences like CAV is
an important component of graduate school education for our society's future
computer science researchers. Students have the opportunity to discuss leading
edge research with world-class researchers in formal methods, and establish
networks, connections, and mentoring relationships that will serve them well
during their research careers. This project aims at increasing the participation
of students from underrepresented groups and those from smaller institutions of
education, to provide them with equal opportunities, rather than leave them
behind.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.