* 1928596
* Developing Faculty Resources of Evidence-based Practices that Improve Learning and Equity in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Eleanor Close, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,050,450.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to support faculty at HSIs
developing and using evidence-based instructional strategies and materials that
improve learning and equity in STEM courses. The project addresses need of
developing STEM education research methods and instruments that focuses on
diverse students at HSIs. First, the project seeks to support HSI faculty in
implementing, adapting and assessing evidence-based instructional strategies
that support equitable outcomes. Second, the project will research potential
bias in research-based assessments. Third, the project will use the Learning
About STEM Student Outcomes (LASSO) online assessment platform to establish
baselines for equity in STEM disciplines. By achieving these three goals, the
project aims to build the framework and the set of resources on the scholarship
of teaching and learning in a culturally diverse and equitable learning
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address gaps in the literature on
evidence-based research to improve learning and equity in STEM courses for
students of diverse backgrounds, the project will develop and assess three
strands of activities. Strand 1 will identify the motivations for and barriers
to faculty at HSIs in engaging in the scholarship of teaching and learning
(SOTL). Based on this knowledge, the project will build resources, tools, and
workshops that meet the needs of faculty who are working with students from
marginalized groups. Central to this support is the LASSO platform, a free
online platform for instructors to administer research-based assessments to
their students. LASSO provides data collection and analysis support to simplify
conducting SOTL in college STEM courses. Strands 2 and 3 will support educators
engaging in SOTL by researching potential bias in the research-based assessments
themselves and methods commonly used to administer them. This research will
ensure the accuracy of the data available to these scholars. To support
scholarship on equitable outcomes, the project will use the aggregated LASSO
database to both establish baselines for equity in STEM disciplines and identify
pedagogies that support equitable outcomes. Equity baselines will provide
scholars a comparison for their own studies and courses. The pedagogies that
support equity will provide rich areas for them to explore. The outcome of the
work will be a framework and set of resources to support scholars at HSIs
engaging in SOTL to identify evidence-based practices that improve equity, while
addressing issues in the existing literature on equity. The products of the
project will be disseminated through various channels including conferences,
workshops, publications, and the NSF-funded Learning Assistant Alliance. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.