* 1928652
* Conference Proposal:Summer School  on Aspects of Geometric Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Richard Canary, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Krishnan Shankar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 35,000.00

A summer school "Aspects of Geometric Group Theory" will be held July 8-19,
2019, at Institut des Hautes Etudes Scientifiques in Bures-sur-Yvette, France.
This summer school features a distinguished collection of geometers and
geometric group theorists who have been chosen both for their mathematical
excellence and their outstanding expository skills. The summer school will
attract talented early career mathematicians from around the world. The support
from this project shall expose US-based graduate students and postdoctoral
assistant professors to a broad spectrum of topics in geometric group theory at
an early stage of their career development and to foster intellectual
relationships, both with the lecturers and with other graduate students, which
will benefit the students throughout their careers. These relationships will
have a long-term positive impact on the interactions between the mathematical
communities in geometric group theory in the U.S. and Europe. The organizing
committee and the principal investigators are committed to funding a diverse
group of mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric group theory is devoted
to exploring connections between algebraic properties of groups and topological
and geometric properties of the spaces on which they act. Geometric group theory
closely interacts with low dimensional topology, hyperbolic geometry, Lie groups
and homogeneous spaces, algebraic topology, computational group theory, and
differential geometry. There are also substantial connections with complexity
theory, mathematical logic, dynamical systems, probability theory, K-theory, and
other areas of mathematics. Geometric group theory is a very broad area, and
this project shall focus on geometrical aspects of group actions, for example,
actions on trees, curve complexes, cube complexes, and discrete groups arising
in geometry, topology and dynamics. More information about the conference can be
found at:
https://indico.math.cnrs.fr/event/3784/overview&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.