* 1928673
* Monarchs and Milkweeds: A Partnership to Develop a Integrated and Culturally Relevant Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mary Ashley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,490,096.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to attract and retain more
Latinx students in biology and chemistry by incorporating a culturally relevant
theme into undergraduate STEM education. The Monarchs and Milkweeds Project
seeks to develop a vertically integrated curriculum that spans from high school
to lower- and upper-level college courses. The curriculum will focus on the
biology, ecology, and chemistry of monarch butterflies and their principal food
source, milkweed plants. Monarch butterflies overwinter in Mexico and return to
the United States each year, and the symbolism of monarchs is prominent in some
Latin cultures. Teachers and faculty from three Latinx-serving high schools, two
2-year colleges, and the University departments of biology and chemistry will
collaboratively build learning activities, laboratory exercises, and other
content based on the science of monarchs and milkweeds. The project also
includes an intensive summer research experience in which students will
investigate urban plant communities as habitat for monarchs and engage in
community participatory science. The project expects to reach thousands of
students, including hundreds of Latinx students, at participating high schools
and colleges in the Chicago area. Further, the curriculum and related materials
will be shared with other institutions, thus promoting incorporation of research
experiences for students at other high schools, colleges, and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monarch larvae are specialist herbivores of
milkweeds that sequester toxic steroids from milkweed plants as a defense
against predators. Every fall they leave feeding grounds in the United States to
overwinter in Mexico, a migration unmatched by any other insect. The complex
relationship between monarchs and milkweeds spans scientific fields ranging from
ecology to pharmacology and provides a rich case study to develop curriculum
content in science classes from high school to upper-level university courses.
The Monarchs and Milkweeds Project will focus on building learning activities,
laboratory exercises, and other content based on the science of monarchs and
milkweeds. Other components of the Monarchs and Milkweeds Project include an
intensive summer research experience, community participatory science, dialogues
to promote synergies between cultural and scientific knowledge, and
opportunities for students to explore their identities as Latinx scientists. The
Monarchs and Milkweeds Project aims to contribute to science education by
creating new knowledge regarding improving outcomes for students in STEM,
including Latinx students. The project will explore how culturally relevant
content in biology and chemistry classes impacts interest in and the academic
performance of Latinx students. Since all students in the courses will
participate in the learning modules, the project seeks to disaggregate the
impacts of integrated content versus cultural relevancy. The collaboration
across urban public secondary and post-secondary education institutions will
allow an assessment of the challenges and opportunities associated with
designing a broad, culturally relevant science curriculum. The HSI Program aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education and to build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.