* 1928332
* University of Washington: R/V Thompson and R/V Carson Oceanographic Technical Support - Year 1 of 4 (2019 - 2022)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Doug Russell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 4,614,875.00

University of Washington proposes to support technical services on R/V Thompson,
a 274? general purpose, global class research vessel, and R/V Rachael Carson, a
newly outfitted 72-foot coastal research vessel, both operated as part of the US
Academic Research Fleet (ARF). The proposal requests support for basic services.
They will provide at least two shipboard technicians on each cruise of R/V
Thompson to support seagoing research projects and to maintain, calibrate and
provide for qualified users items from their pool of shared-use research
instrumentation. As part of the basic services, they will maintain and operate
the multibeam sonar systems on R/V Thompson. For R/V Carson, a technician is
available to sail if desired by the chief scientists, though (s)he will
occasionally not sail due to space limitations. The technician will provide
shared-use instrumentation for use by the scientists, and provide remote support
as needed if a technician does not sail. The budget included with this proposal
is for the first year of a 4-year continuing grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.