* 1928237
* NNA Track 1: Landscape evolution and adapting to change in ice-rich permafrost systems
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Anna Liljedahl, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice-rich permafrost is ground that is
frozen all year round for two or more years and contains particularly large
amounts of water that will be released upon thawing. This ice is the element of
Arctic landscapes most susceptible to climate warming. Nearly 50% of the Arctic
has ice-rich permafrost. For example, the upper 4-5 meters of the land along
Alaska's northern coast contains an estimated 77% ice. Thawing of ice-rich
permafrost affects entire arctic ecosystems and makes the ground unstable to
build upon. Thus, ice-rich permafrost is conceived as having a role similar to
that of a 'keystone species' in ecology, whereby if the keystone element is
removed or drastically reduced, the entire system is radically changed. To
better understand the intricate connections between the ice-rich permafrost and
the larger arctic human-ecological system, this project is exploring how
differences in climate, snow, water, level of disturbance, and time influence
the accumulation and loss of ground ice in permafrost landscapes and how people
and their infrastructure can adapt to changing ice-rich permafrost. The goal is
to understand ice-rich permafrost at local, regional, and circumpolar scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus in the Prudhoe Bay oilfield and the
village of Point Lay, Alaska, where permafrost temperatures are changing rapidly
and there are large impacts to ecosystems, industrial infrastructure, and local
communities. Both areas contain excellent examples of ice-rich permafrost-
related problems relevant to many other areas of Alaska and circumpolar Arctic,
so the work will have broad applications elsewhere. Three ice-rich permafrost
observatories are proposed: 1) a Roadside Ice-rich Permafrost Observatory in the
Prudhoe Bay Oilfield; 2) a Natural Ice-rich Permafrost Observatory remote from
infrastructure; and 3) a Village Ice-rich Permafrost Observatory at Point Lay.
Ground-level observations of ground ice, hydrology, vegetation, and greenhouse-
gas fluxes are being conducted and remote sensing is being used to measure and
monitor changes from space. Much of the response to infrastructure damage caused
by severe thermokarst (thaw-related subsidence of the ground surface) is repair
and stabilization of existing structures. There is an immediate need to develop
more strategic approaches to mitigate damage and adapt to change. Point Lay,
Alaska, is experiencing some of the most severe ice-rich permafrost-related
impacts of any place in the Arctic but has received relatively little research
and agency attention. Researchers from the University of Alaska's Institute of
Arctic Biology, Institute of Northern Engineering, and Geophysical Institute are
working together with the Cold Climate Housing Research Center (CCHRC), the
Point Lay community, the Regional Housing Authority, and North Slope Borough to
address these issues. Wherever possible the team are using local experience with
ice-rich permafrost to help develop housing strategies relevant to many arctic
villages facing similar impacts. The project partners are working with local
residents, government agencies, the oil industry, and the Alaska Department of
Transportation and Public Facilities to develop best practices for road and
house construction and related education materials. A post-doctoral student, a
graduate student, and two undergraduate students will be part of the research
team. The results will be communicated to circumpolar communities and the
broader public and through the Rapid Arctic Transitions due to Infrastructure
and Climate (RATIC) action group of the International Arctic Science Committee
(IASC) and the Terrestrial Multidisciplinary distributed Observatories for the
Study of Arctic Connections (T-MOSAiC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.