* 1928471
* Graduate Student Support to Attend Magnetics Summer School 2019, To Be Held At Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, June 2-7, 2019.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Ravi Hadimani, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This proposal will fund 10 US graduate students to attend the 2019 Magnetics
Summer School at Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond between June 2-7,
2019. The students will undertake intensive classroom training in magnetics and
visit National Institute of Standards and Technology at Gaithersburg to learn
about advanced magnetics concepts and characterization. The summer school will
also help in the professional development of the US graduate students by
allowing them to present their research at the summer school. Through this
summer school, the students will have additional cultural education and
networking opportunities by meeting 80 other international graduate students
working the area of magnetics which will foster multidisciplinary collaborations
across multiple universities in different countries. The organizers of the
Summer School have particularly encouraged women and underrepresented minorities
to apply&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials and electromagnetic techniques
have revolutionized our lives. New concepts in magnetics have enabled several
technologies such as data recording, cancer therapy, non-volatile magnetic
random access memory and brain imaging. The boundaries of these areas have been
constantly pushed to overcome many existing challenges in the use of these
concepts and technologies. The Magnetics Summer School will cover several of
these areas of research including fundamentals of magnetism, magnetic data
recording, magnetic memory, skyrmions and spin-orbit coupling. The latest
results in these areas will be presented to the students by the world leading
experts. Students will also present their research at the summer school in the
form of poster presentations. Because of the restricted budget, the Magnetics
Society has allocated funds for only 15 US students out of 80 total number of
students coming from the four continents, North America, South America, Europe
and Asia. Funds requested for additional 10 US student participants will enhance
US strength in the field of magnetics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.