* 1928549
* FW-HTF-P: Building Research Capacity by Technological Interventions in Support of Mixed-Ability Workplaces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Francesco Cafaro, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2022
* USD 149,785.00

People with cognitive and physical disabilities encounter significant
difficulties when entering the workforce and consistently report lower
employment and pay than people without disabilities. Even after securing
employment, people with disabilities often face misunderstandings or negative
attitudes from their coworkers. This impacts their ability to be productive and
to learn the skills required for their profession. This project is situated in
mixed-ability workplaces (i.e., settings in which workers without disabilities
and workers with different types of disabilities collaborate). The researchers
will explore challenges that emerge during training sessions and everyday work.
They will then investigate how theories that connect cognition with physical
action can be used to design novel technologies that augment the level of
accessibility of mixed-ability workplaces and the success of all workers. The
goal of this planning project is to build research capacity for generating
fundamental, convergent research in support of mixed-ability workplaces and
ultimately to boost the diversity of the U.S.
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three major thrusts.
First, the researchers will partner with a library that supports a mixed-ability
workplace in order to conduct exploratory, qualitative research aimed at
understanding how people with disabilities can be integrated into the workforce.
Second, the researchers will partner with Brain Injury and Technology Education
Support in Indianapolis, IN, a group that supports people with physical and
cognitive disabilities. Together they will organize a participatory design
workshop in which people with and without disabilities will collaborate in
designing novel technologies for mixed-ability workplaces. Third, the
investigators will lay the groundwork for a network of community partners and
professional organizations that will assist in piloting and evaluating new
assistive technologies, create a community of practitioners, and inform current
work practices. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop the necessary
research personnel, research infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the
opportunities for studying future technology, future workers, and future work at
the level of a FW-HTF full research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.