* 1928254
* NNA Track 2: Unangam Ulaa Project: Culturally-informed adaptation of the ancient Aleutian semi-subterranean dwelling for sustainable and resilient Arctic housing.
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Millie McKeown, Aleutian Pribilof Islands Association
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Unangam Ulaa is the traditional house
of the Unangax people in the Aleutian Islands and Alaska Peninsula, typically
constructed from sod and partially buried into the soil surface. This Navigating
the New Arctic (NNA) grant supports a scientific investigation into the
construction and design of the Unangam Ulaa to determine how ancient
construction techniques can be adapted using modern materials to create energy
efficient dwelling specifically designed for the Aleutians yet transferrable to
other Arctic regions. This work will integrate ancient and modern expertise
about the built environment in these harsh environmental conditions into new
built structures to increase resiliency of the structure and to help local
populations adapt to a changing climate. This grant will support several
activities bringing together leaders from an Indigenous community, government
officials, engineers, and scientists trained in universities. The project
focuses on co-production of knowledge with an Indigenous community in the
leadership role. The research team will also collaborate with the Cook Inlet
Native Head Start (CINHS) organization, which provides early childhood education
services to the Alaska Native and American Indian community in
Anchorage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis being tested in this project is
whether ancient construction techniques of the Unangam Ulaa can be applied to
modern materials to build energy efficient dwellings. The model approach will be
ADDIE (analyze, design, develop, implement, and evaluate) with this project
focusing on the first three phases. The foundation of the analysis phase will be
to first learn from Unangax elders. A linguistic team will work with Unangax
elders to gain a deeper appreciation of the ancient construction, use, and
cultural significance of the Unangam Ulaa. An archival research team will gather
available ethnographic data about Unangam Ulaa. An anthropological team will
work with archaeologists who have conducted excavations on Unangam Ulaa to gain
insights. A construction team will work with engineers and architects to learn
about ancient construction design and adapt them into modern materials to
develop a scale prototype. A social scientist team will create an informed
consent form and apply for institutional review board approval for the project
to be implemented during the next phase (five-year field study). Each team will
produce a paper on their methodology, findings, and recommendations. Likely
outcomes will be a comprehensive document of findings and a team of people
prepared for the second phase (implement and evaluate) of five-year field work
building and using Unangam Ulaa in the Aleutian region first with ancient
materials and then modern materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Navigating the New Arctic and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.