* 1928278
* FW-HTF-RM: Intelligent Social Network Interventions to Augment Human Cognition for Interdisciplinary Interactions in Project Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Ken Frank, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,439,993.00

Project teams in the Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) industry
are typically temporary and highly complex, multi-team systems. They require
smooth coordination and integration of ideas while numerous individuals interact
in a complex social network structure at sub-team and project team boundaries
within and outside of their disciplines and organizations. With this motivation,
a trans-disciplinary team of engineering, construction management, computer
science, education, social networks, organizational psychology, and economics
experts will develop a research model of intelligent social network
interventions. By augmenting human cognition and the functioning of multi-team
systems in real-world AEC and student teams, this model will enable individuals
to develop the skills needed for future of work in complex social systems, and
provide short and long-term economic and social benefits via improvements in
student outcomes, individuals' skills, and project outcomes. The successful
completion of the project will offer a practical system, equipping individuals
and organizations with sufficient means to facilitate multi-team coordination
and project effectiveness. AEC project teams have long-term social, economic,
and environmental impacts through their built environment products and so, it is
critical for workers to develop knowledge and skills that support highly
interdependent work contributions in complex social and task structures. The
results from this project will have a significant positive impact in the
productivity of AEC workers that immediately take part in project teams, and
will extend to a broad range of workforce via improvements in built
environments. It will contribute to the science of organizations, engineering,
and R&amp;D teams across industries that employ complex multi-team systems now
and in the future. New learning modules for project-based teaching and learning
that incorporate intelligent social network interventions will be developed and
disseminated through an outreach website to help train future workers. This is
an advancement in the use of technology to sensitize humans on how teams work
and continuously improve their skills for improved project performance,
individual learning, and future of work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While social
network analysis research has been carried out from various perspectives, little
has been done to derive "actionable" insights and use these insights as
intervention to improve communication, especially from the context of work. This
forms the basis for "dynamic (social) network rewiring" based not only on human
behavior but also the work context, i.e., the goals of the work, via multiple
cycles alternating between examining and intervening the network for behavior
and context. To achieve these goals, the researcher team will use immediate and
machine/deep learning enabled social network interventions to help individuals
develop the skills needed for future of work and facilitate short and long-term
economic and social benefits. The trans-disciplinary research team has
formulated a longitudinal, comparative research design involving real-world AEC
teams as well as classroom, student-team test-beds, where equal numbers of cases
are to receive manual, machine learning bolstered, and no social network
interventions. Complementing the recent network intervention studies, this
project focuses on complex and temporary multi-team systems. Student teams in
the study design will contribute to the understanding of smaller, intra-
organizational, sub-team dynamics in multi-team systems and emergence of
tomorrow's authentic workers and teams. The design will use multi-modal graph
neural models to automate recognition of poor team functioning metrics so that
problems can be diagnosed and interventions can be facilitated via augmentation
of human cognition for multi-team coordination. The design can accumulate
knowledge obtained from past learning and adapt it for future learning, even in
new domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.