* 1928950
* Coarse Grained Modeling &amp; Control of Colloidal Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Bevan, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of the proposed project is to develop computational models of ensembles
of differently shaped colloidal particles as a means to control their assembly
into ordered microstructures with few defects. The proposed research may enable
metamaterial applications involving micro-structured colloidal-based materials
for manipulation of electromagnetic radiation. Example materials include novel
reflectors, gratings, polarizers, waveguides, etc. as part of sensors, solar
cells, antennas, optical computers, and cloaking devices, which all require
periodic structures of different shaped particles with low defect densities. The
focus of the research project will be on modeling and control of ellipsoidal and
super-ellipsoidal particles to enable a rich set of microstructures. Novel
methods for controlling interactions using directional and time varying inputs
will be developed to enable precise control of colloidal particle assembly
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the thermodynamics and kinetics in
colloidal systems is challenging and applying feedback control adds an
additional layer to engineering complex responses in such systems. The goal of
the proposed research is to develop minimal physically-meaningful models of
stochastic dynamics to design model-based feedback control policies for the
assembly of ellipsoidal and super-ellipsoidal particles. The objective is to
significantly adapt and extend prior approaches to systematically define coarse
grained system coordinates that capture structural features while eliminating
system symmetries. The feedback control policies will be tested experimentally
with tunable kT-scale interactions to design dynamic reversible assembly of
different shaped particles into ordered metamaterials. The fundamental
understanding of design rules and control parameters for colloidal assembly will
provide new general insights beyond what is known from trial-and-error
discovery. The project will train students by integrating broad topics in
colloid science, fluid dynamics, materials chemistry, advanced
metrology/microfabrication, and control. Broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields will be pursued through weekly mentoring
activities at a local elementary after-school program focused on engineering
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.