* 1928189
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: The climate impacts on Alaskan and Yukon rivers, fish, and communities as told through co-produced scenarios
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Joshua Koch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,567,643.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Northern communities in Alaska and Canada
rely upon productive fisheries. For many of these communities, rivers are used
to access fishing and hunting grounds and to transport supplies during ice-free
seasons and over river-ice in winter. As the Arctic and its rivers continue to
warm, the ultimate impacts on people, their fisheries and winter travel
corridors are highly uncertain. Improved understanding of the ongoing and
possible future changes requires close partnership among Native groups and
researchers from diverse scientific disciplines. This project is a collaboration
among the Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) at the University of
Colorado Boulder (CU), the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), the Yukon River Inter-
Tribal Watershed Council (YRITWC), the National Center for Atmospheric Research
(NCAR), the Institute for Tribal Environmental Professionals (ITEP) at North
Arizona University (NAU), and two major Canadian universities. The YRITWC is a
non-profit organization of 74 First Nations and Tribes that conducts monitoring
of the Yukon River Watershed. Three Indigenous interns are working with YRITWC
and USGS researchers and staff to enhance the community-based and federal river
monitoring networks with automated water quality sensors. The new data are being
used by researchers to monitor river conditions and change and to improve
computer simulations of rivers, ice, and fish. Outreach to Indigenous K-12
students in the communities where monitoring is being conducted will include
traveling lectures and an ask-scientists website. A Native Advisory Council will
be formed in Year 1 to provide input into research directions and refinements
and to ensure the production of useable outcomes. Importantly, the Council will
guide the agenda of a two-day Arctic Rivers Summit in project Year 3 and the
selection of 42 Indigenous community members to receive a scholarship to attend
the Summit. The Summit will bring together Tribal and First Nation resource
managers, Arctic and Boreal community members, and academic, federal, state, and
provincial researchers to unify the state of knowledge on Arctic Rivers as a
community of observers, investigators, knowledge holders, and stewards. Results
from the Summit will include a white paper co-authored by all attendees.
Researchers from NCAR and CU are conducting computer simulations of weather,
streamflow, river ice, and water temperature for historical and potential future
climate conditions over Alaska and western Canada. The data are being used by
USGS and CU scientists to assess potential risks to Arctic river fish species.
The project results will be communicated through co-produced scenarios jointly
developed by all investigators and community members and designed to make future
scenarios of Arctic change and potential societal impacts tangible and relatable
to a broad audience. Thus, the project is assessing how socially important fish
habitat and river-ice transport corridors of Arctic rivers may be impacted by
climate-driven environmental changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in
temperature, precipitation, snowmelt and streamflow timing, ice-cover,
permafrost, hydrologic connectivity, river geochemistry, and groundwater are
poorly characterized in northern regions, and the integrated effects on rivers
and fish are critically unresolved. This project is advancing collective
understanding of terrestrial hydrologic change and the potential impacts on
rivers, fish, and communities in the Arctic. The project facilitates knowledge
co-production through Indigenous community-based monitoring of rivers, Native
engagement and oversight, ethnographic methods, and advances in climate,
hydrologic, and river-ice, and fish bioenergetic models. Indigenous Knowledge
(IK) and Western Science (WS) will be used to co-develop scenarios of past and
plausible future conditions. An Arctic Rivers Summit co-developed by Tribal
Environmental experts, YRITWC, USGS, and a Native Advisory Council identifying
IK and WS baseline conditions of rivers and fish. This includes continuous water
quality measurements of major rivers to observe hydrologic conditions and guide
model development. The Regional Arctic System Model and the Community
Terrestrial Systems Model are coupled to simulate river ice and water
temperature with a chain of process-based models. Historical reanalysis,
verified against baseline conditions, and future climate scenarios are
simulated, and a fish bioenergetics model is being used to assess
vulnerabilities of co-identified river-run Arctic fish species. Rich scenarios
with IK of past events, changes, community challenges and adaptation successes
will provide unique context to best communicate future model projections and
impacts on the social, built and natural Arctic environment. Combining IK,
climate and hydrologic modeling techniques with parallel advances in river ice,
stream temperature, and fish models, the project collectively identifies
convergent opportunities to monitor, map, model, assess, and communicate climate
sensitivities of Arctic and boreal hydrology, rivers, and fish with respect to
Indigenous culture, livelihood, transportation, and
subsistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.