* 1928202
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: ARC-NAV: Arctic Robust Communities-Navigating Adaptation to Variability
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 949,372.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is warming on average twice as
rapidly as the rest of the planet, which is leading to significant changes in
sea ice to which local communities must respond. Beringia, a region of the
Arctic encompassing US and Russian territory, is expected to experience some of
the highest variability in sea ice conditions in the coming century. This
project focuses on the question: how do we design better and more flexible
governance and infrastructure to adapt to changing Arctic conditions? To answer
this question, the team is taking a convergence approach to forecast potential
changes in the Arctic sea ice environment and the impacts on social and
ecological systems resulting from those changes and identify adaptive strategies
to enhance resilience to those impacts. The project fully engages local and
Indigenous communities and decision makers in the Arctic throughout the research
process to generate information and models about critical hot spots of sea ice
change relevant to local communities. This will help build local and regional
governance capacity and allow the researchers to model and predict the
robustness of communities to forecast changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coproduction
of knowledge between local and Indigenous communities and scientists, and
collaborative research across disciplinary and national boundaries, will be used
to address four key research questions: 1) How do people understand and perceive
changing sea ice, and how do they adapt to variability in ice conditions? 2)
Where are the current critical hot spots of variability in sea ice, and where
will they be in the future as the environment and communities change? 3) How
will governmental and non-governmental organizations in the region navigate
changing sea ice conditions and interact with communities to respond to their
changing needs? and 4) What features of the existing, and potential, social-
ecological systems are robust/fragile to forecast changes in sea ice? This
project will document diverse narratives and critical policy challenges around
biogeophysical changes and associated livelihood and economic
opportunities/costs between and within communities through grounded ethnography
and cultural consensus analysis. Satellite data will be used to highlight "hot
spots" of sea ice variability and provide a starting point for community and
stakeholders' discussions of "change". Interviews with governance actors will
identify priorities and responses and generate spatially explicit policy
networks. A multi-agent model will link these analyses and be utilized to
explore the diversity of issues, projections of change, and fragility or
robustness of communities and the infrastructure systems they rely on. Through
this research, the project will derive new understandings of community and
institutional responses to change, the impacts of spatial and temporal
variability within a trend, and robustness-fragility trade-offs that can be
applied to other regions as they navigate transitions around the globe in the
Anthropocene.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.