* 1928230
* NNA Track 1: Rain on Snow and Extreme Precipitation Events across the Arctic and their Impacts on Social-Ecological Systems
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Shari Fox, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,997,618.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rain on Snow (ROS) and extreme
precipitation events have significant impacts on Arctic wildlife, livestock, and
the communities that depend on these resources for subsistence. The icy crusts
that form after ROS events and deep snow can interfere with travel and searching
for food. ROS events have been linked to massive die-offs of reindeer and
caribou. Polar bear and ringed seal populations are also affected--rains early
in the breeding season destroy dens built under the snow and increase cub/pup
mortality. The purpose of this study is to better understand the frequency and
cause of ROS and extreme precipitation events across the Arctic, how their
frequency and severity are changing as the Arctic warms, and their social-
ecological impacts. With a primary focus on hunting and reindeer herding
livelihoods, this study involves close collaborations with Indigenous hunters
and herders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ROS and extreme precipitation events will be
detected using various types of satellite data, weather data from atmospheric
re-analyses, and surface observations. Indigenous hunters and herders will be
engaged through extensive local observing, interviews, group discussions, and
participatory workshops to validate the detection algorithms, and to assess
effects of ROS and extreme precipitation events on wildlife and community
activities. Similarly, the project will partner with reindeer herders to better
understand implications for modern tundra reindeer nomadism and mortality
episodes significant enough to have entered the oral record. Expert systems
models will be developed to assess how ROS and extreme precipitation events
impact wildlife, migratory reindeer herding, hunting, and other community
activities in terms of event timing, geographic scale, snow/land cover, and
existing community practices. A Data and Knowledge Hub, serving as the project
website and a resource on the state of knowledge regarding Arctic ROS and
extreme precipitation events and their impacts, will become the project's
extension to the US Arctic Observing Network. The project also closely connects
with the NSF ELOKA (Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic)
project, and long-time/on-going research collaboration with Inuit hunters,
communities across Northern Alaska, and applied community-based ecological
research in Lapland and Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.