* 1928759
* I-Corps: Pathogen Mimic Cancer Vaccines
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Rita Serda, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 5,875.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corp project is the eventual
creation of a therapeutic cancer vaccine that has the potential to achieve
clinically meaningful and statistically significant recurrence free survival.
The technology involves obtaining patient cancer cells and through a process of
biomineralization and surface adsorption with danger signals (i.e. adjuvants
already used in clinical use) transforms the cells into potent cancer vaccines.
The potential for a durable benefit with this approach in women with ovarian
cancer is supported by data demonstrating that successful induction of an anti-
tumor immune response has a significant impact on long-term survival and by
early results from prior vaccine trials. Following isolation of cancer cells,
the process can be completed in less than 24 hours, without the need for cell
culture or genetic alteration, reducing risks and costs of production. The
personalized cancer vaccine is stable to storage and dehydration, and thus is
available for immediate and future use and can be transported without the need
for cold storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks to further
develop a cancer vaccine that is not an incremental advance in vaccine design,
rather it would transform both the production and distribution of cancer
vaccines to facilitate the integration of immune therapy into current treatment
protocols. Seventy percent of women diagnosed with ovarian cancer have advanced
disease. While chemotherapy offers some initial release, the majority of
patients relapse. Currently no therapeutic alternatives exist, making the need
for better alternatives extreme. The proposed technology transforms patient
cancer cells into pathogen mimics by decorating the cell surface with pathogen-
associated molecular patterns. These patterns activate immune cells to attack
and kill the cancer cells. Preclinical testing in mice has demonstrated that
administration of the vaccine prior to tumor growth prevents tumor engraftment
in all vaccinated mice. Furthermore, early studies show that treatment of mice
with established ovarian cancer results in elimination of cancer in 75% of the
subjects, with a partial response in the remaining. Future dose optimization and
combinatorial testing with immune checkpoint blockade are expected to further
improve on the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.