* 1928756
* I-Corps: Swarm Three Dimensional Printing and Assembly Platform
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2021
* Wenchao Zhou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to accelerate
the development and adoption of 3D printing technologies for industry use.
Although 3D printing has been increasingly implemented in various industries,
its broad adoption has been impeded by the limited 3D printing capabilities and
high cost. This I-Corps project will explore the market potential of a new swarm
3D printing and assembly (SPA) platform, which employs a swarm of mobile 3D
printers and robots to cooperate for digital manufacturing. Due to the
modularity, flexibility, and reconfigurability, the SPA platform can
significantly increase 3D printing capabilities at relatively low cost, which
will facilitate the adoption of 3D printing and digital manufacturing
technologies in different industries, such as construction, architecture, film,
and medical industries. The SPA platform can be used to build a network of
digital factories to provide on-demand customized digital manufacturing to
different industries around the globe, establishing a digital manufacturing
infrastructure for society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further
develops a novel digital manufacturing system, the swarm 3D printing and
assembly (SPA) platform, which expands the current 3D printing capabilities at
relatively low cost. The SPA platform consists of many individual printhead-
carrying mobile robots working together to print and assemble products based on
digital models. Compared to traditional 3D printing technologies that print
materials layer by layer with a single 3D printer, the SPA platform will first
divide the print job into smaller printing tasks using a chunking algorithm and
assign them to different robots, which are then wirelessly coordinated by a
scheduling algorithm to complete the printing tasks in parallel and in sequence
while avoiding collisions. Results from research on both the hardware and
software platform demonstrate the promise of this technology. Objects with
dimensions larger than the printers themselves have already been successfully
printed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.