* 1928325
* Propylene-Permeable Catalytic Carbon Molecular Sieve (CMS) Membrane Reactors for Low Temperature Propane Dehydrogenation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dongxia Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 485,360.00

Propylene is a starting material for many commercial products and is often
derived from petroleum cracking biproducts. However, the current supply of
biproducts is not expected to keep pace with growing demand. An alternative
route to intentional propylene synthesis starts with propane, now available from
low-cost natural gas. However, transforming propane to propylene, using a
process called dehydrogenation, requires high temperatures to obtain even low
yields of 30-50%. In this project, the investigators aim to develop improved
catalysts and separation membranes to produce propylene at lower temperatures
and higher yields. These lower temperatures have the additional advantage of
reducing unwanted side-products, such as coke, during the reaction. The
investigators plan to accomplish these aims by optimizing the catalysts
structure for low-temperature operation and optimizing the pore size in the
separation material to remove the product, propylene, from the starting
material, propane. This separation strategy has the added benefit of driving the
reaction to continue to produce propylene. The fundamental concepts and
technologies obtained from this project will open new avenues of material
discovery and technique development that can transform natural gas into value-
added chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to improve propylene
yield from propane dehydrogenation (PDH) reactions by reducing membrane
deactivation due to coke formation at high reaction temperature. The PIs
hypothesize that controlling the structure and activity of Pt-Cu/zeolite
dehydrogenation catalysts will result in low temperature propane activation and
thermodynamically suppress side reactions and coke formation. To test this
hypothesis the investigators will synthesize Pt-Cu/zeolite catalysts with
varying synthesis parameters in order to control catalyst composition and
properties. The catalysts will be tested using a fixed-bed microreactor system
and reactor effluents will be characterized using concurrent gas chromatographic
and mass spectrometric analysis. In a second aim, novel polyamide-derived carbon
molecular sieve (CMS) membranes with highly-rigid pore structure will be created
to provide attractive propane/propylene separation performance at 350-450
degrees C. The permeability and selectivity of these membranes will be evaluated
by studying the high-temperature C3H6/C3H8 adsorption kinetics and isotherms
using thermogravimetric analysis. The Pt-Cu/zeolite catalysts and (CMS)
membranes will be evaluated together to demonstrate cooperative catalysis-
transport in a membrane reactor. The outcome of the proposed activities will be
fundamental understanding of (i) the structure-property relationships between
carbon molecular sieve and entropic diffusion selectivity under PDH conditions,
(ii) effects of single-atom metal alloy catalysts on low temperature C3H8
activation, (iii) kinetic effects of propylene and/or H2 concentration on
propane activation and coking, and (iv) cooperative catalysis-transport in PDH
reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.