* 1928749
* Graduate Research Opportunities for Women (GROW) 2019
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Rinat Kedem, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 40,000.00

This award supports participation in GROW (Graduate Research Opportunities for
Women) 2019, held October 4-6, 2019 at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign. This is a conference focused on female undergraduate students who
wish to pursue graduate studies in the mathematical sciences. The conference
addresses the crucial transition from undergraduate to graduate school, at which
the percentage of women drops significantly. It aims to directly increase the
proportion and the absolute number of female US students in graduate programs in
the mathematical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will feature
four hour-long lectures by highly recognized mathematicians on cutting edge
research. Collectively, they will cover a broad spectrum of pure and applied
mathematics: algebraic combinatorics, epidemiology, homology theory and non-
commutative algebra. Informal roundtable discussions at the conclusion of the
conference will allow the participants to learn more about research subjects
they find interesting, important open problems, current progress and main
challenges. Lectures will be accompanied by panel discussions, where the
participants will receive information and advice about the application process
for graduate school and being a graduate student, and career opportunities in
mathematics. More information about the conference can be found at
https://math.illinois.edu/grow2019&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.