* 1928812
* RII Track-4:  Use of Positron Annihilation Lifetime Spectroscopy to Engineer Membrane Selective Layers
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Steven Weinman, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 11/30/2023
* USD 233,463.00

This project seeks to build on the water research at The University of Alabama
at Tuscaloosa (UA). With a wealth of natural water sources and access to the
Gulf of Mexico, Alabama is an ideal location for research in water treatment
processes. As such, UA has made water one of its four research pillars to
provide better water quality for all people. Polyamide membranes, often called
reverse osmosis or RO membranes, are commonly used for seawater desalination.
However, their molecular level properties are not well understood. This project
will allow researchers from UA to conduct studies at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) to learn a new technique to characterize the
molecular-level properties of water treatment polymer membranes. This research
seeks to understand how synthesis conditions affect membrane performance at the
molecular level, specifically those involved in seawater desalination. The
polymer characterization technique will be of great benefit to make these
membranes more energy-efficient and cost-effective. This work will initially
provide training for one graduate student, and results will be integrated into
undergraduate curriculum and research. The research collaboration formed through
this project will help develop capacity at UA to characterize polymers using
cutting-edge technology, providing additional opportunities to educate and train
graduate and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed project is to engineer polyamide membrane separation layers by
utilizing Positron Annihilation Lifetime Spectroscopy (PALS). PALS is used to
probe material defects, voids, and free volume at the sub-nm scale and is
therefore useful for characterizing porous materials, such as polymeric
membranes. Polyamide membrane separation layers will be synthesized via the
reaction between the monomers m-phenylenediamine and trimesoyl chloride.
Polymerization conditions such as monomer concentration and polymerization time
will be varied to determine how each affects the polyamide separation layer free
volume on a molecular level instead of a macroscopic level. Free volume
characterization of the polyamide membrane separation layers will be performed
using the PALS system at NIST. The use of a PALS system will allow for the
development of a more basic understanding of how these polyamide membranes
separate on a molecular level and what factors influence the free volume and
separation properties of these polymeric membranes. By understanding the
fundamental reason why polymerization conditions affect polyamide free volume,
and therefore the desalination performance on the molecular level, polyamide
membranes can be engineered to make membrane-based separation processes more
energy-efficient and cost-effective. The collaboration developed between UA and
NIST will generate high-quality undergraduate and graduate research
opportunities in the field of water treatment while advancing one of UA's
research pillars to raise the bar in the quest for better water for
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.