* 1928105
* NNA Track 2: Responding to the housing crisis in the Arctic: A transdisciplinary approach across physical, natural, and social systems
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,06/30/2023
* William Gallus, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,745.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The housing conditions of Alaska Natives
are significantly less developed compared to other parts of the United States.
Such conditions result in poorer ventilation and indoor air quality, both of
which negatively impact the health of the occupants. Additionally, housing
durability is threatened by biophysical changes occurring as a result of climate
change-driven permafrost thaw and erosion. The combination of issues that
threaten household health emphasizes the critical need to consider housing risks
and solutions using a holistic research methodology that rely on multiple
disciplines and local knowledge unique to a community. This planning project
aims to form a research team that consists of experts in diverse fields that
collectively partner with communities to address the complex issues of housing
in the Arctic. This research addresses the root causes of the housing crisis by
bridging the divide between disciplines and communities to identify culturally
appropriate solutions of housing challenges in Alaska. As a result, this project
contributes to a more comprehensive and complete understanding of housing
vulnerability. The collaborative and community-centered nature of this research
develops an understanding of housing vulnerability grounded in the priorities
and needs of communities, thus improving the sustainability of resulting
programs and policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research
is to form a multi-disciplinary research team that is fully prepared to assess
and identify housing vulnerabilities in two Alaska Native communities using a
community-based research methodology. In this research, housing vulnerability is
described as the housing susceptibility to biophysical changes (e.g., permafrost
thaw and erosion) and household exposure to substandard living conditions (e.g.,
poor thermal comfort, poor ventilation). The team of researchers includes
experts in physical systems (geotechnical, energy and thermal performance),
natural systems (atmospheric sciences, erosion) and social systems (sociology,
psychology). Throughout the proposed two-year timeline, the research team will
strategically organize a series of events to work towards this goal, including:
(1) Planning Grant Kick-off Meeting; (2) Need Assessment Study in two Alaska
Native communities using Community-based Participatory Research; (3) Workshop in
two Alaska Native communities; (4) Curriculum design and implementation on
Arctic Resilient Housing and Communities; and (5) Planning Grant Summary
Meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.