* 1928919
* Collective Modes and Electrodynamics of Interacting Spin Liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Oleg Starykh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 11/30/2023
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in quantum spin liquids. These are unique states of
magnetic matter, comprised by elemental magnetic moments (spins), but which,
however, do not exhibit overall magnetism. The spins involved in a quantum spin
liquid state can be pictured as being in a perpetual dance, always changing
their directions in such a way that the overall magnetic moment of the state is
zero. Identifying experimentally observable features of quantum spin liquids is
essential for advancing both fundamental science as well as possible new quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When the magnetic material hosting a quantum
spin liquid state is subjected to an external magnetic field, a finite imbalance
(magnetization) between numbers of spins pointing along and against the
direction of the applied field develops. Under this condition a new type of
dynamic magnetic oscillation emerges in the quantum spin liquid. The PI will
develop i) a complete theoretical description for this feature, and ii) how it
can be used as a valuable spin-liquid detection tool in experiments with real
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, the project involves
training students in modern theoretical techniques and developing a graduate
course on the "Physics of modern materials". In addition, the PI will develop a
public-level lecture on the topic of modern quantum magnetism, aiming to inform
the public about the amazing progress made by modern condensed matter physics up
to the present time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical investigations of
physical properties of quantum spin liquids, unique states of magnetic matter
with strongly entangled spins but without static magnetic order. The PI seeks to
understand unique observable features of critical partially magnetized quantum
spin liquids, which support a new transverse collective spin-1 mode. This novel
collective spin excitation interacts with emergent gauge fluctuations that
provide it with a finite lifetime. The PI plans to develop the full theory of
this collective mode, including its dispersion, lifetime, and other spectral
characteristics, and to identify conditions needed for its experimental
observation. Collective properties of Dirac spin liquids, in which spinon bands
form a relativistic cone dispersion, will be investigated as well. The PI also
plans to extend this approach to a two-dimensional Dirac material, graphene,
subject to an external in-plane magnetic field. Zeeman-field-induced Fermi
surfaces are expected to partially screen the Coulomb interaction between
electrons and, again, promote collective spin
oscillations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All candidate materials expected to host a
quantum spin liquid ground state suffer from various symmetry-lowering
perturbations. The PI will investigate the competition between such anisotropies
and gauge-field-mediated interactions between spinons. In systems with strongly
violated spin conservation, such as the Kitaev spin liquid, spinon band
structures and their interactions with emergent gauge fields manifest via
optical absorption and spinon magnetic resonance, the theory of which will be
also developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to research, the project
involves training students in modern theoretical techniques and developing a
graduate course on the "Physics of modern materials", which will describe
topological materials from a unified perspective of strong spin-orbit and
electron-electron interactions. In addition, the PI will develop a public-level
lecture titled "Spinon: a brief history", to be turned later into a popular
article, on the topic of modern quantum magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.