* 1928312
* An orogenic plateau in the southern U.S. Cordillera?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* James Chapman, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,184.00

The mountain ranges of western North America, often collectively called the
North American Cordillera, are excellent examples of ancient plate tectonic
systems associated with collisions between oceanic and continental plates.
However, it is unclear how the southern U.S. Cordillera fits within this
collisional framework. Several features of the southern U.S. Cordillera suggest
that the region may have been characterized by an elevated plateau, similar to
today's elevated plateau in the Great Basin area of Nevada. At present, there is
no accepted mechanism or theory for how the crust may have been thickened in the
southwestern U.S. to create this plateau. This project will test whether an
elevated plateau and associated thickened crust previously existed in the
southern Arizona region and determine the mechanisms by which such a plateau
could have been constructed. This project is led by a first-time NSF
investigator at the University of Wyoming, includes a first-generation Hispanic
Ph.D. student, and will incorporate undergraduate student research projects.
Students will gain experience in laboratory and field methods, including
geologic mapping. Project participants will also create a series of short-format
videos for public release that document research activities of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to test the hypothesis
of whether an orogenic plateau, the "Arizonaplano" existed in the southern U.S.
Cordillera during the late Mesozoic to early Cenozoic and constrain the
mechanisms by which such a plateau could have been constructed. The initial
phase of this work will use geochemical indices (e.g., La/Yb) from intermediate
arc-related igneous rocks to determine paleo-crustal thickness. The second phase
will include new geologic mapping and structural analyses in a series of
mountain ranges in southern Arizona to determine whether low-angle, "Sevier-
style" thrust faults exist, were regionally extensive, and could have thickened
the crust. Recent discoveries and preliminary mapping provides an opportunity to
correlate structural units across mountain ranges and assemble regional-scale
cross sections for tectonic syntheses. The final phase of this research will
link the tectonothermal history of Cretaceous to Paleogene sedimentary rocks to
the deformation history of the region. This work has important relevance beyond
the regional study area by helping to constrain the Mesozoic evolution of the
Cordilleran orogen in the southwestern U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Tectonics program in the division of Earth Sciences and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.