* 1928661
* FW-HTF-P: Physiological Sensing to Enable Expert Decision-Making in Healthcare
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Md Haque, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 12/31/2021
* USD 166,000.00

Decision-making in healthcare requires rapid synthesis of information from
multiple sources, and failure can lead to patient harm. Expert, high-performing
nurses can quickly grasp complex situations and perform the skills required for
effective patient care. New nurses, however, often lack experience and the
expertise that comes with it, hindering their ability to take immediate proper
action. Currently, no technological aids exist to support decision nursing
decision-making. This award will develop a model of expert nurse responses in
ambulatory (outpatient) care and use this model to develop real-time support.
With an aging population and care moving to home environments, decision-support
technology can have an impact on the health across populations. The technology
can also elevate the quality of care in underserved regions and improve
training. In addition, this work will advance undergraduate curriculum with new
models linking technology with decision-making and improve K-12 education
through new project modules that introduce the impact of technology on health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to augment performance of
ambulatory care nurses by integrating physiological sensing of behavior and
cognitive function with models of expert behaviors. First, the project will
develop models for expert nurse decision-making and actions. The fundamental
processes of nursing expertise at the individual and system levels will be
modeled with a mixed method approach that includes ethnography and eye-tracking
measurements. Second, the project will use physiological sensors (eye tracking
and EEG) to monitor nurse capability and behavior. The sensor data and models
that use them will be used to identify appropriate times for coaching
interventions that will provide decision support to nurses in real-time through
augmented reality. The entire system will be evaluated in a controlled setting
at the Center for Nursing Education and Simulation with nursing trainees. The
goal of this planning project is to develop the necessary infrastructure, and
foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying future technology,
workers, and work at the level of a full Future of Work at the Human-Technology
Frontier research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.