* 1928369
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: Collaborative Research: Integration of Reproducibility into Community CyberInfrastructure
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Tarboton, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 305,747.00

For science to reliably support new discoveries, its results must be
reproducible. This has proven to be a challenge in many fields including, most
notably, fields that rely on computational studies as a means for supporting new
discoveries. Reproducibility in these studies is particularly difficult because
they require open sharing of data and models and careful control by the original
researcher. This is to ensure that products can be run on later generations of
hardware and software and produce consistent results. This project will develop
software that helps support computational reproducibility and makes it easier
and more efficient for geoscientists to preserve, share, repeat and replicate
scientific computations. The Broader Impacts of this project include a
collaboration between computer scientists, hydrologists and the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science Inc. (CUAHSI) for the
hydrology research community. With over 3500 users, and holding over 8000 model
and data resources, this collaboration will bring improved tools and best
practices to a broad and diverse community of geoscientists. Beyond hydrology,
the methods and tools developed as part of this project have the potential to be
extended to the solid Earth and space science geoscience domains. They also have
the potential to inform the reproducibility evaluation process as currently
undertaken by journals and publishers. The projct will also conduct workshops to
train researchers and be used in the classroom at Utah Sate Universtiy, DePaul
University and the University of Virginia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emphasis on the
importance of research reproducibility is steadily rising, however many studies
still continue to not be reproducible. Reproducibility in computational studies
is particularly difficult because of the challenges involved in completely
documenting the data, models and procedures used together with the underlying
hardware and software dependencies. The reproducibility workbench software
(ReproBench) developed in this project will address reproducibility questions by
establishing a container-based reproducible workflow that will make it easy and
efficient for geoscientists to verify scientific results. Automation and
documentation are two key methods for improving verification and, in general,
the conduct of reproducible science. This project will build-from past
investments: (I) automated containerization methods, through the Sciunit
project, and (II) well-documented, community-adopted interfaces, through
HydroShare, and bring these investments together to establish a novel, robust,
and reproducible workflow. By applying this workflow to water-related science
use cases, this project will demonstrate how to preserve, share, repeat, and
replicate scientific results. The interfaces can become an exemplar for other
community cyberinfrastructure that, akin to Hydrology, aims to share data and
models at a large scale. In establishing this workflow, the ReproBench project
team combines expertise in cyberinfrastructure, domain science, and reproducible
computational data science. By leveraging Sciunit, ReproBench brings formal
methods for the conduct of reproducible computational science into the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.