* 1928436
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium to be held in Conjunction with IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Nathan Jacobs, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 05/31/2020
* USD 22,500.00

This grant partially supports the participation of students from US-based
institutions in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) 2019 in Long Beach, CA. CVPR is the
premier annual conference in computer vision with over 6000 senior, junior and
student participants from all the world. The grant helps the career development
of some of the brightest junior researchers in computer vision, contributes to
the research community in general by drawing attention to an important aspect of
graduate student development, potentially increases the number of active
researchers and educators in STEM, and ensures that the computer vision
community, through its recent graduates, makes fast advances in solving problems
that will benefit society as a whole. The Doctoral Consortium aims to have
representation from a diverse group of participants in terms of gender, ethnic
background, academic institution, and geographic location.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF support covers some of the costs for 15 selected US-
based graduate students to attend the Doctoral Consortium and CVPR conference.
The Doctoral Consortium is to highlight the work of senior PhD students who are
within six months of receiving their degrees (including recent graduates), and
to give these students an opportunity to discuss their research and career
options with faculty and researchers who have relevant expertise and experience.
The opportunity to receive advice on their research work and career plans from
experts from different institutions, and with potentially different
perspectives, is often not available internally at one's own institution.
Participants and recipients of travel support are selected by the 2019 CVPR
Doctoral Consortium co-chairs. Travel awards partially cover any admissible
conference-related costs such as registration, airfare, lodging, and board. This
year's Doctoral Consortium features a poster session, one-on-one mentoring, and
panel discussion. These components were introduced in past CVPR Doctoral
Consortium and were well received.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.