* 1928528
* FW-HTF-RL: Collaborative Research: Enabling Marginalized Rural and Urban Digital Workers to Collaborate  with AI to Learn Skills, Increase Wages, and Access Creative Work
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Norma Saiph Savage, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 02/28/2022
* USD 303,369.00

Many rural areas in the United States face a lack of economic opportunity. The
future of work can bring opportunities for rural and urban marginalized
communities through online work and the gig economy. However, work on current
platforms is often low-level labeling work offering few opportunities for
advancement. It is often intended to train Artificial Intelligence to automate
this work away, instead of training workers. The proposed project aims to uplift
workers and improve the marketplace for online work so that digital work may
help with the economic recovery of regions whose traditional industries have
left. This project aims to develop sustainable methods for transitioning workers
to high-skilled and creative digital jobs that are unlikely to be automated in
the near to medium term future. Crowd work can be transformed to not only
improve the work product for the employer, but also to help the worker move
along the career paths necessary for the future of work. The project team from
four universities, Carnegie Mellon U., West Virginia U., Pennsylvania State
University and University of Pennsylvania has partnered with local institutions
to provide workers training to perform progressively more advanced digital work,
while earning money. The vision of the project is to scaffold workers through
basic computer fluency, working with AI tools, and finally innovation and
creativity skills. This work is in collaboration with a rural partner (Rupert
Public Library, in Rupert, WV) and urban partner (CommunityForge in Wilkinsburg,
PA) and also benefits from a partnership with Bosch Inc. in Pittsburgh,
ConservationX Labs in Washington DC, and the State of West
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses a fundamental
challenge in that those who most need to develop skills to gain higher paying
jobs cannot afford the unpaid time spent in training needed to develop them.
Accomplishing this vision will require solving the following core research
questions: (i) How can one best support the marginalized workers in their
transition to online work?, (ii) How can Artificial Intelliegnce tools augment
workers, rather than displace them?, (iii) How can tools be designed to help
workers build skills and creativity for work that is unlikely to be automated in
the future?. This project has the potential to make advances across a variety of
interrelated fields including crowdsourcing, Artificial Intelligence, Human
Computer Interaction, Cognitive Science, Learning Science, Sociology and
Economics. Simultaneously enabling both improved work outcomes as well as skill
development in crowd work will require the development of models of workers,
skills, and their trajectories at a more nuanced level. Enabling workers to
collaborate with Artificial Intelligence will require new human-computer
interaction paradigms. Supporting creativity and the development of new skills
will require the exploration of new organization and coordination structures. By
grounding the investigations in real world contexts, the research aims for
generalizable knowledge that can lay a foundation for research on the future of
crowd work at the human-AI frontier&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.