* 1928112
* NNA Track 1: Collaborative Research: Maritime transportation in a changing Arctic: Navigating climate and sea ice uncertainties
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Ralf Bennartz, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 12/31/2023
* USD 787,549.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent changes in climate have resulted
in less sea ice in the Arctic ocean. This development has opened new Arctic
travel routes and increased vessel traffic along existing shipping routes.
Increased shipping requires a reliable Arctic maritime navigation system for
safety and efficiency. However, navigation risk management in the Arctic poses
many challenges compared to general maritime transportation due to significant
uncertainties in climate, weather, and sea ice conditions. This project
addresses these uncertainties by developing a comprehensive approach to forecast
future climate and sea ice conditions in the Arctic. The results are being used
to evaluate the resulting risk of Arctic maritime navigation. The outcome of
this research supports a safe, reliable, and resilient navigation system for
shippers seeking efficient transit routes through the Arctic. Others will
benefit as well, including emergency responders, local communities, Arctic
researchers, fishing and pleasure craft, and other stakeholders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing and applying a risk-based
framework integrating an analysis of environmental conditions, an assessment of
navigation risk, and an evaluation of the consequences of incidents. Climate and
sea ice models are analyzed to probabilistically assess environmental conditions
and navigability of Arctic routes. Modeled sea ice thickness is used as a tracer
for navigability of shipping routes. Climate model output is analyzed to better
understand the mean state and variability spatially along routes and over time.
The likelihood of an incident is being evaluated using Bayesian predictive
models to incorporate uncertainty with historical data and updated information
from climate and sea ice models. The predictive models are integrated with
economic interdependency models to evaluate consequences of Arctic navigation
incidents. The resulting probabilistic economic models are a function of the
likelihood of an incident occurring and evaluate direct and indirect economic
impact at the local and global scales. The outcome of the risk and economic
assessment provides feedback on the most significant risk factors. Additional
climate and sea ice model runs will be used to further evaluate variables to
refine risk models. A stochastic simulation will iterate through the integrated
risk analysis approach over a range of possible scenarios of climate models and
sea ice conditions to evaluate the range of likelihood and economic impact of
incidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.