* 1928601
* FW-HTF-P/Collaborative Research: Anthropocentric Robot Collaboration in Construction
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Changbum Ahn, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 47,510.00

Labor-intensive construction accounts for a significant portion of the U.S.
economy. However, construction suffers from significant occupational
injuries/deaths, stagnant productivity, a lack of skilled laborers, and an aging
workforce. As one means to address these issues, the construction industry is
gradually adopting robotic automation, particularly in human-robot collaboration
where humans and robots work together in unstructured and dynamic construction
environments. Despite recent advancement of the functionality and capability of
robots, many fundamental questions in human-robot collaboration remain
unanswered. These include: 1. How can a robot work with a human worker, and
build and maintain trust when they work together in the same space? 2. What are
the best strategies to design future construction tasks and work environments
for such human-robot collaboration? 3. How can the construction industry retrain
existing workers and attract new ones in this new and unprecedented working
environment? To answer these questions, this project carries out a human-
centered investigation where a human worker's response to different scenarios of
human-robot collaboration in construction is non-invasively and continuously
monitored in order to maximize the overall performance of human-robot
collaboration. The outcome of the investigation has the potential to build
foundational knowledge on how we can prepare our existing and new workforce for
future construction.

Researchers have identified three major open research areas in human-robot
construction. First is the in-depth understanding of human's physical, cognitive
and emotional response in human-robot collaboration, a critical knowledge in
allowing a robot's adaptable behaviors to be calibrated to a human response.
Second is to explore how to redesign construction tasks, operations, and job
sites to better serve human-robot collaboration. Studying such designs could
involve a significant number of tests in the real world which may be impractical
or infeasible, thus innovative testing technologies and methods are needed.
Third involves strategies for training new and existing workers for future
human-robot collaborative construction. In this project, researchers will test
the feasibility of the three following research activities in the context of the
above research areas: 1) testing wearable biosensors to non-invasively and
continuously measure a human worker's emotional response in human-robot
collaboration; 2) investigating the feasibility of virtual reality as an
alternative to certain real construction tests for redesigning tasks and job
sites for human-robot collaboration; and 3) organizing two workshops to collect
broad perspectives from different stakeholders and experts to refine research
thrusts for future human-robot collaboration in construction. The ultimate goal
of this project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research
infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying
future technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research proposal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.