* 1928611
* Pathways to Promote Seamless Transitions for Undergraduate Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mahesh Hosur, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,392,470.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to develop and assess an
innovative model in engineering education that integrates mentoring, academic
coaching, summer research experiences, and outside classroom opportunities to
improve learning, retention, and preparation of engineering students from
diverse cultural backgrounds. This project seeks to address the
underrepresentation of Hispanics in the engineering workforce by developing the
engineering curricula and co-curricular activities to better equip students as
they proceed through critical transitions in the engineering major. The project
has the potential to increase student persistence and success in the engineering
major which could then lead to a more diverse engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to improve critical thinking,
as well as increase students' academic competencies, self-efficacy and
persistence, tolerance for failure, and level of engagement. Specific aims of
the project are to: a) Develop and implement interventions that will increase
interest in STEM disciplines; b) Create effective bridge programs to improve
students' college preparedness; c) Enhance the student learning experience in
STEM gateway courses; and d) Create opportunities for experiential learning
though summer research, internships, and co-curricular activities. The project
will investigate the ways in which student engagement in high-impact enrichment
activities and personalized support services lead to increased student
recruitment, retention, and persistence. The project will also investigate how
co-curricular activities help to increase students' self-efficacy and successful
degree completion. The project will engage students to synergistically weave
research and education together while providing several enrichment opportunities
that are ideal for students with diverse backgrounds. Students who have
experienced these proactive personalized support services and enrichment
activities are expected to be better prepared to make successful transitions
into the STEM workforce. The project will actively disseminate and share project
findings with stakeholders through a project website, presentations at
conferences, journal articles, and social media. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.