* 1928309
* Collaborative Research: Establishing the Hydrogen Isotopic Window into Archaeal Lipid Biomarkers
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,11/30/2023
* William Leavitt, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 11/30/2023
* USD 299,358.00

Life has three major groups - the eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea. This work
focuses on the often-overlooked archaea. They are microbes critical to the
cycling of matter and energy on Earth. They have played this important role
throughout the history of the planet. Like all life on Earth, archaea are made
up of elements such as carbon, oxygen and hydrogen. These elements form larger
organic molecules that are required by all life such as DNA, proteins, and
lipids. Geobiologists study these organic molecules to learn about life on Earth
today and in the past. However, not all of these are preserved over long periods
of time. Most DNA and proteins break down quickly and can only be used to study
Earth today. Lipids are often much hardier and so are useful to geobiologists
because they can be preserved in rocks for millennia. Lipids from archaea are
particularly hardy and do not break down easily. This means that they can store
information about the place in which the microbe lived. Long after they die, the
lipids made by archaea can be extracted from muds, oils, and rocks.
Geobiologists examine the structures and atoms of these lipids built by archaea
millions of years ago to learn about Earth's past. However, it is not easy to
decode the information in the lipids of long dead microbes correctly. To do this
well, it is important to study these same lipids in modern systems and in the
lab. This project will study several important archaea in the lab and shed light
on how the different kinds of hydrogen atoms are used by archaea to build their
lipids. The results will lead to advances in interpreting what lipids from
archaea can tell us about the places they lived recently, and millions of years
in the past. The proposed project emphasizes training of students at all levels
and this includes advanced graduate (PhD and MS trainees) as well as
undergraduate, high-school and middle school students. To engage high-school and
middle school students in underserved districts, project members will use a
graduate and undergraduate led peer-to-peer mentoring network called
ManyMentors. This is an app-based mentoring platform that matches students in
underserved classrooms who show interest in STEM with undergraduate and graduate
students seeking STEM degrees. Specific teaching activities are all aimed at
fostering transferrable skills. This includes critical thinking, written and
verbal communication, and coding-literacy. All project members will participate
in these activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archaea are a domain of life central
to the cycling of matter and energy in low temperature (&lt;150 Celsius)
environments today and throughout Earth's history. The primary objective of this
project is to uncover how the hydrogen (H) isotopic composition of archaeal
lipid biomarkers records geochemical and geomicrobial processes and may be used
to reconstruct modern environmental systems and the recent geologic past. To
read these records requires controlled experimental calibration of archaeal
biomarker H isotope fractionation, which does not yet exist. This work will
address this knowledge gap by calibrating the lipid H-isotopic signature of
representative archaea across different redox regimes, carbon sources and energy
fluxes reflecting the full suite of environments encountered in nature.
Specifically, it will test the hypothesis that the structural and H-isotopic
composition of archaeal lipids records the main hypothesized geochemical drivers
of variability in archaeal biomarkers (energy and carbon availability, as well
as nutrient/energy flux). To achieve this, the proposed work will employ a
mixture of culturing methods including rate-controlled steady-state
(chemostatic) experiments, combined with archaeal lipid characterization,
compound-specific H isotope analysis, and a modeling effort. The output of this
work will be a process- and mechanism-based interpretive framework for archaeal
lipid H isotope fractionation in response to environmental forcings. That is,
the proposed work will allow for (re)interpretations of past and present
biogeochemical processes across wide temporal and spatial scales, from planetary
(exosphere redox) to regional (basinal redox) to interfacial (pore-water redox).
This project will train two PhD students in low temperature geochemistry and
geomicrobiology and provide myriad opportunities to engage undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds in basic scientific research. Student
engagement will be guided by an emphasis on critical thinking, lab and
analytical skills building, and exposure to new ideas and questions in
geomicrobiology. This will allow student to gain transferrable skills, such as
rational experimental design, hypothesis construction and testing, and coding-
literacy in the geosciences. These are requisite skills in the 21st century
workforce, both in and out of the geosciences. Co-PI Kopf has a demonstrated
commitment to open-source code, data collection and analysis software and has
deployed such modules in the classroom as part of a larger effort to increase
coding-literacy in geoscience courses. To expand the impact of coding modules
developed at CU Boulder, Co-PI Leavitt will test and implement them in
geomicrobiology and biogeochemistry courses at Dartmouth. Both PIs are committed
to experimental pre-registration (via Open Science Framework) and the long-term
archiving and preservation of all data products. All PIs and team members will
participate in the ManyMentors network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.