* 1928838
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Computational Modeling in Biology Network (COMBINE) Forum
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Michael Blinov, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2021
* USD 10,000.00

Standards for data exchange are critical to the development of any field. They
support the reliable exchange of information, interoperability of various tools,
and reproducibility of scientific results. The COmputational MOdeling in Biology
NEtwork (COMBINE) was created to coordinate standardization efforts for modeling
in biology by providing a central point for discussions about standards relevant
to particular domains, and organizing regular face-to-face meetings. COMBINE
workshops have been instrumental in making progress in the development of these
standards and in interacting closely with biologists that develop state-of-the-
art models, such as a global map of human metabolism or whole cell models. This
award will support the COMBINE 2019 meeting to be held at the Heidelberg
Institute for Theoretical Studies, Germany, from July 15th to 19th, 2019.
Registration, travel, and accommodation expenses for US based students to attend
the meeting will be partially supported. A priority will be given to
participants from underrepresented groups who otherwise may find it very
difficult to find the funds to attend. This workshop will provide a valuable
educational and research experience for these participants, enabling students to
share their work and interact with the larger community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;COMBINE 2019 will be a workshop-style event with invited
lectures, oral presentations and posters, but also reserving time for afternoon
breakout sessions. It will be held at the Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical
Studies, Germany, from July 15th to 19th, 2019. The five meeting days will
include talks about the COMBINE standards and associated or related
standardization efforts, as well as presentations of tools using these standards
and other similar topics. Some oral presentations will be selected from
abstracts submitted by the attendees. In addition, poster sessions will allow
people to inform each other about their software and other projects in a setting
that fosters interaction and in-depth discussion. The funding will provide
partial support for registration, travel, and accommodation expenses to 5 to 7
US based students. The students will be selected by the COMBINE coordinators.
The student applicants will provide a short narrative on why they are interested
in participating, including a description of their current interest/involvement
with standard development. Students who are new to the community and/or are
members of underrepresented groups will be especially encouraged to apply. At
least one third of the funds will be reserved for these individuals. The
remainder of the funds will be utilized to support attendance of students that
working on standards or are developing critical software infrastructure that
supports these standardization efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.