* 1928570
* Culturally Responsive Education in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Jessica Black, Heritage University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,499,997.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic
Serving Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project 'Culturally Responsive
Education in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (CRESCENT) ' aims
to strengthen the institutional capacity for increasing the enrollment,
retention, and graduation of underrepresented minority students (URM). The goal
of the project is to provide innovative opportunities for URM students to
improve their education, enhance transferable skills, and contribute to the
regional and national need for a diverse and competent STEM workforce to address
societal challenges of the 21st Century. CRESCENT is built on the longstanding
collaboration of Heritage University with K-12 schools, community colleges and
research-intensive institutions in rural south-central Washington State for
increased URM participation, targeting in particular Hispanic and Native
American students in the Yakima Valley. The CRESCENT project activities include
innovative strategies for professional development of STEM faculty through the
ESCALA program, STEM curriculum enhancement through institutional partnerships,
offering experiential learning to students through hands-on research experiences
and community outreach, and development of intensive culturally-responsive
student support services to increase the number and diversity of students
pursuing higher education in STEM disciplines. CRESCENT program activities will
empower faculty with innovative and sustained pedagogical strategies for
teaching URM students and prepare the next generation of global citizens with a
breadth of knowledge and essential life skills to succeed in the rapidly
changing milieu of the 21st Century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CRESCENT network
will explore factors influencing the success of STEM gatekeeper classes and
gatekeepers at the most influential and critical educational transitions that
are limiting URM student engagement and advancement into STEM careers, testing
innovative models transforming these gatekeepers into positive forces. CRESCENT
is a capacity building program for faculty development, curriculum enhancement,
expanding diversity in educational institutions, and implementing student-
centered activities focusing on critical transition of URM students from 1)
secondary school to college, 2) between the first and second semester of
college, 3) from lower division to upper division coursework, and 4) between
undergraduate and graduate institutions in STEM disciplines. CRESCENT will test
if applied culturally responsive active learning models for STEM teaching and
student support services will improve student performance in STEM disciplines
and academic and professional career advancement. The CRESCENT project aims to
expand a sustainable collaborative network with regional high schools to
increase the pool of URM STEM-prepared first-generation freshmen undergraduate
students, increase the number of URM student applications indicating interest in
STEM disciplines and increase in declarations of STEM majors during the project
period, improve the performance and retention of URM STEM students, and increase
the number of URM students who pursue graduate studies in STEM disciplines after
completion of their undergraduate degrees. The project outcomes will be shared
with other HSIs seeking to improve retention and graduation, resulting in
multiplier impacts on STEM URM cohorts across the nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.