* 1928547
* FW-HTF-P: The Future Matrix of Care: Communities, Networks, and Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Nathan Ensmenger, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Care work is a mainstay of modern societies. The provision of care at the right
time and the right place is crucial for the welfare and wellbeing of children,
the elderly, the disabled, and individuals dealing with health issues. Because
of the changing demographics, more and more American households will have both
children and aging parents, as well as other individuals with various health
conditions, who need care and support. The current model of care is not going to
be able to provide this support because it is fragmented between various
settings and providers such as nursing homes, hospitals, daycares, and senior-
and childcare facilities. This fragmentation, in turn, gives rise to issues of
transition and continuity of care, generating insurmountable financial and
social costs. To overcome these issues, this project proposes 'the matrix of
care' as a community-based, socially embedded, and interactive model of care
using intelligent technologies based on a new understanding of care work. The
proposed matrix will transform the landscape of the Future of Work in the
provision of care and medical services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step in
this direction, the investigators propose to think of care work not solely as
what happens in professional settings, but more broadly as any activity that
aims to improve and enrich the health, wellbeing, and quality of life of
individuals, families, and communities, regardless of context. This includes,
among other things, housekeeping (e.g. cleaning, cooking), shopping, emotional
support, help with dressing and personal hygiene, eating, lifting,
administrative tasks (e.g. paying bills, filing taxes), safely getting around,
and doing laundry. The resulting matrix of care will span across scales
(individual, household, organization, community, city) and various dimensions,
including different settings of care delivery (homes, facilities, hospitals,
etc.) for multiple generations (children, adults, older adults) in different
environments (urban, rural, suburban). The investigators also propose to think
of caregivers not solely in terms of paid professional workers but as anyone who
is involved in the delivery of care. This would involve professional caregivers
(nurses, doctors, therapists, coaches, etc.) but also immediate and extended
family, neighbors, and other members of the community. On this basis, the
project will pursue a multi-pronged approach with the following key components:
(i) the training, promotion, and regulation of professional caregivers; (ii)
institutional and government support for family and community care; (iii) the
provision of skilled individuals who can act as integrators at the interface
between cared-for individuals, their families, and various new technologies.
Such technologies will include assistive robots sensing devices attached to
individuals or distributed in the environments; domain- and condition-specific
applications; transportation infrastructures; telehealth, telerehab, and
telemedicine platforms; and cognitive augmentation systems such as games. The
project will develop several case studies to be carried out in the city of
Bloomington, Indiana, as a testbed for experimenting with the proposed matrix of
care. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop the necessary research
personnel, research infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the
opportunities for studying future technology, future workers, and future work at
the level of a FW-HTF full research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.