* 1928852
* 2019 NSBP Annual Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Willie Rockward, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2020
* USD 377,100.00

The 2019 Conference of the National Society of Black Physicists, Promoting
Professional Connections and Persistence in Physics, is a combined professional
scientific meeting and a student development conference. Open to all, the NSBP
conference provides more than 300 undergraduate and graduate students
opportunities to participate in research seminars, research presentations and
professional relationship building across various subfields of physics.
Recognizing the power of near-peer role modeling to inspire the next generation
of STEM explorers, the 2019 conference will also include a significant number of
high school physics teachers and students. In addition to participating in
seminars and sharing their research, participants are provided specific academic
and career advising and strategies for persisting in the field of physics today.
The NSBP conference offers support for women and under-represented minorities in
technical fields; it is one of America's most recognizable annual broadening
participation STEM events. Support for the conference is provided by the
Directorate for the Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the Geosciences
Directorate and the Directorate for Education and Human Resource
Development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Society of Black Physicists (NSBP) and the Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI)
are collaborating to present the 2019 Annual Conference of the NSBP. The
conference is both a professional scientific meeting and a student development
event whose main goal is to increase the numbers of under-represented minorities
involved in the physics academic pipeline, as well as the broader US STEM
workforce pipeline. Based on the understanding that socialization among seasoned
members of a field and early career workers increases the chances for younger
persons to develop career identities and success skills, the meeting aims to
promote the participation of African Americans in the physical sciences. The
influence of professional scientific meetings on the outcomes of broadening
participation of underrepresented minorities is of particular interest at the
conference. The conference's unique attendee pool will facilitate the further
development of student-professional mentor pairings initiated in previous
meetings. NSBP and AUI will build on the framework for longitudinal data
collection established in the 2018 Annual Meeting to further explore unique
needs of under-represented minorities in physics-related disciplines. The
external evaluation will continue to focus on judging the value of the
conference in terms of its ability to achieve the goals related to both broader
impacts and intellectual merit criteria, including impacts on attitude, self-
efficacy, identity, awareness of career opportunities, and workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.