* 1928565
* An Interdisciplinary Design Program: Incorporating Making and Design Thinking to Enhance Undergraduate STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jose Sanchez, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,172,613.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to improve undergraduate
student interest in science and retention in STEM programs. It intends to
accomplish this goal by enriching STEM courses with project-based learning
activities that introduce students to making and design thinking. The project
seeks to build faculty capacity through a partnership between Queens College, an
HSI, and the New York Hall of Science, a science museum. The project will draw
from the expertise in informal learning of New York Hall of Science, which has
developed a framework that enhances STEM learning through making, discovery, and
exploration. The project will gather evidence about how making and design
thinking lead to increased student motivation and interest in STEM, as well as
improvements in academic outcomes for students. The project seeks to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines and has the
potential to transform science interest within the diverse community of Queens
in New York City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to incorporate project-
based pedagogical approaches in identified courses to introduce students to
making and design thinking. The project will develop and support a learning
community for STEM faculty, which will help faculty acquire expertise in how to
best incorporate design thinking, making, and the use of makerspace facilities
into their courses. The project aims to generate best practices in project-based
learning that includes making and design thinking in STEM courses. In addition,
the project will examine whether making and design thinking supports changes in
students' motivational beliefs and interest in STEM, deepens faculty pedagogical
practices, and fosters inter-institutional interactions. The project's impact on
undergraduate students will be investigated using data linked to STEM
achievement and persistence (from institutional records) and measures of
motivational perceptions (from surveys). To investigate faculty participation
and perceptions, as well as impact on participating institutions, a longitudinal
mixed methods design will generate data about how faculty respond over time to
training and support, and about how long-term activities lead to change in
complex institutions. The project will host a public forum where students can
present or demo their projects and will also share findings through a project
website. Other dissemination efforts will include course manuals posted on the
QC Makerspace and course websites, papers published in both academic
publications and informal learning practitioner publications, presentations
given at STEM education conferences and at public events at the New York Hall of
Science. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.