* 1928693
* HSI-SMART: STEM Model for Research and Teaching Undergraduate-intervention Program
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* David Gillespie, California State University Channel Islands
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase graduation
rates and reduce the time to degree completion for all science, mathematics, and
engineering majors and to reduce the performance gap existing between Latinx and
non-Latinx White students as well as between female and male students. The HSI-
STEM Model for Advancing Research and Teaching (HSI-SMART) project will combine
a set of four interventions into an integrated whole that spans students' entire
undergraduate careers. This project will: facilitate summer advising workshops
to create student-faculty relationships before the students' first semester,
place appropriate students in key first year gateway classes as paid learning
assistants, place students in paid research assistantships, and engage students
in classroom activities to reduce anxiety and increase sense of belonging.
Direct connection to professors and peers will support the retention of new
students, classroom learning assistants will support student participation at
its most crucial stage, and both learning- and research-assistantships will keep
students engaged with the campus community and focused on their discipline. This
program will create a self-propagating student community as Latinx and female
students move through the advising workshops and introductory courses and are
looped back into the learning and research assistantship programs as they
proceed toward graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring
together all STEM disciplines to increase Latinx and female participation,
retention, and success by integrating a set of interventions into a coherent
training and community-building model. The efficacy of interventions, while
otherwise well-established, is not well-documented for Latinx and female student
persistence in STEM degrees, particularly at HSIs. The project will address this
gap in existing knowledge by addressing questions specifically about Latinx and
female students: whether STEM-targeted summer advising sessions affect
retention; whether psychological interventions addressing student anxiety and
sense of belonging influence introductory course achievement and degree
persistence; whether placing near-peers in gateway classrooms affects
performance of both students and learning assistant; and whether engaging in
research as undergraduates likewise supports a successful transition from novice
to graduate. As it will recruit participants from Latinx and female student
populations, the project hypothesizes that all these interventions will benefit
that target populations' sense of belonging, academic performance, and
graduation rates. The project will balance universal interventions with
quantitative, controlled-study approaches to measure the importance of the
aggregate and isolated interventions in success of Latinx and female students.
This scalable, assessable, and integrated model of STEM belonging and
achievement will add a critically relevant element to STEM educational
literature and practice. More broadly, the project will fundamentally change the
social dimension of the STEM student experience by creating and supporting
community and inclusion from the moment students walk onto campus until their
graduation, and will serve as model for student success and inclusive community
building at other HSIs. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.