* 1928792
* Increasing Student Engagement and Retention in STEM through advancing Research Experience and Knowledge in Marine Biotechnology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* PRACHI TRIPATHI, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,019,310.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project
aims to increase undergraduate student interest, retention and success in
Biological Sciences. This collaborative project at the Barranquitas and Guayama
campuses of the Inter American University of Puerto Rico will carry forward the
goals of the HSI Program in economically disadvantaged, rural areas of Puerto
Rico. The project will target those points along the academic pipeline that
represent critical transitions at which students are most likely to switch to
non-STEM major or drop-out of college and will do so through innovative changes
in STEM teaching and learning. Puerto Rico being an island offers a plethora of
opportunities in Marine Biotechnology from the standpoint of research as well as
industrial applications. However, there has been very little progress in this
direction, chiefly due to a serious lack of educational offerings in the area of
marine biotechnology at institutions of higher education in Puerto Rico, which
in turn translates into lack of trained personnel in this area. By introducing a
minor concentration in Marine Biotechnology, along with an elective course in
Blue Chemistry at the undergraduate level, this project aims to revitalize the
undergraduate biology program, as well as train undergraduates to assume roles
in academia, policy-making and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
goals of this project are (1) enhancing Hispanic student opportunities attaining
degrees in STEM education through critical transition utilizing new courses and
curriculum revision; and 2) improving the Hispanic students' STEM learning
experience by research/problem-based learning, collaboration between two
campuses and modern laboratory activities including a teaching museum. The
project will generate new knowledge about how a research-focused learning
experience at the undergraduate level combined with the support from tutorial
services and faculty trained in modern scientific tools and techniques can
contribute to higher retention and degree attainment in STEM. Further, it will
generate knowledge about the impact of introducing a minor in an applied, job-
oriented area of study, such as Marine Biotechnology, on the number of students
choosing a STEM major. In addition, the project will assess if and how a
community science center such as a marine museum can encourage high school
students to enroll in STEM courses in college. The effectiveness of these
interventions will be evaluated through a mixed-methods evaluation and will
include a combination of the before-and-after study design and both quantitative
and qualitative methods providing data for both formative and summative
evaluation. The findings of this project will be disseminated widely through
symposia, publications and through a dedicated website. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.