* 1928737
* Fostering an Equity-minded Student Success Culture in STEM Through Faculty Development
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Tram Dang, Santa Monica College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,493,400.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI)
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims. With HSI program support, this Track 1 project at Santa
Monica College (SMC) aims to identify, implement and investigate interventions
that enhance the success and subsequent graduation of Hispanic and other
underrepresented STEM students through the use of culturally responsive and
effective classroom-based curricular materials and instructional practices
focused on STEM. SMC will bring together the equity-focused work of the
college's Science and Research Initiative and the Center for Teaching Excellence
to implement a three-pronged approach that includes faculty professional
development, pilot and assessment of research-based innovations, and
dissemination of project outcomes both internally and externally. This project
will target first year and other tenure track STEM faculty and provide them with
release time so that they may participate in a 2-year professional development
program and allocate the time necessary to develop and implement effective
equity-minded interventions in their courses. By assessing the impact of both
the innovations and the professional development, SMC will establish a toolbox
of effective practices that can be used by STEM and non-STEM faculty, as well as
a professional development strategy that can be sustained beyond the grant
period for ongoing delivery to new faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will build upon research-based effective practice currently underway at SMC's
Science and Research Initiative, as well as research from the field, to explore
and further assess innovative approaches to community college student success in
STEM. The project will identify effective strategies for engaging the faculty in
change-focused activities designed to improve student success through critical
transitions, thereby helping the numerous colleges across the country that are
struggling to bridge the cultural divide between STEM faculty and a culturally
diverse student population. The project will assess not only the impact of the
proposed innovations on student ability to successfully transition, but also the
degree to which the professional development contributes to teaching
effectiveness, student sense of belonging and learning, and departmental and
institutional culture. Project evaluation will assess the quality of the program
and its ability to achieve grant goals and long-term project outcomes, as well
as provide ongoing feedback to suggest improvements in implementation. The
research focus of this project is to identify effective pedagogical strategies
and methods of teaching that positively impact student success and successful
transitions. The research will use a quasi-experimental design to assess each
intervention, using a combination of both qualitative and quantitative
indicators to answer both implementation and outcome evaluation questions.
Project summative evaluation and research includes conducting a pre- and post-
assessment of all students impacted by the project at both the beginning and end
of each academic year, immediately after they graduate, and again one year after
program completion. Project data will be disaggregated by race/ethnicity, income
status, and gender. Project results will be disseminated at regional and
national conferences. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.