* 1928073
* Response of Soft Colloids and Macromolecules to Crowded Environments: Theoretical and Computational Modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Alan Denton, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 266,039.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education that is aimed to better understand and
facilitate the design of smart materials composed of building blocks whose
properties, such as size, shape, and softness, respond and adapt to changes in
external stimuli. Promising types of building blocks are soft colloidal
particles and flexible molecules containing a large number of atoms called
flexible macromolecules, objects whose sizes range up to microns — thousands of
times larger than an atom, yet visible only under a microscope. Of particular
interest are microgels — microscopic gel particles, made of porous, elastic
networks of chain-like molecules, which swell by absorbing solvent. The degree
of particle swelling can be controlled by adjusting temperature, acidity, and
concentration of the solution, resulting in unique, adaptive properties that
equip microgels to serve as biosensors and as vehicles for delivering drugs to
the body. When crowded by one another in concentrated solutions, flexible
macromolecules can change their size and shape. Interdisciplinary research is
driven by fundamental interest in the basic structure of materials and by
practical applications in biomedical, pharmaceutical, and foods industries.
While past experimental and modeling studies have explored elastic properties of
single particles and collective behavior of bulk solutions, an outstanding
challenge is to link single-particle or microscopic and collective or
macroscopic properties of these materials. Specific unresolved issues concern
the role of electric charge in determining swelling of microgels and the
influence of particle softness on macromolecular crowding in biological
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the ultimate goal of explaining
experimental observations and designing new materials, the research team is
developing efficient modeling methods to achieve several major objectives: (1)
Elucidate impacts of macromolecule flexibility on materials properties by
modeling concentrated mixtures of microgels of different size and softness. (2)
Analyze transitions from liquid to solid phases by modeling crowded solutions of
deformable microgels and identifying conditions that favor formation of
crystalline solids over glassy solids. (3) Explore how different forces between
particles determine thermal properties of soft materials by modeling
concentrated solutions of microgels with electric charge. A potentially
transformative element of the research is incorporation of size and shape
fluctuations of macromolecules, which are especially important in overcrowded
environments, where soft particles can deform and interpenetrate. These
objectives will be achieved by developing and applying an array of modeling
methods, including molecular-scale computer simulations, and directly comparing
predictions with experimental measurements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
scientific, educational, and societal impacts of this project include (1)
development of novel computer simulation algorithms and theories, of
interdisciplinary value, for modeling dispersions of flexible macromolecules,
which can guide the interpretation of experiments and the design of smart,
responsive materials, with potential applications to drug delivery, biosensors,
and water filtration; (2) science outreach activities with students at K-12
schools and tribal colleges; and (3) mentoring and training of students for
careers in computational materials research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research and education that is
aimed to bridge our understanding of microscopic properties of flexible
macromolecules and emergent macroscopic properties of soft materials. Soft
colloidal particles and flexible macromolecules, including microgels and polymer
coils, have drawn intense interest as components of smart materials with tunable
properties that respond to changes in external stimuli. Particular attention has
been focused on microgels, that are natural or synthetic microscopic gel
particles, composed of porous, elastic networks of crosslinked polymers, which
are swollen by a solvent. When dispersed in water, microgels can acquire charge
via dissociation of counterions or from initiators during synthesis reactions.
Permeability to solvent molecules and small ions renders equilibrium particle
sizes highly sensitive to competition between osmotic, elastic, and
electrostatic forces. The degree of particle swelling can be controlled by
adjusting temperature, pH, ionic strength, and concentration, resulting in
unique, adaptive properties, and making microgels well-suited to drug delivery
and chemical and biosensing. In concentrated dispersions, microgels can crowd
one another or other macromolecules, or can be crowded by hard nanoparticles,
resulting in conformational changes. Interdisciplinary research is driven by
fundamental questions concerning self-assembly and practical applications in
biomedical, pharmaceutical, and foods industries. Modeling of microgels has been
mostly limited to explicit models of single particles or coarse-grained models
of many-particle dispersions, while studies of macromolecular crowding have
largely neglected shapes of polymers. Linking single-particle microstructure and
interparticle forces with macroscopic properties remains an outstanding
challenge. Specific unresolved issues concern the role of electrostatics in
determining swelling of microgels and the influence of particle softness and
deformability on macromolecular crowding, depletion forces, and phase behavior,
including stability of crystalline vs. glassy solids in overcrowded dispersions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by these challenges, and with the ultimate goal
of explaining and interpreting experimental observations to facilitate the
design of new materials, this project is developing efficient, multi-scale
modeling methods to directly address several major objectives: (1) Elucidate
impacts of varying internal architecture and compressibility of microgels on
swelling in crowded environments by modeling single particles with nonuniform
crosslink density and crowded dispersions. (2) Analyze liquid-solid transitions
of soft colloids by modeling crowded dispersions of deformable microgels and
computing structural properties and phase diagrams to identify system parameters
favoring equilibrium stability of crystals over glassy solids. (3) Explain
observations of self-healing in overcrowded dispersions of soft colloids and the
influence of particle compressibility on bulk structural properties by modeling
asymmetric mixtures of microgels. (4) Determine the role of fixed charge density
and electrostatic interactions in swelling and thermal behavior of soft
colloidal materials by modeling crowded dispersions of ionic microgels. (5)
Analyze impacts of steric and electrostatic forces between soft crowders on
macromolecular conformations in crowded mixtures of polymer coils and
nanoparticles. (6) Explore influences of macromolecular crowding on depletion
forces, swelling, structure, and phase behavior in microgel dispersions and
mixtures of penetrable microgels and hard nanoparticles. A potentially
transformative element of the research is the incorporation of size and shape
fluctuations of soft colloidal particles, which are especially important in
overcrowded environments, where volume fractions exceed hard-sphere close
packing. These objectives are being achieved by developing, validating, and
applying an array of computational and theoretical methods, including effective
interaction and Poisson-Boltzmann theories and molecular dynamics and Monte
Carlo simulations, and directly comparing predictions with
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.