* 1928461
* Supporting Retention and Graduation in STEM by Building Undergraduate Student's STEM Identity and Cultural Capital
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Maria Siopsis, Maryville College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,880.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, it will support the education of STEM undergraduates at
Maryville College, preparing them to meet the high demand for STEM employees in
the Tennessee Technology Corridor. More than half of Maryville students are from
low-income families, a population with significantly lower rates of STEM
retention than their more affluent peers. As a result, the project is
anticipated to have broad positive impact on STEM retention and graduation rates
at Maryville College. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund four-
year scholarships to 18 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in biology,
biochemistry, chemistry, math, and/or computer science. The project aims to
increase retention in STEM for both Scholars and other low-income STEM majors,
improve STEM identity and cultural capital in low-income STEM majors, and
prepare STEM students for the workforce or graduate programs. Project activities
include a summer experience, first-year STEM portfolio course, and integrated
supports such as mentoring, tutoring, leadership opportunities, and career
preparation. Cohort-based activities will be designed to develop students' STEM
identity and promote a visible and effective campus-wide culture of STEM
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Project activities will support increased
preparation and centralized academic, professional, and social supports
throughout Scholars' four-year academic career. Although the importance of
identity in relation to STEM and cultural capital has been documented for
underrepresented STEM students, the literature does not address the efficacy of
centralized and coordinated STEM supports for low-income students at an
undergraduate liberal arts college. A research study will examine the
development of Scholars' and other STEM students' personal identities related to
STEM, how the project activities support STEM engagement and learning, and the
extent that computer programming becomes cultural capital at the College. The
evaluation will determine the impact of program elements on the retention,
graduation, and career placement of both Scholars and other STEM students and
will generate evidence that can be used to support sustained programming and
transferability to similar institutions. Dissemination will occur through online
platforms, publications, and meetings with similar liberal arts colleges. This
project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.