* 1928989
* 2019 Atmospheric Chemistry Gordon Research Conference (GRC); Sunday River, Maine; July 28-August 2, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Ronald Cohen, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The proposal brings together a group of atmospheric chemistry researchers from
universities, government laboratories, and private research institutes, to
promote discussion of information and ideas on topics of contemporary interest
in atmospheric science through the internationally respected Gordon Research
Conference. The meeting will be held July 28-August 2, 2019 in Sunday River,
Maine and will include scientists and students from both national and
international institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this year's
conference is "New Science in Air Quality and Climate from Charney to AR6." The
broader impacts of the symposium derive from the exchange of ideas that help to
focus the research community on the most pressing questions, as well as provide
an opportunity for young scientists to meet, network, and exchange ideas with
leaders in the atmospheric chemistry and related sciences. Presentations will
address state-of-the-science topics related to the focus themes of the
conference, including atmospheric chemistry and climate, air pollution and
health, fundamental multiphase kinetics and mechanisms, chemical transport
modeling, remote sensing, and cutting-edge instrument
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.