* 1928900
* RoL: Molecular and cellular mechanisms of germination in Saccharomyces
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Michael McMurray, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2024
* USD 969,858.00

Many organisms reproduce through the fusion of gametes, like sperm and eggs.
Gametes usually carry one copy of each chromosome and, when they combine in the
process of fertilization, create a new cell, called a zygote, that has two
copies of each chromosome. Over the last century the budding/brewers'/bakers'
yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has become a powerful experimental system for
learning about how genes work and how cells duplicate and separate their
chromosomes and divide. However, very little is known about how yeast cells make
gametes and how yeast fertilization works. Dr. McMurray's lab found that,
contrary to prior assumptions, (i) yeast gametes are made "pre-oriented" in
terms of the direction in which they grow prior to fertilization; (ii) if they
forego mating and choose instead to start dividing with only a single set of
chromosomes, they must first penetrate a cell wall that encases the gametes, and
(iii) yeast gametes that fail to inherit all the chromosomes they are supposed
to get are still capable of fertilization, and can produce a viable zygote so
long as the other gamete has the missing chromosome(s). This project will
elucidate the molecular bases of these three phenomena, providing major advances
in understanding of gamete biology and how genetic information is transmitted
during reproduction. An outreach program will partner local middle school
students and Early Education majors in isolating wild yeast and looking for
clues from gene sequences about how fertilization happens in various natural
habitats, enriching curricula at both levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term goal of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms by which
Saccharomyces gametes (spores) exit dormancy, escape from a specialized,
inflexible cell wall, and subsequently mate or bud. The objectives of this
project are to determine how spores are born "pre-polarized", how upon budding
they penetrate the ascus wall (the residual wall of the diploid mother cell),
and how a "maternal contribution" of RNAs allows spores to germinate and mate
without accessing their genomes. The hypotheses are that 1) polarity factors
deposited in spore membranes during sporulation persist at cortical locations
near the ascus wall, 2) secreted cell-wall degrading enzymes allow local
digestion of the ascus wall during budding, and 3) many RNAs made during
sporulation are shared between spores, whereas those controlling mating type are
segregated. Imaging and genetic manipulation in the Principal Investigator's lab
and the lab of a collaborator will pinpoint when, where and which polarity
factors are deposited during sporulation and which are required for polarity
establishment. Similar imaging and mutation-based approaches will identify the
cell wall degradation enzymes required for ascus wall penetration. In order to
resolve the paradox of how spores share maternal molecules but segregate those
required to establish identity, the Principal Investigator's lab will monitor
the localization and temporal origin of essential and mating-type specific RNAs
during sporulation, and manipulate candidate pathways controlling RNA
segregation, including targeted RNA degradation, RNA methylation, clustering of
RNAs by RNA-binding proteins, and production of anti-sense
transcripts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by Integrative
Organismal Systems, Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Rules of
Life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.