* 1928874
* EAGER: Local Structure and Dynamics in Tc-Enhanced Overdoped Cuprates: Beyond BCS?
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Steven Conradson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2022
* USD 229,999.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is a property of certain
materials in which they lose electrical resistance, giving them the capability
of carrying electric currents with none of the losses that occur in normal metal
electrical conductors. This enables electromagnets such as the ones used for MRI
scans to operate for weeks or even months without having to replenish them, and
superconducting wires would save the large fraction of the original energy that
is lost in transmission. The problem is that superconductivity that can used in
these applications only occurs at very low temperatures, requiring expensive and
complicated refrigeration equipment. This is, however, superconductivity as we
have known it since it?s discovery just over 100 years ago. Our team has found
that a certain class of copper-oxide superconductors may follow a different set
of rules, and in particular one compound shows behaviors that contradict the
existing theory. A second type of superconductivity could provide insights or
even the means to extend superconductivity to higher temperatures to save energy
by substantially increasing the efficiency of electrical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;A review of the
cuprate literature reveals the surprising fact that the phase diagram is
"universal" because the YBa(2-x)Srx(CuO2)2(Cu(1-y)My)O(7+delta) class of
"overdoped" cuprates has been neglected. When prepared by the High Pressure
Oxygen (HPO) method using chlorate or peroxide their transition temperatures
increase continuously within their 50-80 K range even as their O stoichiometry
is increased to give an excess charge on the CuO2 coppers well past the 0.27
value where the superconductivity ends in conventional materials. Since the HPO
method only produces fine powders and not crystals only a few techniques are
amenable to their study, including the X-ray Absorption Fine Structure
measurements that are the principal capability of this project team was that the
Cu-neighbor atom pairs exhibit highly anharmonic behavior correlated with the
superconductivity in the c direction, including a non-degenerate Cu2-apical O
double well potential. Renormalization of this potential causes the energy
difference between its two components to track the gap energy to the Tc-30 K
lower limit of the team's measurements. Even more radical are results from
Sr2CuO3.3, a La2CuO4+delta structural analog. The static structure contains only
partial CuO2 planes, in contrast to the fully ordered ones in all other
cuprates. These are replaced by more complex, three-dimensional Cu-O structures.
In addition, the superconducting transition occurs concomitantly with a
structural transformation that is a shift of a set of these O ions that is
sufficiently large to modify the Fermi surface by an energy far larger than that
of the gap. This would be a substantial expansion of conventional BCS theory, or
possibly even indictative of a novel pairing and condensation mechanism. Crucial
issues to be addressed by this EAGER project would be a direct comparison with
conventional cuprates, extension to lower temperatures, and measurements at the
complementary Sr edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.