* 1928733
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RM: Augmentation for Tomorrow: Expanding the Future Capacities of Independent Workers
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Melissa Mazmanian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 594,931.00

Technological advancements are changing how people work, what they are able to
accomplish, and what they imagine to be possible. One aim of these advancements
has long been to augment workers' capacities. However, these efforts have often
focused narrowly on improving productivity and safety rather than enhancing
personal well-being or creativity. This research promotes the idea that
technology--if well designed--can support workers' needs holistically, and only
in embracing this approach can we design sustainable human/technology
partnerships for the future. The investigators will collaborate with independent
knowledge workers in domains such as media, law, and scholarship, who are not
full-time employees in traditional organizations. These workers often enjoy the
freedom to organize their work relative to a variety of factors. However, as
part of this freedom, they often feel pressure to effectively manage tasks,
time, clients, collaborators, finances, reputations, and multiple non-
professional aspects of their lives on their own. By attending to how this
population integrates work, family, home, volunteer responsibilities, and other
pursuits into their daily lives, this research will provide design inspiration
for ensuring a more humane work experience in the future and inform related
policy, infrastructure, and training discussions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will observe a sample of independent knowledge workers in their
professional environments (equally distributed on the West Coast and East
Coast). Each worker will be interviewed before and after each observation.
Collected data will be analyzed in collaboration with a third member of the
research team, a design researcher, who will conduct a debrief session after
each observation with the requisite investigator to elicit additional insights
from the field. The data will be processed to create a series of design
workbooks that will be used to support joint data analysis, identify data gaps,
and generate inputs for the final year of the study. During this period, the
research team will conduct participatory design workshops with the independent
workers who participated in the earlier phase of the study. The investigators
will also disseminate information about how human/technology partnerships can be
reimagined to support a more expansive understanding of the future of
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.