* 1928608
* FW-HTF-RM: Collaborative Research: Understanding the Algorithmic Workplace: A Multi-Method Study for Comprehensive Optimization of Platforms
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ozlem Ergun, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,370,189.00

The emergence of the digital platform economy in recent years is rapidly
transforming some kinds of economic activity. This project will develop new
evidence about the workers, business organizations, and government institutions
that are involved in the "algorithmic workplace" or "gig economy". The research
team includes experts in social science, public policy, and engineering. The
team will conduct research to document the experiences, attitudes, and needs of
platform workers. They will use these findings to build a mathematical model of
worker behavior that will be combined with business data from an industrial
partner. The result will be a model that can predict how changes in business
operations will affect worker outcomes. The team will use field experiments to
test the model predictions. The results of this project will be new knowledge
for businesses that need to retain and motivate their workforce, new evidence
for policymakers that seek to understand how neighborhoods and communities are
affected by the growth of platform work, and new empirical evidence about the
benefits and risks of platform work for the US
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will undertake an interdisciplinary
program of research aimed at generating theoretical and practical knowledge of
issues that result from the advent of the algorithmic workplace in the United
States. The project begins by conducting research on the attitudinal and
behavioral characteristics of platform workers. Interviews and surveys will shed
light on the occupational trajectories, experiences of risk, and regulatory
preferences found among workers on several types of labor platforms. The team
will analyze the qualitative data to shed new light over ongoing debates about
the nature of algorithmic control of workers, the labor market dynamics which
the platform economy fosters, and the policy preferences of workers themselves.
A mathematical framework of worker behavior will be designed to model the fusion
of these coded qualitative data with internal data from Deliv, a digital
platform for package delivery. This will lead to a novel contribution of this
project: agent-based modeling that can simulate the action of platform workers
as they respond to shifts in the design of the algorithms on which platforms
rely. This second stage of the research will be used to provide a deeper and
better informed understanding of the strategies which workers employ as they
respond to the technological changes programmers introduce in their efforts to
refine the algorithms governing transactions made possible by
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.