* 1928224
* Category I. Computing without Boundaries: Cyberinfrastructure for the Long Tail of Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Michael Norman, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2024
* USD 26,499,998.00

Science and engineering rely upon an increasingly complex and integrated
ecosystem of advanced computing and data systems, scientific software, and
expertise to conduct research that leads to new knowledge and discovery, and
improves the Nation's competitiveness and the health and welfare of its
citizens. From the building blocks of life on earth to the deepest mysteries of
the universe, researchers use this cyberinfrastructure (CI) to carry out
computation and analysis at ever larger scales and complexity. Computing without
Boundaries: Cyberinfrastructure for the Long Tail of Science is a
transformational project from the San Diego Supercomputer Center at the
University of California, San Diego, designed to address these challenges. The
centerpiece of the project is the acquisition, deployment, and operation of
Expanse, a powerful supercomputer that will complement and extend NSF's
Innovative High-Performance Computing (HPC) program. Expanse will: 1) increase
the capacity and performance for thousands of users of batch-oriented and
science gateway computing; and 2) provide new capabilities that will enable
research increasingly dependent upon heterogeneous and distributed resources
composed into integrated and highly usable CI. Expanse will feature innovations
in system software, operations, and support that extend its capabilities far
beyond the limits of the physical system. Through its integration with the
public cloud and the Open Science Grid, collaboration with the Science Gateway
Community Institute, and support for composable systems, Expanse will become
part of a more inclusive national CI. The long tail of computing reflects
diversity in science, researchers, their institutions, and those who support and
operate CI. The project will reach out to underserved and under-resourced
communities, through new initiatives like HPC@MSI, which will allocate a portion
of Expanse to Minority Serving Institutes via a rapid access allocation to help
them quickly use this powerful new resource.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Projected to
have a peak speed of 5 Petaflop/s, Expanse will feature next-generation Intel
Central Processing Units (CPUs), NVIDIA Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), and a
Mellanox InfiniBand network. It will be composed of 13 SDSC Scalable Compute
Units (SSCUs), each of which contains 56 CPU nodes and 4 GPU nodes along with
over 60 TB of distributed non-volatile memory storage for user scratch. The
SSCUs will be integrated with a 12-PB Lustre parallel file system and 7 PB of
object storage. SDSC, along with its partners Dell and Aeon Computing, will
deploy Expanse in SDSC's energy-efficient data center on the UCSD campus.
Expanse will be connected to multiple high-performance research and education
networks at 100 Gbps and reach thousands of users who require high performance,
but modest-scale resources. Allocation and usage policies will be tailored to
achieve fast turnaround and responsiveness. Experts in computational science,
data-intensive computing, scientific workflows, and large-scale systems
operations will support Expanse at the highest levels of utilization,
reliability, and usability. Through integration with national CI, Expanse will
enable new models of computing and research that require the full complement of
HPC systems and simulation, experimental data analysis, and computational
expertise to support and facilitate breakthrough science. Knowledge gained
through the project will lead to improvements in algorithms, software, and
systems management tools, as well as a better understanding of how integrated CI
can be configured to support emerging research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.