* 1928761
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Predicting the Spread of Multi-Species Coral Disease Using Species Immune Traits
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Amy Apprill, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2020
* USD 30,451.00

Title: Predicting the Spread of Multi-Species Coral Disease Using Species Immune
Traits&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reef ecosystems provide substantial economic
resources to the societies of the United States Virgin Islands (USVI) and other
US locations in the forms of tourism, fishing and coastal protection. However,
reefs are among the most threatened marine environments, and coral disease is
having a devastating impact on these valued systems. In early 2019, a multi-
species rapid tissue loss disease matching the description of stony coral tissue
loss disease (SCTLD) was found severely affecting a reef off the southwest coast
of St. Thomas in the US Virgin Islands (USVI). SCTLD has been devastating coral
reef communities in southeast Florida for the last four years, and was very
recently reported from disparate areas around the Caribbean, including Mexico,
Jamaica, and St. Martin. Rapid surveys by the investigators at the University of
the Virgin Islands believe that a 50 km2 area southwest of St. Thomas is the
initial incidence area of the disease, but will likely spread across the USVI,
British Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. This study performs experiments to
understand how this disease affects coral species immune traits and compares the
microbiology and physiology of disease samples in the USVI to samples from
Florida. It also examines how changing the species composition of a coral
community affects the spread and impact of the disease. The overall aim is to
produce a model to predict the impact of multi-species disease spread on reefs
based on coral species assemblages. The project contributes to the research
training of at least 2 undergraduates, 2 M.S. students, and 3 Ph.D. students,
who benefit from cross-investigator mentoring. The research team includes
representatives to the Coral Disease Advisory Committees for the USVI and
Florida, which ensures rapid communication of findings to management bodies in
both regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral disease is a significant and
increasing threat to Caribbean coral reef systems. Recent results demonstrate
that coral species immune traits can predict disease resistance, and thus,
forecast impacts to coral community structure, under multi-species coral
disease. The onset of this epizootic in the USVI offers an unprecedented
opportunity to test hypotheses about the impact of coral resistance, tolerance
and immune traits on disease spread during the early stages of an outbreak that
could profoundly change the diversity of Caribbean reefs. It is hypothesized
that the abundance of highly susceptible species dictates 1) the onset of
disease at reef sites downstream of the initial incidence area, and 2) the
spread of disease within reef sites. Furthermore, 3) downstream reef sites where
highly susceptible species are removed or treated show lower immune responses in
all susceptible corals, later onset of disease, and slower within-site disease
spread. To test these hypotheses, two experiments directly compare species
responses to disease exposure and test the effect of species assemblage on coral
immune function and disease spread. Results from these experiments aim to inform
a generalizable model to predict the impact of multi-species disease spread on
reefs based on coral species assemblages. Results of this project include direct
comparison of the USVI disease to Florida SCTLD and a better understanding of
how the abundance of highly susceptible host species impacts the spread of
disease during the early onset of a multi-species
panzootic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.