* 1928582
* FW-HTF-RL: Cultivating Capacities and Confidence in Open Access Technologies through Anticipatory Workforce Development for the Future of Digital Agriculture
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Sudhagar Mani, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,996,465.00

This project aims to advance the science informing anticipatory workforce
development programs in American agriculture. The program has the potential to
increase rural adult learners' confidence in digital technologies. It also has
the potential to cultivate capacities and skills for developing, using, and re-
using Open Access Digital Agriculture technologies. Digital technologies have
become a vital element of the successful operation of farms. Open systems enable
agriculturalists to adapt digital systems to their specific operational
requirements, business configurations, and the environment. This project
addresses the desire of farmers and farm managers to take ownership of the
software and hardware systems they operate daily. Through convergent research
between engineering, the social sciences, and the learning sciences, this
project explores three questions. First, what viable configurations of open
access agricultural systems can be deployed at different scales of farming?
Second, can hands-on informal learning delivered to agriculturalists at their
place of work increase comfort with using digital agricultural technologies?
Third, by creating immersive learning opportunities to pair students with
agriculturalists through partnerships with Cooperative Extension, can we reduce
barriers to underrepresented students in STEM curricula? This project will
investigate the theories, methods, and tools for understanding how convergent
research fields develop, are negotiated, and ultimately create new domains of
inquiry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate new configurations
of open access sensors, standards, systems, and methods of data collection
analysis. These will be informed by practicing agriculturalists' understanding
of digital technologies. Agriculturalist experiential data will be collected via
a series of interviews with small/micro, medium, and large growers. This data
will be supplemented by existing data sources on technology trends in
agriculture throughout Georgia. These agriculturalists will play a critical role
in developing an online curriculum for digital agriculture skills. The design of
the curriculum will be scalable and deployable via the Cooperative Extension
system. Undergraduate students will work with agriculturalists across the State
of Georgia to develop these modules. Augmented and virtual reality technologies
will be deployed to enhance the approachability and ultimately the comfort of
agriculturalists with digital agriculture technologies. These educational
opportunities will be supported by the development and deployment of a mobile
performance computing and makerspace facility. This will enable agriculturalists
to engage with digital agriculture technologies and data science within the
context of their working environments and real-life problems. This is an
essential modality for highly effective adult education programming. The mobile
facilities will be deployed throughout the State of Georgia. They will deliver
on-site programming and adapt programming to meet the needs of specific
agricultural operations and co-designing open access sensor networks. They will
incorporate the prototyping of parts via 3-D printing, as well as machine
learning, artificial intelligence, and other needs that emerge during the
project. The results of this study will leverage information gleaned from the
open-source digital agriculture problem area as a model for understanding the
emergence of convergent research fields and future knowledge
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.