* 1928481
* FW-HTF-RM: Measuring learning gains in man-machine assemblage when augmenting radiology work with artificial intelligence
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Krupinski, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 826,795.00

The work setting of the future presents an opportunity for human-technology
partnerships, where a harmonious connection between human-technology produces
unprecedented productivity gains. A conundrum at this human-technology frontier
remains - will humans be augmented by technology or will technology be augmented
by humans? This project overcomes the conundrum of human and machine as separate
entities and instead, treats them as an assemblage. As groundwork for the
harmonious human-technology connection, this assemblage needs to learn to fit
synergistically. This learning is called assemblage learning and it will be
important for Artificial Intelligence (AI) applications in health care, where
diagnostic and treatment decisions augmented by AI will have a direct and
significant impact on patient care and outcomes. This project will also identify
ways in which learning can be shared between assemblages, such that collective
swarms of connected assemblages can be created. The project will create a new
learning model that integrates and measures concepts from individuals learning
to swarm learn. The project will help demonstrate a symbiotic learning
assemblage, such that envisioned productivity gains from AI can be achieved
without loss of human jobs. Even though the focus is on visual cognitive tasks
in radiology, lessons from this project may be applicable to other domains where
human intelligence will be augmented by machine
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies of human versus machine
competitions have demonstrated that assemblages that combine human-technology
partnerships are stronger than individual humans or machines. By building on
these, this project will integrate state-of-the-art algorithms into the
radiology workflow. The project will answer the following research questions:
Q1: How to develop assemblages, such that human-technology partnerships produce
a "good fit" for visually based cognition-oriented tasks in radiology? Q2: What
level of training should pre-exist in the individual human (radiologist) and
independent machine learning model for human-technology partnerships to thrive?
Q3: Which aspects and to what extent does an assemblage learning approach lead
to reduced errors, improved accuracy, faster turn-around times, reduced fatigue,
improved self-efficacy, and resilience? A rigorous counterbalanced trial will be
performed to assess individual radiologists interpreting images with and without
the assemblage. Data on clinician engagement from EHR systems will be captured
and analyzed, along with pre-test and post-test surveys and interviews. Deep and
wide analysis of the quantitative and qualitative data from the trial will
answer questions related to learning gains, task performance, emotional as well
as behavioral aspects of learning in an assemblage. The project employs
perspectives from Science &amp; Technology Studies, Computer Science,
Psychology, and Learning Sciences, to create and study assemblages that can
produce gains in routine radiology work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.