* 1928280
* I-Corps: AI-Guided Self Fitting Hearing Aid Platform
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Peggy Nelson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will benefit a
broad range of medical device users, ranging from hearing aids to deep brain
stimulators. The proposed innovation will enable efficient, self-directed tuning
of medical devices using patient preference to find the settings that work best
for each individual patient. The proposed innovation will improve patient
outcomes and satisfaction, and thereby improve efficacy. Additionally, the
innovation will reduce the need for patients to travel to expert clinicians,
thereby improving access and reducing cost. This I-Corps project will first
focus on exploring the application of this technology for creating a self-
fitting hearing aid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the
market need for this self-directed tuning algorithm in medical devices. The core
technology of the proposed innovation is an AI-guided self-fitting algorithm
differentiates itself by efficiently tuning parameterized medical devices based
upon user preference. By asking the patient to compare two settings, the
innovation efficiently learns the patient's underlying preference, and finds
their preferred setting in a small number of comparisons. The technology is
currently being used in two pilot studies, where it is learning stimulation
parameters for spinal cord stimulation and parkinson's
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.