* 1928360
* Collaborative Research: The Burma Arc from Collision Kinematics to Subduction Tectonics as Observed from a Passive seismic experiment (BACKSTOP)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Eric Sandvol, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 326,372.00

When two tectonic plates collide, one may slide underneath the other. This
process, called subduction, often occurs when an oceanic plate meets a
continental plate. The subducting oceanic plate, or subducting slab, sinks into
the Earth's mantle affecting the regional mantle flow. This often generates
mountain building and volcanic activity on land, like in Cascadia and Andean
mountains. The volcanos may form along a curved chain called an arc. Colliding
continental plates also build mountain ranges, like the Alps and the Himalayas.
These processes are responsible for large earthquakes and volcanic eruptions
threatening human lives and activity. Here, the researchers study a plate
boundary coupling subduction with continental collision. Subduction of the
Indian oceanic plate occurs along the Indo-Burma arc. It transitions to
collision along the Himalayan Mountains. The scientists leverage on an
international collaboration between five countries and the U.S. They use
seismology, the study of seismic waves propagating through the Earth, to image
in 3D mantle and crustal structures. Deploying 24 seismic stations in key
locations in Myanmar, they analyze data from these instruments and ~900 other
stations in surrounding India, Bangladesh and China. A primary objective is to
unveil the processes responsible for the growth of the southeastern Tibetan
Plateau. Another one is to quantify the effect of the Indian slab geometry on
the mantle flow. The project improves the understanding of the regional
tectonics. Its outcomes have strong implications for seismic and volcanic hazard
assessment in Myanmar; a region which faces large dramatic events. The project
provides support for two graduate students in Missouri and New Mexico, as well
as the development of scientific collaborations in Myanmar. The three-year award
was co-funded by NSF Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events
(PREEVENTS) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the team investigates the role
of the Indian slab beneath Burma as a "backstop" to the mantle flow around the
eastern Himalayas. They also study how this impacts the growth of the
southeastern Tibetan Plateau. The project consists of two components: (1) data
collection from a temporary seismic array that links large arrays in
India/Bangladesh and China; (2) the synthesis of data from a large number of
existing stations across the region. The data acquisition component consists of
24 temporary broad-band stations deployed in key regions lacking any seismic
instruments. The second component is a collaborative effort with scientists from
Myanmar, India, Singapore, China, and Germany. The combined seismic network of
over 900 stations spans an area of 1800 km by 2000 km. It completely covers the
entire Indo-Burma Arc. The scientists use 3-D seismic tomography and anisotropic
surface wave tomography to image the Indian slab beneath the Indo-Burma
subduction zone. This enables them to compare flow and lithospheric deformation
around eastern Himalayas and in the Indo-Burma back-arc. The project outcomes
constrain the dynamics of the deformation associated with the Indian collision
and subduction, and how the transition from subduction to continental collision
occurs. The gained insight into the regional tectonics, as well as crustal
attenuation, is key to improve seismic and volcanic hazard forecasting in
Myanmar and surrounding regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.