* 1928439
* 1st COFI Workshop on Precision Electroweak
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Mayda Velasco, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Saul Gonzalez
* 06/30/2020
* USD 29,857.00

Particle physics is focused on understanding the most basic building blocks of
the Universe and the rules that bind them. The CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC),
located near Geneva, Switzerland is the world's most powerful particle
accelerator, able to reach the highest particle energies in a laboratory
setting, and a platform for precision studies of the Electroweak interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standard Model of particle physics can be challenged
using precise measurements of electroweak probes based on the large LHC data
samples. This requires a higher level of accuracy and confidence on the inputs
used in the analyses and in the interpretation of the results in addition to
more advanced analysis techniques. This project provides support for a workshop
at the Colegio de Fisica Fundamental e Interdisciplinaria de las Americas (COFI)
in San Juan, Puerto Rico that will focus on bringing together particle
experimentalists and particle theorists to address the challenges of precision
electroweak physics at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) using the current 13 TeV
data sample.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current challenges include reducing
uncertainties on the theoretical corrections (both electroweak and Quantum
Chromo-dynamics) and the inputs needed to describe proton-proton collisions
(parton distribution functions), and subtleties in combining and fitting the
electroweak data. These issues must be understood for many of the crucial
measurements, like the W and Higgs bosons and top quark masses, the weak mixing
angle, di-boson scattering, and rare or forbidden decays of bosons. The workshop
will bring relevant experts together to improve our understanding and perform
the best possible precision electroweak measurements. A focus will be on the
interplay between the various theoretical inputs needed to find deviations, if
any, to the expected electroweak observables and the opportunities to exploit
measurements to calibrate theoretical predictions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discussions between theorists and experimentalists in a
workshop setting will lead to an improved understanding, which in turn will lead
to more precise electroweak measurements, potentially expanding the reach of the
LHC during the next run. This project also aims to support the local scientific
community in Puerto Rico and establish significant under-represented group
participation. Another important goal is to foster the connections between
Puerto Rican researchers abroad and the local community. Several postdocs and
graduate students residing abroad will be participating in the workshop. COFI is
a member of the UNITWIN/UNESCO Chairs Program, which involves 700 institutions
in 116 countries to promote cooperation and networking to enhance institutional
capacities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.