* 1928918
* DNA Repair Mechanisms of Self-Resistance to Genotoxic Secondary Metabolites
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Brandt Eichman, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,319,999.00

DNA Repair Mechanisms of Self-Resistance to Genotoxic Secondary
Metabolites&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacteria, fungi, and plants produce secondary
metabolites that often have antimicrobial properties, making these compounds
important in agricultural, industrial, and medical applications. It therefore is
important to understand how these compounds exert their toxicity and how the
organisms that produce them can avoid self-destruction from toxicity of their
own natural products. This research program will benefit society by providing 1)
intensive quantitative structural biology experience in the laboratory to
trainees at all levels, including postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate, 2)
hands-on summer research opportunities to undergraduates of Fisk University, a
nearby historically black college/university, 3) employment opportunities to
women and underrepresented groups, 4) teaching and mentoring opportunities to
all trainees, 5) exposure of high school students interested in STEM to
biomedical research, and 5) community outreach. The appointment of the Principal
Investigator in the College of Arts and Science and the School of Medicine at
Vanderbilt University provides an exceptional collaborative and inclusive
training environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
duocarmycin/CC-1065/yatakemycin family of highly toxic natural products from
Streptomyces that exhibit potent antimicrobial and antitumor properties by
covalently modifying DNA. Recent work from our lab and others has established
DNA base excision repair (BER) as a self-resistance mechanism for these and
other genotoxic (DNA damaging) natural products. These self-resistance proteins
are encoded within the biosynthetic gene clusters involved in synthesis and
regulation of the natural products. While most work on biosynthetic gene
clusters has focused on the enzymes that synthesize the natural product, the
roles of the non-synthesis proteins, including those involved in self-resistance
to toxicity, have lagged behind. The long-term goals of this project are to
understand the roles of these self-protection mechanisms, which can lead to
discovery of novel biological and biochemical mechanisms of the enzymes
involved, and to increased yield of the natural product from a re-engineered
producing organism. The short-term goal is to understand the specialized BER
mechanism of duocarmycin/CC-1065/yatakemycin resistance in Streptomyces.
Structural biology, biochemistry, genetics, and cell biology will be used to
characterize the basis for toxicity of each compound and the specificity and
mechanisms of the unique DNA glycosylases and apurinic endonucleases that
catalyze the first two steps in BER of this important family of natural
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.