* 1928781
* Identifying and comparing developmental mechanisms conferring an adaptive transition in the evolution of compound eyes
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Andrew Zelhof, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 10/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Nature has presented us with many blueprints for the design and function of
animal eyes. The different designs represent adaptations to the light conditions
that each animal experiences and the behaviors and needs required for survival
of that animal. Understanding these blueprints and the genes required for these
designs will reveal fundamental design principles that can inform the
development of artificial systems for light detection and vision and will offer
information to promote a deeper understanding of our own human eyes. This study
will compare and determine the variations in gene activity that permitted a
simple change in structure from a fused array of light-catching cells or
photoreceptors in the flour beetle eye to an open array of photoreceptor cells
in the eyes of fruit flies and mosquito. This change in eye form drastically
increased the ability to sense light. Research and training will be provided to
students from populations that are underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering and mathematical (STEM) disciplines. The project will also provide
elementary and high school teachers an opportunity to develop laboratory
activities that promote science literacy as well promote scientific literacy in
a children's museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a key question
of evolutionary/developmental biology within the context of compound eyes: how
are conserved cellular processes modified to produce adaptive transitions within
the constraints of constructing a functional tissue? In particular, the
individual rhabdomeres of photoreceptors of apposition compound eyes are either
organized in a "fused" rhabdom (e.g. ommatidia of Tribolium) or "open" rhabdom
(e.g. ommatidia of Drosophila) configuration. In apposition compound eyes, the
presence of an open rhabdom combined with the principle of neural superposition
enabled an increase in light sensitivity without a commensurate loss of visual
acuity, and as such allowed some species to diversify into niches characterized
by low light availability. The objectives of this grant are designed to continue
to identify the different cellular and molecular mechanisms responsible for this
evolutionary change and test whether similar mechanisms are responsible for the
convergent evolution of open rhabdoms. Secondarily, our work in Tribolium will
also expand the genetic amenability of this model organism, and thus permit
greater access and usefulness across research disciplines. Overall, insights
provided by the research will reveal potentially novel as well as shared
cellular mechanisms that lead to adaptive organizations and to the tremendous
morphological diversity observed in visual systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.