* 1928305
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: Argovis 2.0: A Next Generation Platform for co-located Oceanic and Atmospheric Data to Accelerate Climate Science Workflows
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Donata Giglio, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 495,544.00

This project will develop Argovis 2.0, a web application for binding co-located
atmospheric and oceanographic data sets so that they are easily accessible by
scientists and non-scientists. The application will focus on colocation with
observations from Argo floats, which measure ocean properties globally as deep
as 6000 meters below the surface. Examples of data that the application will be
able to help visualize include: hurricane trajectories, winds, and
precipitation; these data will be combined with ocean temperature and salinity
observations from Argo profiles. Users will be able to view and download data
without the need to install anything other than a web browser or to directly
import data into their programming environment of choice. Argovis 2.0 is
intended to be both a scientific research and educational tool. The
investigators envision it being used for exhibits and for classroom learning
activities in oceanic and atmospheric sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop Argovis 2.0, a web application for collocating atmospheric
and oceanic data with Argo profile data. The application will be able to
collocate two or more observational datasets in latitude, longitude, depth, and
time. Users will be able to view and download data using a web browser or by
directly importing data into their programming environment of choice such as
Matlab proprietary programming language or open source such as Python or R.
Argovis 2.0 builds on Argovis 1.0, using a standard architecture comprising of a
front-end, back-end, and database. The MongoDB database is used to store gridded
and non-gridded data such as the point based and finely gridded datasets. The
database outputs in JSON format and is accessed by an Express.js back end
framework. The backend sends requests and responds by sending either HTML or
JSON data to the user. Finally, Angular is the web application framework for the
front end. User generated charts and maps are built using tiled mapping and
charting libraries Leaflet and Plotly. The project will serve a broad community
of scientists and professors who use atmospheric and oceanic science in their
research and teaching, as well as the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.