* 1928890
* I-Corps: Electric Reservoir Stimulation
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a novel,
inexpensive, and environmentally friendly solution for production improvement in
oil, gas, geothermal, and groundwater reservoirs. Fracking/stimulation is a
required step after drilling to increase permeability and get access to the
trapped geofluid in sedimentary and rock formations. This method provides an
alternative or complimentary reservoir permeability enhancement solution to
current high-pressure water/acid injection-based method such as hydraulic or
acid fracking. This proposed innovation will allow for an economical
permeability increase without water contamination and induced seismic
activities. Furthermore, this method will alleviate the demand in water stressed
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will identify the commercial
potential for developing a novel Electric Reservoir Stimulation (ERS) method
that increases reservoir permeability for petroleum and geothermal applications,
without requiring pumping material into the subsurface. This method will consist
of controlled high voltage electrical pulses applied in two electrodes placed at
the depth of interest between wells. In this method, the conductivity of the
geofluid along with the pulse discharge parameters (amplitude, width,
frequency), and treatment time will determine the effect on the permeability of
the reservoir rock. Fluid mobility is increased due to viscosity reduction and
reservoir permeability is increased in the direction of interest from the
vibrational removal of particles within pores. We're performing experimental
analysis in our lab on different core samples to see the effects of the proposed
electric treatment. Additionally, numerical simulations are used to predict the
effect of proposed method and power requirements in reservoir
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.