* 1928876
* GOALI: Modeling of Next Generation Metal-Free Frictionless Materials for the Prevention of Thermal-Mechanical Instabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Yun-Bo Yi, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 06/30/2023
* USD 488,730.00

Copper and other heavy metals are used to generate friction in vehicle brake and
clutch systems to slow down wheels or transmit torques. Frictional material
formulations are complex material systems that also include various ingredients
for wear resistance, thermal stability, and mechanical strength. Existing laws
and regulations require phase out of copper and other heavy metals in brake pads
to reduce contact of metal particulates from brake wear with storm water and
discharge into nearby waterways, to limit adverse effects on aquatic life.
Substitutions for metals have been suggested to include graphite, carbon fibers,
nanotubes, and ceramics; however, their introduction can lead to operational
safety issues, primarily through loss of friction due to thermal-mechanical
instabilities. This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Program award will support an investigation of these instabilities in
brake pad component materials. The project will deliver an engineering analysis
tool facilitating manufacturers a cost-effective way to meet laws or ideally
exceed future regulations. The development of non-toxic frictional material
alternatives will allow U.S. manufacturers to gain global market share by
offering safe and high-performance brake and clutch products. Other industries
using friction materials include aerospace, oil and gas, mining, and defense. In
addition, this project will support the development of graduate and
undergraduate courses and offer research and internship opportunities for
historically underrepresented undergraduate and high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, computational models accounting for
fundamental material characteristics and processing conditions will predict the
performance of engineered frictional materials related to thermal-mechanical
instabilities (TMI). The TMI phenomenon is a structural instability induced by
the interaction between thermal expansion, dynamics, and mechanical stresses
under high-speed contact. The onset of TMI can lead to cracks, material damage,
vibration, noise, and mechanical failure; therefore, an investigation of TMI in
the next generation of metal-free frictional materials systems is imperative.
This work will improve fundamental understanding of compression and packing
effects on the anisotropic properties of frictional materials. In this project's
approach, a multiscale model of heterogeneous materials will incorporate the
effects of composition and morphology of particulate or fibrous ingredients on
the effective mechanical properties. The predicted properties will evaluate
susceptibility of specific material compositions to TMI. Reduced-order models
will be developed to combine the effects of elasticity, dynamics, contact
mechanics, and thermal buckling. The research will be primarily computational,
where the industry collaborators will validate key results through materials
characterization and experimental measurements of critical braking speed and
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.