* 1928543
* Increasing Student Success in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Agda Cordero, Universidad del Sagrado Corazon, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,669,578.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project titled "Increasing Student
Success in STEM" by Universidad del Sagrado Corazon, Inc. (Sagrado) aims to
increase the number and percentage of students at Sagrado who select and remain
in STEM majors, complete STEM degrees, and secure STEM employment after
graduation. In Puerto Rico the shortage of STEM workers is severe after a decade
of serious economic decline and recent devastating hurricanes. Sagrado seeks to
help first- and second-year students in STEM majors overcome obstacles in
gateway math courses, which are nationally acknowledged barriers to STEM
success. All Sagrado students (100%) are Hispanic. "Increasing Student Success
in STEM" will focus on peer tutoring and mentoring, research and internships,
career counseling, industry mentoring, and faculty development, leading to key
gateway math course revisions. These improvements aim to increase within-term
retention, fall-to-fall retention, six-year graduation, and placement into STEM
employment post-graduation. This project will ultimately contribute to
increasing locally grown STEM talent in Puerto Rico as a key mechanism to
rebuilding the economy. It will also increase Sagrado's capacity to develop and
maintain partnerships with key local industries, which will lead to new research
and internship experiences for our students. These partnerships will have a
lasting impact as the university sustains this model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to examining how the activities impact the outcomes, this project will
generate new knowledge by examining the effect of: (1) peer mentoring on
retention in STEM majors; (2) student participation in a research or internship
experience early in their undergraduate studies on retention in STEM majors and
STEM employment after graduation; (3) industry mentoring and career counseling
on retention in STEM majors and STEM employment; and (4) faculty training and
curricular revisions and development on retention in STEM majors and STEM
employment. Assessment mechanisms will include feedback from student surveys and
interviews, and evaluations from research professors and selected partner
companies. These will help assess students' confidence and satisfaction in their
chosen field, and the effect on students' persistence in the major. Project
staff will disseminate the results locally through campus-wide and faculty
meetings, and more generally through conference presentations and publications
in peer-reviewed journals. Faculty development and student research mentoring
activities will include adjunct faculty, which will generate knowledge on how
these experiences for part-time (non-tenure stream) STEM instructors improve
teaching and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.