* 1928982
* I-Corps: Inscriptures Protocol App Technology
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Wise Young, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project resides in its
novel approach to transferring and capturing knowledge and organizing it for
application. The art of learning is the keystone to society's arch of success.
From the most complex chemical reaction to running a government every aspect of
humanity has been based on the sharing and passing of knowledge - always
refining it along the way. The proposed mobile software product, a
multidimensional method acquirer and perfector, seeks to standardize all regions
and echelons of understanding, bridging the gaps between the professional,
academic, public, and even private sectors, connections which will blaze new
pathways in scientific novelty and commercial collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on addressing the pains and
gains of learning in stressful and demanding research environments. The Method
Catcher is a smartphone software designed to intake any set of instructions and
standardize it into a dynamic and customized .inscript file type. The software
adapts a series of user recorded media into editable, scannable, publishable,
and pedagogical stepwise navigations of time, environment, material, and reason
to accomplish any task: be it sandwich-making or neurosurgery. Research
methodology is usually transferred via written methods sections between studies,
and hierarchical pedagogy within studies. The proposed technology includes
method walkthroughs: seamlessly instantiating adaptable stepwise protocol
capture by transforming photographic sequences of - say - surgical demos into
sharable, completely replicable protocols - exportable to bar code
stickers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.