* 1928760
* I-Corps: Active and Durable Alkaline Water Electrolyzer for Cost-effective and Renewable Hydrogen Production
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Zhenmeng Peng, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is it provides
an economical and environmentally friendly way for hydrogen production. This
emission-free alkaline water electrolysis technology reduces the reliance on
fossil fuels and provides a solution to storing renewable energy. It has a good
potential to account for more than 15% of hydrogen production that is currently
dominated by steam reforming of natural gas. It could produce hydrogen on-
demand, on site without the cost of shipping and storage and offer high-purity
hydrogen for fuel cells vehicles and other important applications. Therefore, it
has the potential to take over the market of electrolyzers and promote the
hydrogen economy. Due to the nature of this innovative material, the new robust
electrode with outstanding activity and stability would reduce the cost of
alkaline electrolysis significantly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
aims to promote alkaline electrolysis with high-performance porous amorphous
metal phosphide electrodes for water oxidation, the key half-cell reaction in
electrolytic hydrogen production. The electrode exhibits large surface area,
excellent conductivity, outstanding corrosion resistance and good mechanical
properties. More importantly, the electrode shows drastically higher activity in
water oxidation than state-of-art powder electrode, with less than 200 mV
overpotential being needed to achieve a 10 mA/cm2 reaction activity. Besides,
the electrode was demonstrated to have remarkable durability with minimal
activity decay under long-term operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.