* 1928936
* Management and Operations of the Green Bank Observatory
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* James Jackson, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Harshal Gupta
* 09/30/2024
* USD 47,868,824.00

Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI) will manage the Green Bank Observatory (GBO)
from October 1, 2019 to September 30, 2024. The GBO enables leading edge
research at radio wavelengths by offering access to telescopes, facilities, and
advanced instrumentation to the global scientific and research community. GBO
also provides research and educational opportunities through a variety of radio
telescopes and facilities on site. AUI will play a crucial role in ensuring that
GBO maintains its strategic relevance as a vital asset to the U.S. scientific
community while effectively managing partnerships that support an increasing
share of observatory operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by the priorities
of the U.S. research community and aided by a number of new instruments and
infrastructure upgrades, GBO will make major advances across many fields of
astronomy and physics. The major research instrument at GBO is the 100-meter
diameter Green Bank Telescope (GBT)---the world's largest fully steerable
single-dish radio telescope. The GBT's large sky coverage, very high
sensitivity, and extensive suite of instruments make it a powerful and versatile
telescope which enables advances in virtually all areas of modern astrophysics,
including: Solar System and planetary astronomy; star formation and evolution;
interstellar physics and chemistry; pulsar studies of long-wavelength
gravitational waves; physics of black holes and neutron stars; and galaxy
formation and evolution. The GBT offers excellent complementarity and synergy
with interferometric arrays, such as the Very Large Array, the Very Long
Baseline Array, and the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array by
providing the larger context for follow-up studies requiring the high angular
resolution of these facilities. It also plays a critical supporting role as a
highly sensitive element of very long baseline interferometry, as well as a
bistatic radar receiver for rapid and sensitive imaging of near-Earth objects
and asteroids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GBO is used by hundreds of scientists each
year, and it is available to all scientists based on the intellectual merit of
the proposed studies, independent of institutional or national affiliation. GBO
will enable and maintain easy access to its telescopes and their data by the
entire astronomical community. Science ready data products will be made
available in archives accessible to both the broad research community and the
public. Astronomy is an important element in meeting national goals related to
diversity, science and technology education, and increased U.S. competitiveness.
GBO conducts an exemplary program of education and public outreach. The Green
Bank Science Center attracts nearly 50,000 visitors each year, and the various
telescopes on site provide invaluable training opportunities for students, as
well as science enrichment for a very wide demographic. The program effectively
leverages GBO resources to enhance science literacy in the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.