* 1928452
* Building Capacity: Pathway to Success for Students and Faculty in Computing
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Neva Lozada, Kean University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,700,277.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 projects aims to increase the retention
and completion rates of students majoring in computer science (CS) and
information technology (IT). This project at Kean University will develop a
model for CS and IT education by providing curriculum support for critical early
transition points in the majors, along with innovative faculty development to
improve undergraduate CS and IT teaching and learning success and improve degree
completion rates. Student interventions, including cohort community development,
supplemental instruction and undergraduate research groups, will be uniquely
coupled with faculty training in growth mindset, hypothesized as culminating in
collective impact for increased student retention, superior career preparation,
and persistence to graduation. Outcomes from this project will include
contributions to educational pedagogy in computer science, faculty development
methods, and identification of early intervention techniques for improving
student academic success, leading to a larger, more diverse community of
graduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to prepare students from
diverse populations to enter the STEM workforce or graduate school as highly
trained individuals, with training experiences in teamwork and research. The
project will assess the impact of reinforcement for students, including those
who have met the minimum expectation for progression in the major and those who
may have a higher probability of not thriving in the major. To address
consistencies in student experiences and course content, the project will revise
the first three courses in the computer science sequence. Materials from the
Computing Alliance for Hispanic-Serving Institutions (CAHSI, an NSF INCLUDES
Alliance) and Google on thinking, problem solving, and algorithmic thinking will
be integrated into the revised computer science courses. The project will also
develop engagement materials, provide supplemental instruction, advisement and
career building activities to aid students as they progress through critical
transitions in the computer science curriculum. For incoming first-year
students, the project will develop an orientation to provide CS and IT majors
familiarity with the curriculum and the faculty. The project will investigate
the impact of the project activities on the retention in the CS and IT majors,
as well as student academic performance. Research methods will employ
qualitative and quantitative data collection from students and faculty,
including climate data surveys. Collected data will be analyzed to determine how
participation in cohort communities, pre-professional career activities, and
research groups changes students' computing identity perceptions, interest,
persistence and growth in the discipline. The results from this project seek to
provide evidence-based activities that other institutions may adopt on effective
strategies on how to effectively enhance student success in the CS and IT
majors, and in particular, for underrepresented students. The project will
disseminate its findings through academic venues including the CAHSI and the NSF
INCLUDES National Network. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HIS program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.