* 1928103
* I-Corps: pH-sensitive Prodrug for Targeted Cancer Chemotherapy
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2019
* Ming An, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to increase
the clinical utilization of cancer chemotherapy drugs by reducing toxic side
effects and improving the therapeutic index. The key technology is based on the
controlled release of chemo-drugs in response to tumor acidosis. The initial
product is an acid-sensitive prodrug of Doxorubicin (Dox). Dox is a prominent
chemo-drug commonly used in the treatment of breast, bladder, and other cancers
(including the childhood cancers Wilms tumor and neuroblastoma). The current
global annual market for Dox is ~$800M (~$400M in the US). Treatments of solid
tumors that are likely to be acidic account for ~60-70% of Dox applications in
the clinic. The Dox global market is projected to reach $1.38B by 2024. This pH-
sensitive prodrug of Dox may be considered an improved version of Dox for
treating acidic solid tumors. Also, this technology could be expanded to other
chemo-drugs outside of the anthracycline class. Furthermore, acidic
microenvironments are found not only in cancerous tumors, but also in other
disease states, such as sites of inflammation and the ischemic myocardium during
heart attacks, which represent other potential targets of the pH-sensitive
prodrug technology in the future.

This I-Corps project aims to develop a technology for improving the safety
profile of chemo-drugs by suppressing drug release at healthy tissues, while
preferentially releasing drugs at tumor sites. The targeted drug release would
be triggered by tumor acidosis. Due to rapid growth, many cancerous tumors have
extracellular pH (pHe) in the range of 6.5-6.9, compared with pHe of 7.2-7.4 in
healthy tissues. Tumor acidosis can be considered as a universal biomarker of
the cancer microenvironment and correlates with poor prognosis (i.e., more
acidic tumors are usually found in more aggressive cancers). To turn tumor
acidosis against cancer, this team developed ultra-acid-sensitive, small
molecule prodrugs to selectively release Dox in response to acidic tumor pHe.
The critical challenge of developing an ultra-sensitive pH biosensor that can
distinguish between pHe 7.4 and 6.7 has been met from the basic science side by
using an acid-sensitive linker. Preliminary data indicate that these prodrugs
can release ~ 4-fold more Dox at pH 6.7 vs. 7.4 in cell culture settings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.