* 1928850
* Dynamics of Geysers in Stormsewer Systems and Novel Retrofitting Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Cheng-Xian Lin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2023
* USD 329,733.00

Combined sewer overflows (CSOs) are the release of raw sewage and stormwater
into receiving waterways when the system becomes filled. CSOs constitute a major
source of water pollution for 860 municipalities across the United States.
Combined sewer systems consist of a network of deep tunnels to move both
stormwater and sewage. These systems can be filled rapidly with stormwater
during rainfall events, resulting in the entrapment of large amounts of air.
When the trapped air is released through vertical drop shafts, geyser eruptions
are often produced. These geysers can exceed 30 meters in height and can cause
massive flooding events that lead to the pollution of streams, rivers, and
lakes. Many combined sewer systems are operated below design capacity to prevent
geyser formation during rain events, but this increases the likelihood of CSOs.
This research project will develop a mechanistic understanding of geyser
formation that can be used to design retrofitting methods for drop shafts that
allow the smooth release of air pockets without producing geysers. When geysers
are no longer a concern, the full capacity of storm sewer systems can be
utilized during rain events and hence CSO discharges will be reduced
significantly. An outreach program will educate and train researchers, middle-
school and college students from underrepresented groups, sewer system
operators, and other stakeholders on the control of geysers and the impact of
CSOs on water quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the research project is
to develop a fundamental understanding of the two-phase flow physics that
triggers geysering in storm sewer systems. The research will utilize integrated
high-speed optical imaging, digital particle image velocimetry, and 3-D
computational fluid dynamics to model and confirm results from the laboratory-
scale reproduction of geysers. Studies will be performed to understand the
relationship between geyser eruption, system geometry, and initial flow
conditions. A reduced order geyser model will be developed from these
relationships and implemented in an open-source software format for modeling
flow dynamics in storm sewer systems. Retrofitting strategies to permit the
smooth release of air pockets will be preliminarily tested and validated using a
3-D model, and the most promising methods will be tested experimentally and
confirmed numerically. The outcomes of this research will be used by scientists,
hydraulic engineers, and other practitioners to inform future design and
retrofitting strategies to prevent geyser formation in storm sewer systems.
Students, regulators, and other stakeholders will learn from the software
packages and educational outreach how to prevent geyser formation and reduce
CSOs and their associated impacts on the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.