* 1928400
* Enhancing Introductory Biology with the Arizona Insect DNA Barcoding Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Katcher, Pima County Community College District- NORTHWEST CAMPUS
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,323.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 2 project aims to improve undergraduate
biology education. It will do so by implementing a place-based Course-Based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) in introductory biology at a community
college, and studying the CURE's impact on students. The CURE will be developed
through a collaboration between Pima Community College and the University of
Arizona, both located in Tucson, Arizona. Students participating in the CURE
will generate, analyze, and publish data that will be new to science. The
opportunity to contribute to scientific knowledge is expected to increase
students' positive feelings toward science, which may in turn increase their
persistence and graduation in STEM fields. This project will provide new
evidence about the value of CUREs by determining whether community college
students participating in a CURE are more likely to continue studying science
and to graduate with a STEM degree. A significant percentage of college students
who take their first biology course at a community college are from
underrepresented groups. Thus, the project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM education and the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students in introductory biology courses at Pima
Community College will participate in the Arizona Insect DNA Barcoding CURE.
Students will obtain, analyze, and publish DNA sequences from insects curated in
the University of Arizona Insect Collection. Through this work, students will
contribute to research at the University of Arizona and to the scientific
community at large. Research has shown that increases in students' project
ownership, self-efficacy, science identity, and tolerance to obstacles are
associated with increases in their persistence and graduation in STEM fields. It
is expected that students who participate in the CURE will demonstrate greater
increases in these characteristics than those who do not participate. The
project will also examine whether multiple experiences in the same CURE are
associated with greater increases than a single experience. This project aims to
broaden research on STEM student success by examining the relationship between
CURE participation and the successful transfer of community college students to
four-year institutions and their subsequent graduation in STEM. Thus, the
project may provide a collaborative model for how two-year and four-year
institutions can partner to improve transfer success and increase STEM
graduation rates. It is also expected to serve as a model for actively engaging
undergraduate biology students with natural history museum collections in ways
that benefit both student performance and the collections. Results from this
project will be presented at national science education conferences and
submitted for publication in peer-reviewed STEM and STEM education journals. The
HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at
HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on
how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.