* 1928616
* FW-HTF-P: Impact of AI Robotics on Labor (AIRL)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Richard Freeman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 149,996.00

This award will fund efforts by the Harvard AI Robotics Labor (AIRL) project.
The team will research advances in artificial intelligence and robotics that are
likely to impact the workplace of the future and thus the employment and wages
of American workers. It will assess the extent to which recent technological
advances in robots and artificial intelligence are affecting current workers and
the specific tasks they perform on the job. Since AI and robots are more cost
effective substitutes for workers in some activities compared to others, the
investigators will focus on specific work tasks in carefully defined
occupational categories. The goal is to determine what tasks will be key to
future jobs and what skills humans will need to succeed in those tasks. The
findings of the project should help school and career counselors inform students
and job seekers about the prospects in various jobs and to provide information
to individuals, firms, and policymakers who seek to advance the well-being of
American workers in the global economy.

The project brings together a unique team of experts to assess the future of
work. The project includes efforts to bring together the engineering and
computer science experts who develop new technologies with the economics,
sociology, psychology and business experts who study how firms implement
technologies and change work tasks when technology changes. Past technologies
have invariably created new jobs as well as altered older jobs, so the
investigators will study how leading edge firms that have invested in new robots
or in the latest work-related algorithms are reorganizing their work tasks among
occupations, and the pay and benefits associated with different types of work.
It will determine the skills and knowledge that workers will likely need in the
new jobs as well as to continue working in existing occupations. Finally, since
new technologies do not come out of the blue but are developed by engineers and
computer scientists, and are influenced by business and government users of the
technologies, the investigators will analyze the factors behind the choices of
which tasks to digitalize or to develop robots to undertake, and the potential
for moving those choices in worker-friendly directions. The ultimate goal of
this project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research
infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying
future technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research proposal.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.