* 1928252
* Understanding the Contribution of Methanesulfonic Acid to New Particle Formation and Growth in the Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Barbara Finlayson-Pitts, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2024
* USD 612,477.00

This project is focused on investigating a specific pathway for the formation of
new particles in the atmosphere. This pathway involves reactions of
methanesulfonic acid (MSA), a compound that is widespread throughout the lower
troposphere and one that may be more significant in new particle formation than
previously known. Improvements in predicting new particle formation will enhance
our ability to better understand a number of the effects of atmospheric
pollution central to human health and welfare and provide ways to help mitigate
these impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives of this project are to:
(1) quantitatively investigate possible synergies between mixtures of
multifunctional amines and mixtures of selected amines and NH3 on new particle
formation (NPF) and growth from MSA reactions; (2) investigate the role of low
volatility highly oxidized organics produced from the oxidation of biogenic
volatile organic compounds on these systems; (3) probe interactions between
H2SO4 and MSA for NPF; and (4) translate the mechanistic understanding into
atmospheric models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in the
parameterization of the rate of NPF as a function of precursor concentrations.
The results will be incorporated into the Community Multiscale Air Quality
(CMAQ) air quality model to better understand the importance of MSA in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.