* 1928262
* Ultra-fast transient cell adhesion and its application for high-throughput microfluidic cell sorting
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 522,949.00

Biological cells use various adhesion molecules on their surfaces to interact
with each other and their environment. The type, amount, and combination of
these adhesion molecules, which carry important information about specific cell
conditions, can be used to characterize cells and diagnose disease. Sorting and
separating cells based on their expressions of adhesion molecules are critical
steps in many biomedical assays. Current cell sorting approaches use tags that
bind to cells expressing specific adhesion molecules. These attached tags enable
high purity sorting, but the tags can alter cell state and can lead to unwanted
cell activation preventing further use of the labeled cells. This project will
develop a microfluidic technology that enables rapid and efficient sorting of
biological cells based on the expression of adhesion molecules without the use
of any tags or labels. The technology utilizes a microfluidic channel with
periodic constrictions coated with molecules that briefly interact adhesion
molecules on the cells' surfaces. The interaction causes a change in the
trajectories of the cells of interest without inducing unwanted activation. The
project will investigate the mechanics of cell interactions within the
microchannel and will probe the use of this microfluidic separation technique to
isolate lymphocytes with highly specific adhesion molecules that can be used in
cancer therapies. The research will involve undergraduate and graduate students,
and the team will conduct several outreach activities to students at all levels,
including developing projects for science and engineering
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a microfluidic
approach for high-throughput, label-free cell sorting and separation based on
the affinity of molecular surface markers for target ligands. Identifying and
isolating cells that express desired molecular surface markers are required in a
variety of applications in the biological sciences, cell therapy, and medical
diagnostics. The project will integrate microfluidic experiments and computer
simulations to examine transient adhesion of biological cells at ultrafast time
scales that have not yet been explored. Cells will be propelled through a
microfluidic channel decorated with diagonal ridges that slightly compress the
cells to promote binding between adhesion molecules and ligands covering the
microchannel surfaces. The binding events alter cell trajectories in the
microchannel characterizing cell adhesion. The short contact time between cells
and microchannel surfaces will prevent unwanted cell activation. The project
will systematically probe effects of confinement on transient cell adhesion for
a wide range of time scales. Furthermore, the project will employ the
microfluidic cell sorting technique to examine T cell selectivity to target
antigens, which is important in clinical applications, without activating the
cells. Positive and negative selection to T cell neoantigens will be
investigated to identify disease-selective T cells. The results of this research
project, a new microfluidic method for high-throughput label-free cell
separation, will have broad implications in medical diagnostics, therapeutics,
cell engineering, and cell manufacturing. Furthermore, the microfluidic method
can enable direct measurements of transient interactions between important
physiological ligands and adhesive cell molecules that will benefit the
development of novel diagnostic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.