* 1928375
* MSA:  Macrosystems Biology and Early NEON Science Investigator Meeting; May 15-17, 2019; Boulder, CO
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Jason McLachlan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2022
* USD 145,121.00

The biosphere has changed more in the past 50 years than during any time in
human history. Environmental change, land use change, and the introduction of
invasive species that collectively affect living systems by altering the
fundamental relationships between life and the non-living environment that
sustains it. Many of the changes challenge our understanding of how the
biosphere works - how the ecological systems on which we depend will respond to
changes in environment, land use, biodiversity, and a host of related
environmental factors. Research in Macrosystems Biology is developing basic
scientific knowledge needed to understand the biosphere at regional to
continental and annual to decadal scales, to quantify the strong and weak forces
regulating the biosphere, and to predict the consequences of environmental and
land use change and invasive species on living systems is difficult to
extrapolate from studies conducted at local or global scales. Macrosystems
ecology seeks to understand ecological processes and interactions at the
broadest scales and has potential to help solve globally important social and
ecological challenges. Critical advances in this field are shared through
publications, presentations, and synthesis activities such as workshops and
symposia. This meeting will broaden impacts through professional development and
engagement of a diverse pool of scientists, collaboration and synthesis of
active researchers, and by generating new ideas and synthetic research products.
A substantial proportion of funding for this meeting is specifically allocated
to support early career scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference award
will support a meeting of Macrosystems Biology and NEON-Enabled Science
investigators, postdoctoral scientists, and graduate students. Substantial
investments in Macrosystems Biology research and education are generating new
insights into pattern and process at Macro-scales. The meeting will advance
Macrosystems Biology and NEON-Enabled Science by: 1) Fostering collaboration and
synthesis among scientists and graduate students across funded Macrosystems
Biology projects; 2) Facilitating networking and professional development of
attendees, especially early career scientists; 3) Identifying relationships and
synergies among MSB and the NSF-funded National Ecological Observatory Network
and the National Center for Atmospheric Research; and 4) Developing a white
paper that outlines the major challenges and opportunities for NEON-enabled
science in the near future. Discussion of common and contrasting research themes
will yield insights to generate new Macrosystems Biology theory and best-
practices for critical advancements in the emerging discipline of Macrosystems
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.