* 1928538
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Atomic Origin and Mechanism of Relaxation in Silicate Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Mathieu Bauchy, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 290,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: A glass is continually relaxing toward more stable
states, which can result in undesirable aging effects in the high-tech glasses
used as protective cover screens, flat panel display substrates, or the glass
optical fibers that form the backbone of the Internet. Despite recent progress
in describing glass relaxation at the macroscale, the atomic scale nature of
glass relaxation remains poorly understood. To address this gap in knowledge,
this project aims to elucidate the atomic origin and mechanisms of glass
relaxation. Such fundamental insights would facilitate the rational, non-
empirical design of novel glasses with improved stability against aging effects.
By seamlessly integrating experiments, simulations, and theory, this
collaborative project aims to train students to be well-versed in both
experimental and modeling approaches relevant to materials science and
engineering, with particular focus on industrial glasses. This project places a
special focus on attracting, engaging, developing, and retaining female students
in engineering careers to rectify the gender imbalance. In addition, this
project seeks to expose students from local middle and high school in rural
areas in Pennsylvania to the crucial role of materials in our
society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The objective of this research
is to investigate the nature of glass relaxation at the atomic scale. This
project aims to: (i) explore the linkages between distinct modes of relaxation
under different regimes of temperature, (ii) decode the role of the atomic
topology in controlling the propensity for relaxation, and (iii) reveal the
structural mechanisms of glass relaxation. This research relies on a strategic
combination of carefully-controlled experiments and atomistic simulations
-wherein experimental and simulation activities mutually inform and feed into
each other. This project is timely as it relies on a new accelerated simulation
technique to access long-term relaxation effects through modeling, as well as
powerful experimental techniques (e.g., X-ray photon correlation spectroscopy
and vertical scanning interferometry) to investigate the nature of glass
relaxation at low-temperature and train students in cutting-edge materials
characterization and modeling research techniques. The synergy between
experimental and computational approaches is key to assess the existence of
relaxation deep within the glassy state, thereby questioning the conception of
the very nature of the glassy state. This project also interrogates the concept
of "intermediate phase" in silicate glasses, wherein relaxation is expected to
be minimized. Overall, this project addresses broad, fundamental, yet unanswered
questions in glass science, with important implications both at the fundamental
and practical levels, as relaxation is one of the most critical problems at the
intersection between glass physics and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.