* 1928883
* Estimating the Earth's Dayside Exospheric Neutral Density Using XMM-Newton Soft X-ray Data
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Hui Zhang, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 486,287.00

The very outer edge of the Earth's atmosphere is the exosphere. This study uses
X-ray observations from an astrophysics satellite to probe the exosphere and
understand how it is impacted by solar activity. The work is relevant to
understanding space weather and how it affects satellites, high frequency
communications, GPS, and other technological systems relevant to commercial
interests and national security - a national priority set out in the National
Space Weather Action Plan. The project will support an early-career tenure-track
faculty member from an underrepresented group at a minority-serving institution
and a graduate student's Ph.D. thesis work. This project is jointly funded by
the Magnetospheric Physics program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate solar activity impact on the dayside exospheric density by applying
the methodology of Connor &amp; Carter [2019] to the larger XMM-Newton solar
wind charge exchange (SWCX) dataset. The project will answer the following three
questions: 1) What is an exospheric neutral density at the nominal 10 RE
subsolar location, 2) How does the density change during solar minimum, and 3)
How does the density change during solar maximum? First, the XMM-Newton dataset
will be analyzed to make a list of the strong SWCX events during relatively
constant solar wind conditions. Only the stable solar wind conditions will be
considered to avoid the complexity of magnetosheath modeling. Then, the PI will
select at least 10 strong SWCX events, 5 for solar minimum and 5 for solar
maximum, and simulate those events using a global MHD model. They will compare
the modeled magnetosheath parameters with contemporary in-situ observations of
the heliospheric spacecraft missions such as Cluster, THEMIS, and MMS. After the
validation test, they will calculate the magnetosheath contributions from the
MHD model and subtract their effect from the SWCX observations. Finally, the
exospheric densities will be calculated at 10 RE subsolar location and
investigate the density variation between solar minimum and solar
maximum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.