* 1928645
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-RM: Intelligent Facilitation for Teams of the Future via Longitudinal Sensing in Context
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Aaron Striegel, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 422,771.00

In the information workplace of the future, teamwork will become increasingly
critical and teamwork itself will be redefined. Teams will need to develop
better skills in handling complex problems as routine work will be increasingly
delegated to artificial intelligence (AI) technologies such as personal digital
assistants. Teams will need to rapidly adapt to fluid membership and changing
work structures with the growing gig economy, and as new workers enter the
workforce bringing new cultural practices. Individuals will need to be able to
perform effectively in heterogeneous teams as the workforce becomes more diverse
and as globalization increases. The future of teamwork will require integration
of technological advances to facilitate team performance, yet we are largely
relying on tools and techniques from the 20th century for team facilitation.
This project will develop and validate an intelligent (AI-based) team
facilitator for information work utilizing sensing and dynamic intervention to
promote better team coordination, higher performance, and ultimately lower
worker burnout. The intelligent team facilitator will serve as a blueprint for a
broad set of domains beyond information work, including medical care teams,
control room settings, crisis management, and manufacturing, where team skills
will be needed for interacting with AI, robots, and new technologies. The
facilitator can also be used for training underrepresented groups to succeed in
the workforce, a national priority. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project
utilizes sensor technologies for tracking team behavior in information
workplaces in addition to traditional methods of studying teams using
observations and self- reports. Longitudinal precision tracking of teams in situ
with a suite of sensors can provide objective measures, can scale, and will
enable a deep understanding of how teams respond to changing contexts, how teams
form and integrate new members, and how they develop rhythms of teamwork. This
project examines team diversity broadly, considering demographics, attitudes,
circadian rhythms and personal responsibilities. The first aim of this project
is to develop models of critical team states and processes (e.g., team cohesion,
team coordination, team mood/affect), based on unobtrusive, continual,
longitudinal sensing of physiology, behavior, and communication in a real-world
context along with measures of individual differences to understand factors that
lead to team effectiveness. This project will use risk mitigation strategies to
safeguard privacy and security of data. The second aim of this project is to use
those insights to develop an intelligent (AI-based) team facilitator.
Performance of teams who use the intelligent team facilitator will be
experimentally compared against matched controls in a longitudinal in situ
study. The results will contribute to a new understanding on how 21st century
teams can manage complexity, how team heterogeneity can lead to team
effectiveness, and will identify successful strategies for team
adaptability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.