* 1928406
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Data Capabilities--Jupyter Meets the Earth: Enabling Discovery in Geoscience through Interactive Computing at Scale
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Laurel Larsen, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,712,604.00

Earth science research is being reshaped by the availability of increasing
amounts and variety of data, combined with ever more refined and computationally
demanding models. This transition to a data-rich world offers immense
opportunities for transformative scientific discoveries, but also presents new
challenges to researchers: exploring these vast stores of data and combining
them with complex models to make discoveries and novel predictions is
technically challenging, requiring data management and computational expertise
distinct from that of many Earth scientists. This project will develop novel
tools to help Earth scientists seamlessly access and interact with extremely
large data sets and powerful computational resources, in an environment that
supports the lifecycle of research ideas from the scientist to the public.
Specifically, this new effort builds upon the foundations of Project Jupyter,
which provides tools for interactive computing, and partners with the Pangeo
project that develops open tools and fosters a community of Big Data
geoscientists. In this project, researchers will build new tools for interactive
access to and exploration of data and models, driven by three specific problems
in geoscience: the analysis of global climate models, the hydrology of
watersheds, and the modeling of the subsurface of the Earth based on
measurements of electric and magnetic fields. The project will advance
technologies that empower multiple communities of researchers, both in Earth
science and beyond. Tools from Project Jupyter are being used worldwide in
research, education, industry, government, and media, including in the
groundbreaking observation of gravitational waves by the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory collaboration and the first direct image of a
black hole made by the Event Horizon Telescope. The outcomes of the project will
be freely available to the public as Open Source software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use geoscience use-cases in hydrology,
climate science, and geophysics to drive the advancement of computational
technologies for interactive geoscience research involving very large datasets
and computationally complex models. These use-cases require High Performance
Computing facilities or distributed computing in the cloud, and highlight the
need for capabilities to: (1) handle big data such as the World Climate Research
Program's Coupled Model Intercomparison Project's 6th release, expected to
exceed 18 petabytes in size, (2) integrate data over variable spatial and
temporal scales, including streamflow forecasts with sensor-based observations
of discharge and hydrometeorological forcing factors, such as precipitation,
temperature, relative humidity, and snow-water equivalent, (3) perform large-
scale, parallelized computations that combine the solution of partial
differential equations with numerical optimization to construct 3D models of the
subsurface in a geophysical inversion of electromagnetic data. The project team
is an interdisciplinary collaboration that brings together software developers,
geoscientists, and statisticians to advance the state of data science in the
geosciences. The researchers will follow a user-centered design approach that
Project Jupyter has successfully applied for over 15 years, using concrete use-
cases to constrain and prioritize software development and ensure that all
resulting features have direct scientific relevance. The key software goals of
the project are to: (a) improve access to data sources and data catalogs by
exposing them to users in the same Jupyter interface where they conduct their
computational work, (b) empower researchers to seamlessly utilize and combine
cloud and high performance computing resources, (c) accelerate research by
simplifying the process for scientists to create and deploy custom, interactive
applications for their research questions, and (d) facilitate dissemination of
research findings to decision-makers, stakeholders, and the general public. To
achieve these, the project will advance three key Jupyter technologies:
JupyterLab, Jupyter Widgets and JupyterHub. JupyterLab is an extensible
interface that provides access to data, computation, and visualization. Jupyter
Widgets provide easy-to-use tools for researchers to create rich graphical user
interfaces for data analysis. JupyterHub is a tool for deploying computational
web-based interfaces on shared infrastructure, such as the cloud or High
Performance Computing centers. By working on three concrete geoscience problems
the researchers will advance the state of the art in their respective fields,
yet in their implementation within the open Jupyter ecosystem they will ensure
that their solutions are generalizable to other scientific
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.