* 1928403
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: Collaborative Proposal: Assimilative Mapping of Geospace Observations
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Tomoko Matsuo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 627,763.00

The most dynamic electromagnetic energy and momentum exchange processes between
the upper atmosphere and the magnetosphere take place in the polar regions as
evidenced by the aurora. Energy deposited into the upper atmosphere as a result
of these processes causes dramatic global disturbances, including global
temperature and neutral mass density enhancement and plasma density changes.
These near-Earth space environment disturbances can negatively impact radio
communication, navigation, positioning, and satellite tracking. In response to
the research community's need for tools to combine heterogeneous data from
ground-based and space-based instrumentation to better specify electromagnetic
energy and momentum deposition from the magnetosphere, the project will develop
and deploy an open-source Python software to optimally fuse these data sets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will empower individual investigators by
providing easy access to a powerful data analysis tool and reanalysis data
products. The proposed dissemination activities are intended to promote
grassroots development of an open-source and open-data collaborative cohort, to
catalyze a cultural change within the geospace community necessary for it to
fully benefit from opportunities of the Big Data era. The project will serve to
broaden the education and training experiences of one postdoc, two graduate and
several undergraduate students at the researcher's institutions by engaging them
in a multi-faceted project. The proposed software and infrastructure will be
used to develop graduate course material. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by
recent advancements in geospace observing capabilities and the opportunities of
Big Data, the proposal aims (1) to develop and deploy an open-source Python
software and associated web-applications for Assimilative Mapping of Geospace
Observations that are interoperable with established geospace community data
resources and standards, and (2) to create fully reproduceable, validated
reanalysis data products that can be accessed from established data repositories
to maximize the scientific return on the program investment from the National
Science Foundation and other federal agencies. The capabilities of existing data
assimilation and data analysis tools, developed as part of the researcher's
earlier EarthCube pilot project, will be extended to take advantage of the
latest development and findings in the geospace sciences. The proposed web
application service and software will automate data collection, pre-processing,
and quality control steps to mitigate hurdles for non-experts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Assimilative Mapping of Geospace Observations software
will provide a coherent, simultaneous and inter-hemispheric picture of
magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling by optimally combining diverse geospace
observational data in a manner consistent with first-principles and with
rigorous consideration of the uncertainty associated with each observation.
Through workshops organized in partnership with community science working
groups, the researchers will engage the geospace community in the collaborative
geospace system science campaigns and science-driven process of data product
validation using the common, accessible, expandable data analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.