* 1928684
* High Resolution Observing of Arctic Net Community Productivity with Ships of Opportunity
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Laurie Juranek, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 09/30/2024
* USD 627,176.00

The Arctic is warming at roughly twice the pace of the rest of the globe,
leading to pronounced changes to the environment. These changes include
declining sea-ice extent and a longer period in summer when large swaths of the
Arctic Ocean are ice-free, both of which have the potential to influence growth
of microscopic plants at the base of Arctic Ocean ecosystems. Shifts in timing,
location, or amount of growth will have consequences for organisms higher up the
food chain, with potential to impact vital subsistence and cultural resources
for Indigenous populations that inhabit Arctic coastlines. In addition, Arctic
ecosystems help to facilitate the transfer of carbon dioxide gas from the
atmosphere into deep ocean waters, which helps to reduce carbon dioxide levels
in the atmosphere. This project is aimed at characterizing patterns of
phytoplankton growth and how they might be influenced by Arctic change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many aspects of Arctic system responses to warming
can be monitored remotely with satellites or moored sensors, observations of
integrated ocean ecosystem response have historically been less tractable to
obtain at needed scales. This observing gap is a hindrance to understanding and
modeling the potential implications of physical system change for carbon and
energy flows through Arctic ecosystems, and to understanding how biologically-
facilitated exchange of carbon between atmosphere and ocean might change in the
future. This project will directly address this observing gap. A high-resolution
dissolved gas tracer approach (O2/Ar) will be used to constrain rates of net
community productivity (NCP), an important metric of ecosystem function and
biologically-facilitated air-sea CO2 exchange, at unprecedented space and time
resolution throughout the Pacific-influenced Arctic on ships of opportunity. The
project will augment flow-through surface seawater systems of vessels already
conducting research in the Pacific Arctic region with instruments to obtain
O2/Ar-based NCP at sub-kilometer scale resolution with minimal impact to other
science activities. This high-resolution coverage will enable identification of
processes that are important in controlling net growth patterns throughout the
study area. To expand spatial and temporal coverage of biological rate
information, the project will target data collection efforts on three cruises
per year over a four-year period. Initially, data acquisition will require a
dedicated technician sailing with the instrument, but a secondary project goal
is to optimize instrumentation and protocols such that future data could be
collected in a near-unattended mode, similar to the strategy that has greatly
facilitated the rapid expansion of global observations of air-sea CO2 flux. A
special emphasis will be placed on rapid dissemination of data collected over
the course of the project to maximize synergies with other funded research in
the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.