* 1928506
* FW-HTF-RL: Collaborative Research: Shared Autonomy for the Dull, Dirty, and Dangerous: Exploring Division of Labor for Humans and Robots to Transform the Recycling Sorting Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jacob Whitehill, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 612,314.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) project
investigates a novel human-robot collaboration architecture to improve
efficiency and profitability in the recycling industry, while re-creating
recycling jobs to be safer, cleaner, and more meaningful. The specific goal is
to improve the waste sorting process, that is, the separation of mixed waste
into plastics, paper, metal, glass, and non-recyclables. The US scrap recycling
industry -- which represents $117 billion in annual economic activity and more
than 530,000 US jobs -- is struggling to meet increasingly challenging standards
in domestic and international markets. A major problem for the industry is poor
sorting of waste, resulting in materials impurity and a significant decrease in
the quality and value of the recycled product. Human perception and judgement
are essential to handle the object variety, clutter level and changing
characteristics of the waste stream. Yet waste-sorting workers currently face
health risks and discomfort arising from sharp and heavy objects, toxic
materials, noise, vibration, dust, noisome odors, and poor heating, ventilation,
and air conditioning. The innovative robotics component of this project,
especially in object detection, manipulation, and human-robot interaction, will
allow new sorting facility architectures, creating new, safer roles for human
workers. The project complements these technological advances with economic
analyses to determine the facility configurations that best remove processing
bottlenecks, target materials of high value, and boost the end-to-end efficiency
of the recycling process. Division of labor between humans and robots will be
investigated to improve job desirability and worker motivation, incorporating
consideration of the workers' well-being. In particular, the project will
explore ways to utilize robots to amplify worker expertise and value. A holistic
and interconnected research approach will be taken for all these aspects, i.e.
developing robotics technology, designing the human-machine interfaces,
investigating workers' workers' role in the new sorting plant architectures, and
understanding and incorporating workers' needs and well-being into the design
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the appropriate robotics
technology for recycling industry deployment, which will require advancing the
state of the art in waste classification and manipulation to handle the
conditions associated with recycling facilities. Deep Neural Networks-based
object detection and semantic segmentation frameworks will be designed for rich,
multi-modal sensor data in order to solve challenges regarding a high-level of
clutter, occlusion and object variety. Novel robotic manipulation algorithms
based on dynamic and soft manipulation strategies will be utilized to separate
and pick classified items from the cluttered waste stream. Robust and dexterous
robot hardware will be developed, including the robotic arms and end effectors.
Human-machine interfaces will be designed and implemented to achieve these tasks
in an intuitive, efficient and practical workflow that optimizes the
contributions of both human workers and automated technologies. The robotics
technology will also allow expanding the facilities from simply sorting the
incoming materials into a whole recycling ecosystem; additional process lines
for onsite materials processing units will enable conveying partially-finished
products to next stage manufacturers. This expansion will require a novel
systems approach, and will help achieve more efficient recycling plants and a
much more comprehensive employment ladder for current and new workers. These
technological and structural changes in the interactional system of work will
shift both the task and relational landscape of the work. The effect of these
shifts on worker satisfaction and motivation will be investigated via worker
interviews with simulated systems. The new technological landscape will be
formed accordingly for improved work experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.