* 1928930
* Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* David Eisenbud, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 15,000,000.00

Mathematical sciences research is key to progress in many areas of technology,
healthcare, and national security. The Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
(MSRI) in Berkeley, California strengthens U.S. research in the mathematical
sciences through innovative and intensive semester-long programs and workshops
as well as through the training of postdoctoral fellows and graduate students.
In addition, MSRI contributes to public education and enhances the appreciation
of mathematics through public events and widely distributed videos. In all of
its activities, MSRI strives to be a model of innovation and best practices in
encouraging inclusivity. The Institute has long been recognized as a world
center of collaborative mathematics research and it will continue to expand its
national impact by exploring new research areas and creating new collaborations.
MSRI's programs bring together both early-career and established mathematical
scientists from a wide range of institutions. In these programs, postdoctoral
fellows and graduate students meet the subject's leaders, as well as some of
their most creative future colleagues, providing a powerful influence on their
scientific development and future careers. MSRI's Summer Graduate Schools enrich
PhD students with collaborative experiences around new subjects often outside of
the standard curriculum. The Institute's nationally visible programs, such as
Numberphile and the National Math Festival, improve the public appreciation of
mathematics and its importance to society, while the annual Critical Issues in
Mathematics Education Workshops connect mathematicians and math
educators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;MSRI's programs range over the spectrum of
fundamental mathematics. Each program brings together a group of specialists,
including those interested in applications, and for that time MSRI becomes a
global center of activity in the program's subject. Postdoctoral fellows and
advanced graduate students add to the intellectual excitement and influence of
the programs, and they find an environment for research beyond what they had in
graduate school. The Institute combines fields and pairs programs in ways that
lead to new connections and sometimes catalyze the recognition of a new field.
In 2022, the program on Analytic and Geometric Aspects of Gauge Theory will be
paired with one on Floer Homotopy, which has the potential to deeply enrich both
fields. The development of Floer theory can be seen as a parallel to the
emergence of algebraic topology in the first half of the 20th century, going
from counting invariants to homology groups, and beyond that to the construction
of algebraic structures on these homology groups and their underlying chain
complexes. The goal of this program is to relate these developments to Floer
theory with the dual aims of (1) better understanding symplectic and low-
dimensional topology, and (2) providing a new set of geometrically motivated
questions in homotopy theory. MSRI can also respond quickly to new developments
through its Hot Topics Workshops. In 2020, MSRI will host a workshop on Optimal
Transport and Applications to Machine Learning and Statistics. The workshop will
explore the many emerging connections between the theory of Optimal Transport
and models and algorithms currently used in the Machine Learning community. Some
programs treat more applied subjects, such as the 2021 programs on Fluid
Dynamics and Universality and Integrability in Random Matrix Theory and
Interacting Particle Systems. The past decade has seen tremendous progress in
understanding the behavior of large random matrices and interacting particle
systems. Complementary methods have emerged to prove universality of these
behaviors, as well as to probe their precise nature using integrable, or exactly
solvable models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.