* 1928425
* FW-HTF-P: Human-Robot Collaboration for Enhancing Work Capabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Robert Radwin, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The research objective of this Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier
(FW-HTF) project is to create a matchmaking tool to identify opportunities in
manufacturing workplaces where robot capabilities can augment or enhance human
workers to improve productivity and safety. This planning project will
investigate the possibility to integrate human workers into work processes by
modeling tasks from an existing database of critical tasks required to perform
each of more than 1000 occupations within the US economy. The project team will
also engage with industry to understand differences between the results of task
modeling and real work. Successful project outcomes will include the advancement
of knowledge around future collaborative technologies, as well as the
advancement of fundamental knowledge around the relationship and co-existence
between American workers and intelligent robotic workplace assistants. A series
of intensive workshops will foster new research collaborations between experts
in process optimization, labor economics, and public health to build a
multidisciplinary research team for a long-term FW-HTF research initiative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project will apply state-of-the-art work-
design and task-allocation methods and tools to jobs and occupations that show
high potential for the integration of collaborative robots to gain a better
understanding of the technical challenges in human-robot teaming. The research
team will model a subset of candidate tasks from the US Department of Labor
Occupational Information Network (O*NET) database and apply optimization-based
tools to explore possibilities for human-robot teaming and to investigate the
impact of human-robot teaming on both station and system level performance. The
project team will analyze the effects of modeled work configurations on key
factors such as productivity, ergonomics, and compatibility. Upon project
completion, the team will better understand the discrepancy between work models
and real-world work, as well as the measurement challenges and constraints in
the integration of collaborative robots to existing manufacturing environments.
Workshop activities will foster new research collaborations with experts in
process optimization, labor economics, and public health to build a
multidisciplinary research team for a long-term initiative. The ultimate goal of
this project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research
infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying
future technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.