* 1928695
* FW-HTF-RM: Augmenting Spatial Cognition Capabilities of Future Workforce to Enhance Work Performance in Altered Environments Using Virtual Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Jyotsna Vaid, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,201,560.00

The goal of this research is to enable the future workforce to work in
unfamiliar environments, including desolate hard to reach places such as: deep
space, low Earth orbit, deep ocean, and polar regions. The research team will
introduce a new cost-effective educational platform combining Virtual Reality
(VR), Eye Tracking and electroencephalography (EEG). This platform will inform
design principles for scenario-based simulations and games to train the future
workforce to adapt to and work in altered environments. The main goal is to
understand how spatial cognitive processing differs in altered gravitational and
visual environments, and how VR-based simulation can accelerate training the
nation's future workforce to adapt to such environments. The research team
integrates the principles of information modeling, VR, fixation analysis, EEG,
and aerospace engineering to conduct the proposed research on spatial cognitive
processing in altered conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
research team will address how, and to what extent, the non-alignment of visual
and idiotropic frames of reference (FOR) and a lack of visuospatial cues offered
by familiar landmarks influence spatial abilities, fixation patterns, and brain
functions. This study will: (1) measure spatial abilities through behavioral
tests, and contrast scores and reaction time in simulated normal and altered
environments; (2) measure and analyze cognitive strategies and mental workload
using eye tracking and electroencephalography (EEG) and contrast results in
simulated normal and altered environments; and (3) apply the results of spatial
abilities, attentional allocation, and mental workload to create the framework
of a simulation or game to train the future workforce to work in altered
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will lead to inventing,
evaluating, and applying innovative methods and tools that use VR, eye tracking
and EEG to design scenario-based simulations and games for workforce training.
This study will create new knowledge in the behavioral and physiological domains
of cognitive science leading to a better understanding of spatial cognitive
processing in altered environments. The broader impacts of this work include
developing a unique, safer, and cost-effective approach to train workers using
virtual analogs and augment their spatial abilities to enhance their safety,
quality of work life, productivity, and potential for more people to participate
in the future workforce. Broader impacts also include developing educational
course content and increased mentoring of underrepresented student groups.
Educational activities include a strong outreach program for K-12 and college
students to increase their participation in careers in science, technology,
engineering and math (STEM), inform them about the future of work in altered
conditions, and explain how a human-technology frontier can bolster spatial
cognitive performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.