* 1928626
* FW-HTF-RM: Collaborative Research: Future of Construction Work at the Human-Technology Frontier
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Susan Simkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 698,525.00

The construction industry faces many workforce-related challenges, including a
shortage of skilled workers and high accident and injury rates. The use of
robotic technologies to augment construction workers can enable new construction
techniques and work opportunities. This project seeks to transform the nature of
construction work by removing barriers to the formation of human-robot teams on
the jobsite. Working together with skilled trade workers, robots have the
potential to lower construction costs through more precise cutting and placing
actions that reduce waste. Human-robot teams can also increase safety and
efficiency by reducing the risk of overexertion and injury to workers. The
investigators will address three specific barriers to the widespread adoption of
robotics on the construction site: (1) the lack of clearly defined and fully
structured robotic tasks for trade work; (2) the need to understand how robots
will be integrated into predominantly human-centric trade worker teams; and (3)
the need to identify new knowledge and resource requirements that will support
robots on the construction jobsite. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
convergent solutions to overcoming barriers to human-robot teaming in
construction, using methods from computer science, construction engineering, and
social science to: (a) re-define construction tasks by translating the means and
methods of trade work into common actions that can be interpreted and performed
by robotic systems, and (b) explore how robotic systems can be integrated into
current and future human-robot construction teams, as an integral part of the
worker, knowledge, task, and resource networks on the jobsite. To achieve these
aims, this research will surface which construction tasks can and cannot be
automated or augmented using robotics. Of the processes that are well-suited to
robotics, basic design information will be converted into defined tasks and
ultimately into instructions for the robot and the conditions needed to perform
the action. Shared mental models for introducing robots within trade worker
teams will be created, which will assist in determining the role of human-made
robotic systems, as either active team participants or simply passive tools.
Lastly, a meta-network analysis will study the potential vulnerability of human-
robot teams to identify the risks and opportunities for improving the
reliability of construction project delivery. These efforts will result in a
risk framework for understanding the direct (e.g., safety) and indirect (e.g.,
network vulnerabilities) risks, as well as unintended consequences, emerging
from the integration of robots in the construction work context. Collectively,
this research will advance the potential for human-robot teams in the
construction industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.