* 1928389
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: Collaborative Proposal: Broadening Community Use and Adoption of StraboSpot
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Andrew Davidson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,206,365.00

Within the geological community, collaboration through a shared database would
facilitate discovery and new scientific breakthroughs. However, geological data
has proven difficult to enter into digital formats, necessary for a shared
database, because of the nature of the data itself and the varied and complex
methods used to collect these data. The StraboSpot digital data system was
designed to overcome these difficulties and allow data from the geological
sciences to become more easily accessible to both scientists and citizens. The
new work will allow for the development of new mobile user interfaces, allowing
geologists to collect field data in ways that are efficient and go beyond what
is currently possible in a paper notebook and map. The new application will also
integrate data collected at the microscopic level, including information about
rock composition. Finally, the data and interpretations will be made available
through search capabilities that will use the StraboSpot data repository. The
broader impacts of this work include the engagement of scientists to best
develop ways to share the data they collect, and the easier access to this data
for scientists and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of the development
efforts in this project, various geologic communities will be involved in
initial design and evaluation. Continued engagement of these communities through
field trips, workshops, and student outreach help to identify three objectives
that will improve the data system and will lead to wider adoption and use of
StraboSpot. The objectives are to: 1) Develop new mobile user interfaces -
determined by ongoing and future conversations with the communities - that will
allow practitioners to collect field data in ways that are compelling,
efficient, and go beyond what is currently possible in a paper notebook or on a
paper map; 2) Incorporate petrological data into the micrograph/thin section
component of the database, in addition to creating a desktop user interface that
works seamlessly with data collected with analytical instruments (such as
scanning electron microscopes); and 3) Design and implement interfaces and
transfer protocols to efficiently extract information from the StraboSpot data
repository. If successful, StraboSpot will impact all practitioners in the
geological sciences, motivating new and innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.