* 1928146
* NNA Track 1: Predicting coastal responses to a changing Greenland ice sheet
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,887,924.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As ice melts around the world, sea level
is projected to rise in many places and fall in others. Because Greenland is
very close to the changing ice, it is anticipated that the land will rise, and
that sea level will fall, impacting both humans, marine life, and natural
resources. Community responses to changing sea level depend on accurate,
location-specific knowledge of the present-day coastal environment and how it is
predicted to change. Given the economic, mining, natural resources, and
infrastructure development occurring in the Arctic, there is an urgent need to
better understand and communicate the present and future sea level around the
island. This joint US-Greenlandic investigator team has identified four key
local communities with different infrastructure that are likely to experience
differential future coastal environments. By focusing on these four communities,
the investigators can develop better models of changes to both land and sea
level changes and can map the shallow water environments to determine which
habitats and coastal transportation routes may change. Together these new
predictions of sea level change and mapping of seafloor habitats can improve the
capacity of local communities to respond to change. This integrated approach
serves as a template for developing a strategy for communities to respond to the
changing ice in the Arctic and around the globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea level
changes throughout the Arctic are the combined response of solid Earth uplift or
subsidence, oceanic circulation, and gravity field variations driven by changes
in glaciers and ice sheets. Due to the adjacent ice sheet, the signals of
shallow water change in Greenland may be large, as shown by the NSF-supported
Greenland GPS Network (GNET), which has documented uplift rates up to 23 mm/year
and subsidence rates of 5 mm/year in the southwest. The goal of this project is
to bring together a convergence research team focusing on the integration of the
natural, social, and built environments of four different Arctic communities
proximal to a changing ice sheet. This focus permits the: (i) use state of the
art technologies to map shallow water environment and habitats; (ii) development
of data-informed models and projections of how sea level has responded to
changing ice in the past, present and future; and (iii) partnering with local
communities in both needed data collection to improve the sea level models and
the baseline bathymetric mapping to identify hot spots for future change where
new infrastructure, fisheries, and other marine use may be susceptible to
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.