* 1928334
* Point-of-care ultrahigh sensitivity magnetic lateral flow assay
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Richard Willson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 443,988.00

The proposed research aims to demonstrate an ultrasensitive point of care
biosensor for ongoing prostate-specific antigen (PSA) monitoring in prostate
cancer patients. Early detection of the disease will help timely identification
of the appropriate treatment options and improve the long-term patient outcomes.
The proposed biosensor is based on detection of magnetic reporter nanoparticles
on a paper strip (like a pregnancy test) and will be integrated with the readout
electronics costing under $300 and disposable test chips costing under $3.
Successful completion of this work would yield a point-of-care PSA device that
will allow physicians to test patients in their offices during follow-up visits
after surgery, or allow patients to self-monitor themselves at home and transmit
results to care providers for follow-up and consultation. This research will
also help establish a new general biosensor platform broadly useful in other
areas of therapy monitoring, molecular diagnostics, biomarker detection, and
biomedical research, which will satisfy the ASSURED (affordable, sensitive,
specific, user-friendly, rapid and robust, (almost) equipment-free and
deliverable to end users) criteria established by the World Health Organization
for point-of-care diagnostics. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed biosensor
platform offers a number of technological advancements over the current state-
of-the-art magnetic biosensor technologies. It enables ultrahigh sensitivity,
completely electronic readout, precision and the cost advantages of high-
throughput manufacturing, and simplicity of assembly. The sensors are embedded
into low-cost PCB (printed circuit board) components sandwiching an lateral flow
assay strip in between. Each disposable sensor chip incorporates a test line and
a control line with the readout voltages proportional to the number of magnetic
reporter particles captured in the respective sensing volumes and with the
background (due to non-specific binding) automatically subtracted. The
miniaturization of the inductive sensing design enables larger excitation fields
and high-frequency operation resulting in a significantly higher sensitivity of
10 pico-emu, a 100,000 fold improvement over conventional inductive detectors.
The 100-fold signal reduction in sensitivity as one moves away from conventional
multi-coil AC susceptometer design operating in the sub-1000 Hz Brownian
relaxation mode is offset by the 200,000-fold sensitivity increase due to
radically higher operation frequency (&gt;200 MHz) and significantly smaller,
more efficient sensing and excitation elements. Specificity is achieved by a
lateral flow sandwich immunoassay. The system dynamic range of the system is
electronically adjustable (excitation frequency and/or field) for detection of
both low and high concentrations of the analyte. The system is expected to be
exceptionally robust against fabrication process variations and will not require
calibration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.