* 1928393
* EarthCube Data Capabilities:  QGreenland:  Enabling Science through GIS
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Twila Moon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,030,243.00

QGreenland will create an interdisciplinary GIS data environment that is freely
available and ready-to-use on the open-source QGIS platform. Designed in direct
response to requests from the research community and needs identified by
international and U.S. agencies, QGreenland will provide immediate impact for
scientific research and exploration. QGreenland will improve data sharing for
research and enable cross-community system science to advance knowledge and
collaboration. The project has broader impacts owing to the importance of
Greenland in general for understanding and prediction global climate. Greenland
sustains a massive amount of land ice, the future of which will significantly
determine to what extent sea levels
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;QGreenland will address the limitations of
current online GIS platforms and data services by providing a geoscience-focused
but interdisciplinary package of professionally formatted data that is ready-to-
use online or offline. QGreenland is modelled off of the widely used, award-
winning Quantarctica package, an Antarctica GIS package developed by Project
Collaborators at the Norwegian Polar Institute. Based on QGIS, a free, open-
source, cross-platform GIS environment as the foundational software, QGreenland
will offer a freely-redistributable package of original-quality data in a
complete GIS environment. Three tiers of a data will be available, including
web-served datasets. An international Editorial Board and diverse Project
Collaborators will help the QGreenland Team identify key geospatial datasets and
act as two-way connectors between QGreenland and user communities in the US,
Greenland, and across the globe. QGreenland will provide a tool for
visualization, individual GIS environment expansion, and to explore system
science across geosciences, social sciences, and the built environment.
QGreenland is also an instant in-field tool with a full set of reference data
that can be used with no or limited internet access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.