* 1928678
* I-Corps: All-digital transceivers for millimeter wave communications
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2020
* Shivendra Panwar, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project covers nearly
all applications related to next generation mobile communications technologies,
such as connected cars, drones, robots, and smartphones. This wireless
technology can unlock the true potential of higher frequency bands by
establishing more efficient and robust connections that operate in the
millimeter Wave (mmWave) spectrum above 28 GHz. The resulting increased wireless
capacity and reduced latency will enable the key use cases that have been
defined in the context of 5G, such as interactive Augmented Reality/Virtual
Reality (AR/VR), autonomous driving, and unmanned robotics. Rapidly exchanging
large amount of information wirelessly will be of paramount importance for
AR/VR, as it will permit getting rid of the cables connected to the headsets,
and for autonomous automotive and robotic systems, as it will enable beyond
line-of-sight vision by broadcasting with minimal latency massive amount of data
generated by sensors such as lidars, radars, and cameras.

This I-Corps project focuses on the design of an all-digital transceiver radio
for mmWave communications. The mmWave frequencies of above 28 GHz are necessary
to alleviate the spectrum crunch in the traditional cellular bands, and to make
ultra-fast 5G use cases a reality. However, challenging propagation
characteristics at these frequencies necessitates the use of transceivers that
not only operate over low power budgets, but also deliver the robustness that
the wireless ecosystem demands. Existing state-of-the-art mmWave analog
transceiver radios trade-off robustness against power: they allow the radio to
transmit or receive in only one direction or a small number of directions at a
time. Conversely, this all-digital beamforming technology allows to look in all
directions simultaneously, resulting in more spectral-efficient and robust
communications. The defining technical feature in this design is that the
signals from each antenna chain are digitized independently, as opposed to
existing techniques where the signals from each antenna are first combined in
analog and then digitized.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.