* 1928502
* FW-HTF-P: Optimizing Long-term Human Performance in Future Work
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Clegg, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2021
* USD 149,998.00

Wearable systems, for example smart watches and smart glasses, are important
emerging technologies for the future of work. When such systems are coupled with
automation that supports and guides performance, they offer tremendous
opportunities for American companies, but also might create challenges for their
workers. Optical, see-through displays from wearable devices like smart glasses
or head-mounted displays can project images while still allowing the user to see
through them. The resulting blend of digital elements with the person's view of
the real world is a form of augmented reality. This type of dynamic integration
of new forms of information with our environment provides an opportunity to
enable major innovations in the workplace. However, the ability to use these
devices to constantly and seamlessly inform and guide people as they perform
their jobs will impact what these individuals are learning. A key issue is how
people can remain engaged in the tasks in ways that allow them to learn what is
necessary for them to enhance performance and outcomes and also enrich their
working lives. What people need to avoid is becoming passive, unquestioning
recipients of external support. This research tackles the issue of how to
optimize support and assistance to increase human capacities and improve
immediate outcomes, while still allowing the durable, robust learning that
ultimately produces skilled, experienced workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
objective of this award is to advance the use of automation support for
performance in future work by incorporating principles from the science of
learning to produce superior long-term outcomes. This approach will provide a
foundation for determining when and how external assistance would provide the
best aid to humans. The work aims towards a new theoretical framework, as well
as for guidelines for practitioners and developers. An initial study of
performance in an exemplar furniture assembly task will use augmented reality to
examine the interaction between current ongoing performance and long-term
learning. The investigators will also organize a broad, multidisciplinary
workshop to foster future interest in the area and develop new collaborations.
The ultimate goal of this planning project is to develop the necessary research
personnel, research infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the
opportunities for studying future technology, future workers, and future work at
the level of a FW-HTF full research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.