* 1928740
* Leveraging a Faculty Community of Practice Model of Professional Learning to Enhance Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in STEM Teaching, Learning, and Leadership
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Monika I Hogan, California State University-Dominguez Hills Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 2,334,801.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to build faculty expertise
on how to implement evidence-based practices in STEM. This project seeks to
broaden STEM faculty's use of inclusive pedagogy and welcoming environments in
STEM courses, improve alignment between courses offered at the community
colleges and the universities, and support the development of a diverse faculty.
Through a collaboration between California State University Dominguez Hills
(CSUDH), CSU Long Beach, California Community College Success Network (3CSN),
and the CSU's Institute for Teaching and Learning, the project aims to enhance
teaching, learning, and leadership. Using a community of practice model of
professional learning, the project will develop faculty learning communities
that support STEM faculty from CSUDH and the local community colleges on best
practices in teaching and learning coupled with identity, culture, context,
power, bias, and institutionalized forms of oppression. The project will also
examine how alignment of STEM curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment practices
between two- and four-year institutions supports transfer student success. As a
result, this project aims to build institutional capacity in developing STEM
faculty to increase student retention and success, with an emphasis on
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate
components of effective STEM faculty learning communities rooted in the science
of learning and the culture of diverse students. The STEM faculty will then be
equipped to reshape curriculum, teaching practices, interactions with students,
and collegial interactions. In this project, the unit of change is the STEM
faculty member which will then lead to a sustained institutional change that
aims to provide an enhanced learning experience for students in STEM. The
project will investigate the community of practices?s impact on 1) STEM
faculty's development and implementation of evidence-based curriculum design,
teaching, and assessment practices; 2) Faculty-student and faculty-faculty
interaction (including faculty hiring, mentorship, sponsorship, evaluation, and
retention practices), and faculty and students' sense of belonging; and 3)
Leadership strategies including how faculty, administrators, and staff interact
with, mentor, and evaluate each other in ways that improve the retention of
individuals underrepresented within the STEM faculty. The project will use a
grounded theory approach to study which elements of the faculty learning
communities are most effective in training faculty. Data will be collected to
assess impacts on student success based on individual departments and course
goals and outcomes. This project seeks to develop an evidence-based tiered STEM
faculty development model that enhances the STEM learning experiences for
diverse students that other institutions may adopt. The project will be shared
through presentations at conferences, publications, as well as CSU's Institute
for Teaching and Learning. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.