* 1928909
* I-Corps: Robust filtration membranes for harsh environment separations
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies primarily
in its ability to stimulate growth across multiple industries. The membrane
filtration technology developed allows for the separation of components of
interest and value in the oil &amp; gas, food &amp; beverage, life sciences,
textiles, and semiconductor manufacturing spaces in a more efficient manner than
the methods in use today. By replacing these more expensive and energy intensive
processes, the technology can provide a significant cost savings to the
industrial end user, thereby generating surplus revenue, increased hiring
capacity, and facilitating growth. In addition, the project will yield a
societal benefit by providing a more effective and energy efficient approach for
industrial process separations and wastewater
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a robust
membrane filtration technology. The membrane consists of commonly available
thin-sheet silicon through which nanoscale pores are chemically etched using a
simple patented process. These pores extend from one side of the silicon sheet
to the other, thereby acting as channels through which water can flow.
Molecules, particles, and other constituents of interest are rejected both by
the physical size of the pores, and by the chemical character of the membrane
surface, allowing for the removal, concentration, or separation of important
components. The membrane offers a unique value proposition in that it combines a
very small size cutoff offered by polymeric filters with the harsh environment
compatibility of ceramic filters, while possessing excellent resistance to
clogging and blockage. These properties enable low maintenance separation
performance in a wide range of industrial applications where exposure to harsh
environments such as high or low pH, organic solvents, and high temperatures is
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.