* 1928783
* The International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) 2019 Travel Grant
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Jason Lowe-Power, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 11/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

The International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) is a premier forum
for research on computer architecture, the hardware/software interface, and
systems architecture. This award provides travel support for up to 20 students
attending this flagship conference in June 2019 at Phoenix, Arizona, USA. ISCA
embraces systems research that directly targets these new problems in new ways.
Historically, the conference has attracted top research papers from both
academia and industry, and many innovations published in the proceedings have
been influential in the history of the processor industry. The acceptance rates
for submitted papers is typically between 15-20%. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will have two primary direct benefits. First, The ISCA conference is
strengthened as a result of better student attendance that this travel support
enables, since they are the next-generation of the research workforce in this
domain. Second, those students receiving travel support personally benefit from
the opportunity to interact with peers and experts, as well as to establish
connections that will help their professional careers. An undergraduate workshop
at the event is one part of the computer architecture communities' efforts
towards increasing diversity, and the travel funding seeks to also support
students from underrepresented groups within the undergraduate attendees at the
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.