* 1928922
* Educating the vertebrate morphologists of the 21st century: technology pedagogy, and core concepts. International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology, 21-25 July 2019; Czech Republic
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Nicole Danos, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Long
* 09/30/2021
* USD 20,268.00

This award funds a symposium, Educating the Vertebrate Morphologists of the 21st
Century: technology, pedagogy, and core concepts, at the International Congress
of Vertebrate Morphology (ICVM), a triennial meeting of the International
Society of Vertebrate Morphology to be held in Prague, Czech Republic, in July
2019. The Congress facilitates international collaboration among researchers
working in diverse fields (e.g., developmental biology, paleontology, functional
morphology) and provides the opportunity for researchers to interact and to
integrate vertebrate morphological research with other fields of biological
sciences. Because many of the researchers attending the Congress also teach
comparative vertebrate anatomy to undergraduates, the symposium will provide the
opportunity to share teaching practices, integrating the field of vertebrate
morphology with pedagogical research on how students learn. A major goal of the
symposium is to define the core concepts of comparative vertebrate anatomy, a
technique used by educators to focus students on learning big ideas and broad
concepts instead of memorizing facts. Speakers will share evidence-based
strategies for incorporating technological skills (e.g., 3D modeling) and
inquiry-based teaching (e.g., social media outreach and service learning). The
central goals of the symposium are to make comparative vertebrate anatomy more
accessible to diverse student populations and to increase the diversity of
future vertebrate anatomists. Both the articulation of core concepts of a field
and inquiry-based teaching practices have been shown to foster retention and
build problem solving and critical thinking skills. A keynote talk and workshop
on inclusive teaching practices in biology are highlights of the symposium, and
will be valuable to all scholar-educators in attendance. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The fields of vertebrate morphology and the scholarship of teaching
and learning have grown rapidly since the last ICVM teaching workshop was held
fifteen years ago. Both comparative vertebrate anatomy and human anatomy are
common courses in the teaching repertoire of vertebrate morphologists who
identify as teacher-scholars. A lack of well-defined core concepts, which exist
for other fields of biology, has kept teacher-scholars of vertebrate morphology
from fully implementing evidence-based strategies for teaching and learning. As
a result, a misperception exists among students that comparative vertebrate
morphology is an antiquated science that relies solely on memorization and has
not embraced modern techniques and technology. Furthermore, outdated teaching
practices reinforce the barriers to the success of underrepresented students.
This symposium will push the boundaries of applying interdisciplinary approaches
to the study of vertebrate comparative anatomy in the classroom. The diverse set
of symposium speakers will share evidence-based strategies for incorporating
technological skills (e.g., 3D visualization and modeling) and inquiry-based
teaching (e.g., social media outreach and service learning). The symposium aims
to forward the mission of NSF to create an engaged and inclusive community of
teachers, students, and scholars. The core concepts, pedagogical approaches, and
teaching resources identified at the symposium will be disseminated in
publications resulting from the conference or on publicly available websites.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The award is co-funded by the BIO-IOS-Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the EHR Division of Undergraduate
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.