* 1928836
* RoL: Closing the Gap between the Genotype and Phenotype by Elucidating Cellular Dynamics of Endosperm Development
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Tomokazu Kawashima, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 649,831.00

Seeds of flowering plants are not only important from an agricultural point of
view but are also an excellent system to investigate unique cellular processes
and complex communications among tissues during development. The seed comprises
the embryo, endosperm, and seed coat, and these tissues communicate with each
other to determine the final seed size. The duration of the early-stage
endosperm development is strongly associated with the final seed size; however,
it is still not clear what exactly is happening in the seed at this early stage.
The Kawashima lab has identified that manipulation of cellular dynamics of the
early-stage endosperm results in diverse final seed sizes. Using live-cell
imaging, genetics, and biochemical approaches in Arabidopsis thaliana, this
project aims to understand the relationship between the early-stage endosperm
development and subsequent seed phenotypes, such as seed size. This project
engages student in science by providing STEM students with lab research
experiences and non-STEM students with opportunities to be exposed to plant
biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kawashima lab established the live-
imaging endosperm system and identified that filamentous actin (F-actin) in the
coenocytic endosperm of the flowering plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, plays a role
in endosperm development, as well as, seed size. The objectives of this project
are to: (i) investigate how F-actin is involved in coenocytic endosperm
development, (ii) characterize the function of an endosperm-specific class II
formin in F-actin organization, and (iii) investigate endosperm molecular and
cellular dynamics of previously identified mutant/transgenic lines that show
seed size change through endosperm development. Not only will the live-imaging
system be utilized to address the objectives mentioned above, but also genetics,
genomics, and biochemical approaches. This project will provide clues about how
endosperm genotypes, cellular dynamics in the coenocyte, and the phenotypes
(endosperm development itself as well as the final seed size) link together to
form a seed. These insights will be a foundation to developing further knowledge
of how the complex compartments of plants work together to orchestrate seed
development and larger crop seeds for higher yield to sustain our
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by Integrative Organismal
Systems, Molecular and Cellular Biolsciences and the Rules of
Life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.