* 1928924
* Engagement of early-career and diverse scientists in international science on Archaea at the International Conference on Geo-Omics of Archaea; October 25-27, 2019; Shenzhen, China
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Brian Hedlund, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This grant award will support the participation of fifteen U.S. students,
postdocs and/or early-career scientists in an international conference at the
cutting edge of environmental microbiology. It will enable vital networking for
the participants, opportunities for initiating new collaborative research with
international colleagues, and the advancement of research and discovery by U.S.
scientists. The conference will include scientists from many countries,
including the USA, Germany, Netherlands, France, Austria, Spain, Australia, and
China. The topics address areas of basic scientific research, as well as the
role of archeal microorganisms in as diverse as the production of natural gas
and microbiome contributions to human health and
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A group of world experts is organizing the
International Conference on Geo-Omics of Archaea (ICGOA), to be held in
Shenzhen, China from October 25th to 27th, 2019. The grant will help advance
U.S. efforts in conducting research into fundamental questions related to the
biology, physiology, diversity, biogeochemistry, ecology and evolution of
Archaea. Participants will also be invited to participate in one or more
synthesis manuscripts describing key advancements in areas of Archaeal biology.
To maximize impact on broadening participation and development of science
excellence in the U.S., funding support: (1) members of underrepresented groups
in science; (2) graduate students and/or postdocs; and (3) early-career
Assistant Professors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.