* 1928485
* FW-HTF-P: Clinical Skill Acquisition, Retention and Atrophy with Artificial Intelligence Aids
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* M. Cenk Cavusoglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 12/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates whether Artificially Intelligent Assistants (AIAs) may
impair cognitive skill acquisition and retention, or may accelerate skill
atrophy in clinicians who rely on AIAs to perform various tasks. It is
imperative to assess the effects of these tools as their use increases. The
project will study the impact of AIAs in the context of radiology, where they
are used for decision support. It explores whether technologies such as surgical
robots and cognitive assistants for radiological exams will lead doctors to lose
skills over time. Project activities have the potential to increase our
understanding of the human-machine dynamic of surgical robotics. The project
will integrate the perspectives of experts from cognitive psychology, human
factors, computer science, and engineering. The objective is to develop training
practices aimed at mitigating cognitive atrophy that could result from the
introduction of AIAs. Knowledge gleaned from this assessment has implications
for AI development, training protocols, and fail-safe protocols in a variety of
everyday and professional domains. The project addresses national concern
regarding the impact of technology on the future of work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two phases. First, data will be collected
in controlled laboratory environments on acquisition and retention of a set of
cognitive skills that are relevant to robotic surgery and radiological image-
based diagnosis. Second, a workshop will bring together a group of experts on
clinical training; robotic surgery; radiology; human factors, with specialties
both within and outside the clinical domain; and psychology, both cognitive
psychology and industrial/organizational psychology. Participants will discuss
initial results and plan for future research that investigates these issues in
real-world environments, informed by the initial studies. Efforts will focus on
three skills important in clinical applications where AIAs are present. Two are
motivated by robotic surgical applications: reasoning about spatial information
and perceptual-motor skills when the visual and motor systems are not aligned,
as may happen during robotic surgery. The other is motivated by the radiological
diagnosis task: visual search and target identification skill. The pilot study
data collection phase will measure success through the amount and quality of
data collected, as well as whether statistically significant experimental
results are obtained and the sizes of these effects. The workshop's success will
be considered successful if the experts demonstrate a high levels of
participation and the ability to build a collaborative effort. The overall
project aims are three fold. First, the project aims to facilitate convergent
research between computer scientists, roboticists, clinicians, human factors
researchers. Second, it aims to obtain a deeper basic understanding of the
design of AIAs that operate in harmony with human workers. Third, it aims to
enable human-appropriate design of AIAs that factors in the way people learn and
adapt to technological change. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop
the necessary research personnel, research infrastructure, and foundational work
to expand the opportunities for studying future technology, future workers, and
future work at the level of a FW-HTF full research
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.