* 1928795
* CAREER:  Integrated Research and Education to Improve Pavement Sustainability Using Bio-Binder
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Elham Fini, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 81,990.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to engineer
sustainable alternatives to petroleum-based adhesives for use in construction
and pavement. The research objective of the project is to test the hypothesis
that introducing bio-binder to asphalt binder can change the phase structure
within asphalt binder to produce bio-modified binder (BMB) with desired
rheological and surface characteristics. Desired characteristics are an increase
in BMB's adhesion strength and stress release rate, and a reduction of its
viscosity at corresponding temperatures. This in turn can improve pavement
sustainability in several ways: 1) an increase in adhesion strength between
binder and aggregate can reduce moisture damage in pavement, 2) an increase in
binder's stress release rate can reduce low temperature cracking in pavement,
and 3) a reduction in binder viscosity can facilitate use of reclaimed asphalt
pavement and recycled asphalt shingles in paving mixtures. It is hypothesized
that when bio-binder is added to the asphalt binder, bio-binder molecules
penetrate into the asphalt binder's matrix changing its chain conformation and
molecular packing. The interchain interactions between the long alkyl chains of
the bio-binder and those of the asphalt molecules' side chains hinder the
stacking of the aromatic cores of the asphalt molecules improving asphalt's
properties. Molecular dynamics simulations will be implemented to study how the
two materials interact and how their interactions impact rheology, aging and
adhesion characteristics of the bio-modified binder. &lt;br/&gt;This project
opens a new paradigm in asphalt material characterization and modeling, enabling
an integration of chemistry and mechanics while enhancing pavement
sustainability and revolutionizing waste management practices for better
environmental protection. It will offer a simultaneous approach to sequester
carbon and address problems associated with manure management while improving
pavement sustainability and enhancing U.S. economic competiveness by reducing
dependence on petroleum resources. The broader impact of the project will be
further expanded by reaching audiences ranging from university educators to
industry practitioners, farmers and K-12 deaf students to achieve educational
goal of the project including 1) enhancing students' knowledge in the area of
sustainable pavement and 2) providing professionals and decision makers with the
scientific rationale underlying the use of bio-binder.