* 1928339
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2019 ACM Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking (ACM MobiCom)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Bhuvana Krishnaswamy, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 05/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The 25th ACM international conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
MobiCom will be held in Los Cabos, Mexico between October 21 and 25, 2019.
MobiCom is one of the leading conference venues for researchers addressing
algorithmic and system challenges in the fields of wireless networks, wireless
sensing, mobile systems, edge computing to name a few. MobiCom not only
encourages researchers to push the boundaries and innovate, but also provides a
platform to discuss open challenges and learn from experience in the form of
Experience Papers, Challenge Papers, and Verification Papers. MobiCom invites
leading researchers from diverse research areas, background, and geographical
locations through research presentations, Workshops, Keynote Talks, Topic Review
Sessions, and Panel Discussions.

The conference, akin to the research presented there, continues to innovate and
facilitate students with increased opportunities to get involved. MobiCom 2019
introduced a new two deadline model and accepts submissions in Fall and Summer,
with scope for a "One-shot revision" after one round of submissions, to
encourage more and higher-quality submissions. MobiCom has dedicated sessions to
motivate students such as poster sessions, demos, mobile app competitions,
student career fair and startup competitions. The NSF travel grant will
encourage more students to attend the conference and avail the benefits of
interacting with leading researchers in the areas of mobile computing and
networking and get motivated by the high-quality research work and discussions
in the conference. The travel grant program has a proven record of providing
minority and underrepresented students the means to benefit from this
educational experience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.