* 1928550
* FW-HTF-P: Wearable Adaptive Cognitive Assistance to Auditory Situational Awareness for Workers Exposed to Complex and Dynamic Noises
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Sarah Winslow, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 146,198.00

This Future of Work at the Human Technology Frontier project will create
intelligent hearing protection devices (HPDs) for workers in settings with
hazardous noise volumes. Long-term exposure to high levels of noise can cause
serious mental and physical health problems. However, hearing protection that
simply blocks all sound also eliminates important safety cues, such as audible
alarms. The resulting reduction in situational awareness can greatly increase
the risk of serious industrial accidents. This project investigates a new
wearable hearing protection technology that uses artificial intelligence (AI) to
amplify safety-critical sounds and help locate their source, while greatly
attenuating ambient noise. If successful, this project will enable the
development of an AI-based HPD solution to preserve auditory situational
awareness while providing comprehensive hearing protection. The result has the
potential to improve job performance and safety, and minimize occupational
hearing loss for the approximately 22 million U.S. workers that are exposed to
hazardous noise levels each year, with the associated social and economic cost
savings. It can be difficult to convince employers and workers to accept new
wearable safety equipment. Thus, this project includes technological,
psychological, and socioeconomic research components, to achieve a complete
understanding of the factors controlling intelligent HPD adoption and
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project aims to advance
the field of adaptive wearable augmented hearing protection technology. This
planning project includes two thrusts. The first thrust entails identifying
important design considerations, the potential impacts of human and
environmental factors on aural sensing decision making, the needs and beliefs of
key relevant actors (i.e., workers, business leaders, policymakers, and
insurance agents) through a variety of engagement field visits, individual
meetings, and focus groups. The second thrust entails the exploration of
appropriate solutions by conducting a comprehensive literature review, a
multidisciplinary workshop, and several pilot studies with construction workers,
focusing on: i) AI-based sound recognition, ii) human-machine teaming for
auditory situation awareness, and iii) socioeconomic modeling of using wearable
safety technologies at work. This project will produce new knowledge about the
needs and concerns of the user and other relevant stakeholders. The project will
also generate new data for the development of computational semantics-based
sound filtering models considering important human and work specific factors
including auditory cognition, work complexity, biological individual differences
in hearing, and human-machine teaming for aural comprehension. Further, this
project will provide insights necessary to model the interrelationship between
societal and economic perspectives of cognitive HPDs. The ultimate goal of this
project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research infrastructure,
and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying future
technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.