* 1928514
* Linking evolutionary processes and taxonomy in the peatmoss group Sphagnum subg. Cuspidata
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Arthur Shaw, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 851,441.00

Peatmosses (genus Sphagnum) cover huge areas of the Northern Hemisphere where
they help regulate regional patterns of water drainage, and in the far North,
the extent of permafrost (permanently frozen ground). Within these Sphagnum-
dominated peatland ecosystems, peatmosses store vast amounts of carbon in the
form of partially decomposed peat and create environments for unique assemblages
of other plants, animals, and microbes. There are an estimated 250-400 peatmoss
species although the exact number of species and their genealogical
relationships remain to be tested. This project focuses on species delimitation,
estimating genealogical relationships, and producing a new taxonomic
classification for one group of peatmosses: Sphagnum subg. Cuspidata.
Undergraduates, graduate students and post-doctoral researchers will be trained
in diverse field and laboratory techniques and receive hands-on experience
working in Sphagnum-dominated peatland ecosystems. A series of workshops and
field courses will engage both professional and amateur naturalists in the
project, and a new illustrated book will introduce preschool children to the
diversity of plant life. All DNA sequence data generated by the project will be
deposited in public databases and other research products will be freely
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central aims of this project are to assess
species delimitation, phylogenetic relationships, interspecific admixture, and
inter- / intra-specific genome structure in Sphagnum, subgenus Cuspidata.
Subgenus Cuspidata includes approximately 20-25 species. The project covers a
broad range of geographic scales including proximate populations, regional
metapopulations, and plants from different continents, and includes three
integrated parts. The first aim uses RADSeq to test hypotheses of
phylogeographic structure among plants collected in Europe, eastern North
America, western North America, Asia, and specifically, whether eastern North
American and European plants form a clade sister to plants from western North
America and Asia. The RADSeq data will be used to delimit phylogenetic species,
including estimates of genetic admixture among species and intraspecific,
geographic metapopulation systems. The second aim uses whole genome sequencing
to test hypotheses about genomic differentiation among species and
geographically disjunct population systems, as well as genomic regions that are
shared among species- and population-level clades. A major goal is to assess the
physical architecture of shared and differentiated genomic regions across the 19
chromosomes of haploid gametophytes. Comparative analyses will test hypotheses
that species differ in genes related to nutrient requirements and water
relations, two important niche gradients that differentiate members of Sphagnum
subg. Cuspidata. The comparative analyses are facilitated by rich genomic
resources available for Sphagnum, including a reference genome and genetic map
for a species in subg. Cuspidata (S. fallax). The third and final aim integrates
and synthesizes data within a taxonomic revision of the subgenus, including
identification keys, descriptions, nomenclatural revisions, illustrations, and
distribution maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.