* 1928711
* FW-HTF-P: Robotic Health Assistants: A New Human-Machine Partnership in Home Healthcare
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Alex Bishop, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 12/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

This project intends to develop a robotic health assistant-based smart home
healthcare system to augment the productivity and efficiency of home healthcare
providers. The goal is to empower home healthcare providers to improve
productivity and quality of work life. The project addresses the nation's
growing need to provide healthcare to home-bound older adults. It also aims to
improve our understanding of the design, development and use of anthropomorphic
machines. This project will expand the research frontier in telemedicine by
introducing the concept of a robotic health assistant (RoHA), which has the
potential to transform the work of home healthcare services and lower the cost
of care. This research is expected to deepen our understanding of the impact of
artificial intelligence on healthcare providers, and prepare a new generation of
providers for a technological transformation in the healthcare industry. The
proposed system has the potential to improve the quality of life of under-served
older adults in rural areas. The project will impact the educational environment
at Oklahoma State University and University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
especially in robotics, AI, geriatrics and gerontology. In addition, it will
contribute curriculum integrating robotics, AI, and embedded systems and improve
students' understanding of the development and use of anthropomorphic machines,
especially in the context of older adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
planning project are two-fold. First, the research team will collaborate with
industry partners and stakeholders to develop the research concept of a robotic
health assistant-based smart home healthcare system. Activities such as focus
groups and charrette workshops will be conducted with industry partners and
stakeholders. These will identify the needs of healthcare providers and learn
how case managers could deliver services via a robotic health assistant. Second,
a preliminary study will be conducted. Healthcare professionals will help pilot-
test the concept and collect preliminary data and user feedback to improve the
design of the RoHA prototype. Natural language-based, older adult-friendly robot
skills with be identified and refined with the help of industry partners and key
stakeholders. These skill will evaluate the care recipient's physical and mental
well being, and allow data-driven, evidence-based home healthcare. Stakeholder
input will provide insights into how the robotic health assistant could enhance
current healthcare services. The RoHA has the potential to facilitate online
virtual visits with healthcare providers or monitor medication and therapy
adherence. The intent would be to proactively intervene on health problems
before they progress to a medical emergency. The ultimate goal of this project
is to develop the necessary research personnel, research infrastructure, and
foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying future technology,
future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full research
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.