* 1928654
* FW-HTF-RL: Co-worker Robots to Impact Seafood Processing (CRISP): Designs, Tools and Methods for Enhanced Worker Experience
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* John Basl, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,500,000.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) project will
investigate the appropriate development and deployment of collaborative robots
to transform profitability, productivity, safety, sustainability, and worker
quality of life in the seafood processing industry, where harsh conditions and
demanding and dangerous tasks challenge the capabilities of humans and robots
alike. The result will be designs, tools, methods, and datasets to facilitate
seamless human-robot collaboration. Soft robot manipulators will augment the
safe and reliable handling of slippery, scaly, and flexible objects. Emerging
capabilities in artificial intelligence will assist in identifying and
inspecting varieties of fish and shellfish. Critical to the project is
understanding how best to allocate specific tasks among robot and human workers,
integrating a complex set of desired outcomes, across scales of individual
workers, independent businesses, domestic and migrant labor markets, national
economic sectors, and global trade, while respecting environmental and ethical
constraints. Associated educational and outreach programs will empower
engineers, design experts, and social scientists how to address challenges at
the convergence of robotics and manipulation, artificial intelligence, human-
robot collaboration, ethics, and labor economics. Training programs will develop
a new cadre of learners and researchers in data, technology and human
literacies. In 2017, the US imported record amounts of seafood, corresponding to
a trade deficit of more than $17 billion. Due to low domestic unemployment and
obstacles to employing migrant labor, the US seafood processing industry has
been unable to meet US consumer demand. This project will advance US leadership
in a globally competitive and domestically underserved industry, while
simultaneously advancing understanding of key scientific, engineering, and
societal challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of the project will
impact five interconnected and convergent areas, namely (i) collaborative
robotics and shared autonomy, (ii) interaction design with data visualizations,
(iii) labor economics in seafood industry, (iv) ethics of autonomy in the
workplace, (v) workforce training and new skills learning. To address
shortcomings of today?s human-robot co-worker teams, the research plan aims to
dramatically enhance productivity in complex environments, while paying specific
attention to factors affecting user acceptability. The team will emphasize the
integration of robotic systems in the existing socio-technical context --
existing machinery and tools and existing human work practices, including formal
and informal modalities ? to develop an approach of ambient and distributed
robotics, rather than individual robot interventions. The research plan develops
a constellation of design requirements for systems through user-centered design
and ideation activities, iteratively advancing model-based and data-driven
methods, validating designs through usability studies, and assessing the
societal and economic impact of technologies to impact the future of work. The
project incorporates and builds upon improvisation in the everyday seafood
processing plant workplace, to design and validate robot co-worker competencies.
Complementing the technological objectives, the project includes human-subject
studies to address ethical issues raised by the adoption of robotics in the
workplace. Addressing these issues -- which include challenges specific to a
labor context with immigrant labor, low wages, and harsh working conditions --
is essential to successful robotics integration and adoption. Finally, the
project will evaluate the economic impact of automation on both workers and
companies in this emerging socio-technological landscape to understand both the
costs and the benefits of adopting new technologies that will shape the future
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.