* 1928802
* Collaborative Research:  RoL:  Local adaptation, hybrid breakdown, and species barriers in North American chickadees
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Amber Rice, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2025
* USD 350,082.00

Understanding how new species are maintained is a major goal of evolutionary
biology. When similar species live in different habitats, natural selection may
produce different specializations for each species. In North America, there are
several species of small birds known as chickadees. Some chickadee species live
in warmer climates, others live in colder ones. When their ranges overlap, the
different species can hybridize with one another. The goal of the research is to
understand whether hybrid chickadees have less efficient metabolisms and reduced
survival when compared with non-hybrid chickadees. If hybrids have low survival
this may help maintain separate species. Members of the public will be critical
parts of the project. They will help collect data on survival by monitoring
backyard bird feeders. In addition, the research team will work with University
of Colorado Science Discovery to create educational materials for K-12
classrooms. These materials will explore relevant topics in evolution,
physiology and genetics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three aims. The
first is to understand patterns of genetic divergence and gene flow between
Black-capped and Carolina chickadees. The second is to measure differences in
metabolism, body composition and gene expression in these chickadees and their
hybrids. The third is to relate the data from the first two aims to fitness and
survival. To meet these aims, the research will sample chickadees from
populations spanning three latitudinal gradients. Among other data types, the
work will combine whole genome sequence data and whole organism performance data
with data gathered by the public on over-winter feeding rates to develop an
integrated model of how local adaptation contributes to
speciation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.