* 1928898
* A Workshop on Aligning Goals for the Development of a Global Roadmap for Achieving Negative Emissions on the Order of a Gigaton by Mid-Century
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2019
* Jennifer Wilcox, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 31,219.00

The workshop will bring together a small group of thought leaders in the various
sectors of Negative Emissions Technologies (NETs), including land management,
accelerated weathering, bioenergy with carbon capture and storage, and direct
air capture with storage. The workshop is intended to establish a framework for
a 1-year study in which each of the attendees works in their primary area of
expertise, but toward a common goal of developing a roadmap to achieving global
negative emissions on the order of a gigaton by mid- century. It is envisioned
that global coverage of deployed NETs will have significant impact in reducing
atmospheric CO2 concentration to safe levels as part of the global effort to
achieve lower than 2 ?C warming by the end of the century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to effectively realize this vision, the workshop,
"Global Mapping of Negative Emissions Technologies," and associated follow-up
will assess the opportunities and impacts of NETs in different scenarios and
multiple stages of implementation. Comprehensive mapping and siting of global
potentials for negative emissions under various options of technologies and
assessment of impacts are needed to provide richer understanding for the
feasible and sustainable development of NETs and their multiple interactions.
Such mapping will also provide policymakers, businesses, and investors with
information needed to finance initial negative emissions projects of the highest
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.