* 1928906
* Collaborative Research: Frame-Spine System with Force-Limiting Connections for Low-Damage Seismic Resilient Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Larry Fahnestock, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 839,877.00

This project will develop a new structural system that will protect buildings,
their contents, and occupants during large earthquakes and will enable immediate
post-earthquake occupancy. This earthquake-resilient structural system will be
particularly valuable for essential facilities, such as hospitals, where damage
to buildings and contents and occupant injuries must be prevented and where
continuous occupancy performance is imperative. The new system will use
practical structural components to economically protect a building from damaging
displacements and accelerations. The project team will collaborate with Japanese
researchers to study the new system with full-scale earthquake simulations using
the 3D Full-Scale Earthquake Testing Facility (E-Defense) located in Miki,
Japan, and operated by the National Research Institute for Earth Science and
Disaster Resilience. This project will advance national health, prosperity, and
welfare by preventing injuries and loss of human life and minimizing social and
economic disruption of buildings due to large earthquakes. An online course on
resilient seismic design will be developed and offered through the American
Institute of Steel Construction night school program, which will be of interest
to practicing engineers, researchers, and students across the country. Data from
this project will be archived in the Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). This project
contributes to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel steel frame-spine lateral force-resisting system
with force-limiting connections (FLC) that will be developed in this project
will control multi-modal seismic response to protect a building and provide
resilient structural and non-structural building performance. This frame-spine-
FLC system will rely on a conventional, economical base system that resists a
significant proportion of the lateral load. The system judiciously employs
floor-level force-limiting deformable connections and an elastic spine to
protect the base system. Integrated experiments and numerical simulations will
provide comprehensive understanding of the new frame-spine-FLC system, including
rich full-scale experimental data on building seismic performance with combined
in-plane, out-of-plane, and torsional response under 3D excitation. The FLCs
will be tested using the NHERI facility at Lehigh University. This project will
be conducted in collaboration with an ongoing synergistic research program in
Japan. The extensive dataset from this integrated U.S.-Japan research program
will enable unique comparisons of structural and non-structural performance,
including critical acceleration-sensitive hospital contents that directly affect
the health and safety of patients. In addition, the dataset will enable the
advancement of computational modeling for the assessment of building performance
and the development of practical, accurate models for use in design that capture
the complex 3D structural response that occurs during an
earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.