* 1928306
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 49th IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN 2019)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Homa Alemzadeh, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This project provides funding support for travel grants for students to attend
the 49th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and
Networks (DSN 2019) to be held in Portland, Oregon on June 24-27, 2019. The
IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) is a
premier international conference for presenting the research results, problem
solutions, and insights on new challenges in dependability and security of
computer systems and networks. The 2019 edition of the conference will be
organized around a number of thematic areas of emphasis, including emerging
areas such as Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), Internet of Things (IoT), Machine
Learning and Artificial Intelligence, Autonomous Systems, and Social Media. The
conference will provide various opportunities for student submission and
participation. These opportunities range from full-length conference and
workshop papers to medium-length preliminary contributions considered by the
Student Forum to brief descriptions of early stage research in the Fast
Abstracts category.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
the attendance opportunity to students in U.S. universities, who otherwise might
not be able to attend the conference, in particular students from
underrepresented groups, undergraduate and graduate students who are attending
the conference for the first time, and students who might not have a paper or
presentation at the conference. The broader impacts of the project is primarily
through the education students will receive from attending the technical
sessions of DSN, mentoring that they will receive through the Student Forum
activities, and networking opportunities they will receive through numerous
different conference activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.