* 1928724
* 12th International Precipitation Conference (IPC12)-Precipitation estimation and prediction at local, regional and global scales: Advances in hydroclimatology and impact studies
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2022
* USD 35,000.00

Precipitation is difficult to predict both locally and globally. Scientists have
identified many challenges in precipitation research. The International
Precipitation Conference was established to bring together researchers from
various fields to discuss these challenges. Scientists and engineers discuss
challenges and opportunities facing the research community at the conference.
The researchers develop collaborations during this conference. The conference
supports early career scientists and provides training workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precipitation remains one of the most challenging
variables to model and predict at local, regional and global scales with
significant implications for our ability to quantify water and energy cycle
dynamics, inform decision making, and predict extremes such as floods and
droughts and their hydro-geomorphic hazards. The international community has
acknowledged the challenges in precipitation research and has established the
International Precipitation Conference (starting in 1986) to bring together the
atmospheric, climate, hydrologic and applied water resources engineering
communities to discuss challenges and develop collaborations that advance
modeling and prediction. Building on the previous International Precipitation
Conferences, this conference will bring together an international group of
scientists and engineers to integrate research efforts, discuss challenges and
opportunities facing the community, mentor young scientists, and craft future
directions. The conference engages and supports early career scientists and
graduate students in an international collaborative environment and fosters
opportunities for future research collaborations. The conference program
includes several training workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.