* 1928379
* CSBR:  Living Stocks --  Transfer of Ownership of Two Large Legacy Collections to the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* David Somers, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 314,349.00

The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC) has been serving the plant
research community since 1991 by collecting, preserving, amplifying and
distributing seed and DNA resources of Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis) and
related species. These include diverse DNA libraries, full-length cDNA
collections, insertion mutant seed populations, seed collections representing
global natural variation, as well as genome editing resources. The ABRC's long-
term goals are: 1) to continue to enlarge and expand the collection though
acquisition of new resources, 2) to store, amplify and distribute new types of
resources based on the needs of the community, 3) to increase the efficiency of
the operation, to provide higher quality service with a continued low stock
price, 4) to provide free access to curated stock information, and 5) to
continue to generate, collect and distribute teaching and education outreach
kits, to facilitate an integrated plant biology education both locally and
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will facilitate the transfer of
ownership of two large legacy seed collections, generated through previous NSF
funded research. The Center will curate, amplify and distribute novel seed stock
collections that have been donated by two retiring or re-orienting Arabidopsis
researchers, Dr. David Meinke and Dr. Robert Last. The information from these
legacy collections (about 20,000 records) will be integrated within the existing
ABRC database infrastructure, in addition to securing, curating and amplifying
the physical collections for approximately 6,500 stocks. These collections are
larger and more complex to curate and maintain than the stocks normally accepted
and this project will support their timely inclusion into the larger ABRC
collection. The addition of the Last and Meinke legacy collections also presents
an opportunity for the ABRC to highlight these acquisitions through the creation
of new education resources and unique, hands-on experiences for K-16 students,
educators and the general public. This will include the development of two new
Greening the Classroom education modules that include stocks from the legacy
collections, and a public hands-on laboratory experience involving "citizen
scientists" who will assist in the identification of defective seed from the
Last collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.