* 1928343
* STEM Articulation and Transfer Collaborative Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Gregg Fields, Palm Beach State College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,553,556.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to increase the successful
transfer of students from a two-year institution to a four-year institution, and
their graduation with a four-year degree. It will do so by creating a model of
proactive articulation, advising, and enhanced student learning opportunities.
The transfer model will be developed through a partnership between Palm Beach
State College and Florida Atlantic University. To enhance student learning, Palm
Beach State College will collaborate with the Scripps Research Institute-Florida
and the Max Planck Florida Institute to integrate classroom-based undergraduate
research opportunities into chemistry courses. Expected project outcomes include
improved degree attainment and development of a transfer success model that can
be adapted by all STEM disciplines at the partner institutions. By developing a
collaborative transfer-success model that enhances student learning and
facilitates the successful transfer of students, this project can contribute to
diversifying the STEM workforce. It is expected that the project's transfer
success model could also be implemented to enhance the success of other two-
year/four-year collaborations that seek to enhance student success and degree
attainment in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to increase retention
and degree completion for all STEM students, full- or part-time, with attention
to the needs of Hispanic students. To accomplish these goals, the project will
streamline advising protocols and articulation agreements between the
institutions, and provide students with early research experiences and enhanced
academic supports. The program will focus on chemistry and biology, which are
essential STEM disciplines for the successful completion of Florida Atlantic
University's College of Science programs. In year 1, the project will develop
and pilot a program of streamlined articulation, collaborative advising, and
Hispanic culture-centered strategies to improve academic outcomes in chemistry.
In year 2, the project seeks to fully implement and refine the validated model
for chemistry. In years 3 and 4, the model will be institutionalized in
chemistry and applied to biology. In year 5, elements of the model may be
expanded to additional STEM disciplines at the two schools. To provide an
understanding of student educational pathways, a mixed methods analysis will
compare and synthesize quantitative data (e.g., data from student transcripts;
co-curricular participation) and qualitative data from student surveys.
Strategies and processes developed by the project will be shared through a
website, presentations at national conferences such as the Hispanic Association
of Colleges and Universities Conference and the Association of Community
Colleges Conference, and publications in journals such as the Journal of College
Science Teaching. It is expected that this project will influence other higher
education institutions that seek to enhance student learning and the successful
transfer of students from diverse backgrounds. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.