* 1928147
* Category I: Bridges-2: Scalable Converged Computing, Data, and Analytics for Rapidly Evolving Science and Engineering Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2025
* Robin Scibek, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Robert Chadduck
* 09/30/2025
* USD 24,499,998.00

Unlocking the power of data will accelerate discovery to advance science,
improve our quality of life, and enhance national competitiveness. The
increasing importance of data is driving a rapid evolution of research, creating
opportunities for breakthroughs by combining the strengths of artificial
intelligence (AI) and high-performance computing (HPC) simulation. To address
this exciting opportunity for the nation's research community, the Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center (PSC), a joint research center of Carnegie Mellon
University and the University of Pittsburgh, in partnership with Hewlett Packard
Enterprise (HPE), will deploy Bridges-2, a resource that will provide
exceptional capacity and transformative capability for rapidly evolving, data-
and computation-intensive research. Building on PSC's experience with its very
successful Bridges system, Bridges-2 will take the next step in pioneering
converged, scalable HPC, AI, and data; prioritize researcher productivity and
ease of use; and provide an extensible architecture for interoperation with
complementary data-intensive projects, campus resources, and clouds. Bridges-2
will deploy new high-performance technologies to deliver results faster by
combining AI with simulation and through exceptional data-handling capabilities
and will be integrated with NSF-funded cyberinfrastructure (CI) services for
allocation, user-support, monitoring, etc., such as those currently provided by
the Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE) and
XDMoD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridges-2 will accelerate discovery to benefit
science, society, and the nation. Its unique architecture will catalyze
breakthroughs in critically important areas such as understanding the brain,
developing new materials for sustainable energy production and quantum
computing, assembling genomes of crop species to improve agricultural
efficiency, exploring the universe via multimessenger astrophysics, and enabling
technologies for smart cities. A great amount of valuable research is in areas
that did not traditionally use HPC until Bridges. Bridges-2 will therefore serve
nontraditional communities and applications, which now have workloads requiring
great capacity, as well as traditional ones. Its community data collections and
user-friendly interfaces will democratize participation in science and
engineering and foster collaboration and convergence research. The Bridges-2
project includes areas of focus on developing STEM talent, engaging industry,
reaching beyond borders, and broadly engaging stakeholders to develop the
nation's workforce, maximize learning through collaboration, and bring the
benefits of advanced computing to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PSC
is integrating cutting-edge technologies to deploy a uniquely powerful national
resource for turning data into knowledge. Bridges-2 will consist of Hewlett
Packard Enterprise Apollo 2000 and ProLiant DL560 central processing unit (CPU)
servers of three different memory capacities (256GB, 512GB, and 4TB) for
extremely broad workloads; Apollo 6500 servers each with two CPUs and eight
graphics processing units (GPUs) for AI (particularly deep learning) and to
accelerate simulations; and ProLiant DL360/380 servers for gateways, databases,
and utility and management functions. A hierarchical data management system
using HPE's Data Management Framework (DMF) will provide seamless access with
exceptional ease of use to active and archival data, spanning a Lustre parallel
filesystem and StoreEver MSL6480 Tape Library. An HPE TierZero high-performance
flash array will provide even higher performance for data-intensive
applications. A Mellanox HDR InfiniBand interconnect will provide unified, high-
performance data transport across compute and storage components. The Bridges-2
user environment will be extremely robust and flexible, supporting HPC
applications, AI frameworks, high-productivity programming languages,
containers, interactive and batch execution, workflows, databases, and science
gateways. Bridges-2's uniquely flexible software environment and heterogeneous
hardware resources will serve the needs of rapidly evolving research, opening
the door to discovery and the path to prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.