* 1928696
* Creating Faculty-Student Communities for Culturally Relevant Institutional Change
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Eleanor Close, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,499,933.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project aims to advance STEM education
research. Specifically, it will analyze the efforts of faculty and student teams
to improve introductory STEM courses at a large HSI in central Texas. By
providing faculty with support from education specialists, peers, and
administrators, the project will facilitate instructional innovations to enhance
student learning in STEM gateway courses. The project's key goal is to improve
undergraduate STEM courses in ways that that build on the students' strengths
and that increase the collaboration between faculty and students in the learning
process. The project emphasizes faculty-student partnerships to redesign
courses, which has the potential to broaden participation of underrepresented
minorities in STEM. In addition, the project's focus on sustained improvements
will benefit future students in the gateway courses as well as result in
improvements to STEM courses beyond those targeted by this proposal. The work
will involve all seven departments in the College of Science and Engineering at
Texas State University, directly impacting hundreds of faculty and thousands of
STEM students. Lessons learned will inform other higher education institutions
that plan to undertake similar initiatives. The project has the potential to
increase the number of STEM degrees awarded to underrepresented minorities, thus
supporting increased diversity of the national STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will implement and study a comprehensive
instructional improvement initiative in the College of Science and Engineering
at Texas State University. The initiative consists of four programmatic
components that engage faculty and students at increasingly high levels: (1)
professional development workshops on evidence-based and culturally relevant
instruction; (2) sustained support for faculty to conduct departmental self-
assessments to understand student strengths and needs; (3) financial,
pedagogical, and community support for faculty-student teams to redesign lower
division STEM gateway courses; and (4) development of faculty team leaders who
participate in project-level decision making and plan for next steps beyond the
duration of the grant. The project will develop a learning assistant model that
will engage undergraduate students as instructional partners to leverage the
strengths of diverse students. Participating STEM departments will receive
multifaceted intellectual, material, and logistical supports to empower faculty-
student teams in developing sustainable communities of practice focused on
culturally relevant instruction. The first research strand focuses on
communities of practice among faculty and learning assistants, by measuring
shifts in faculty knowledge, perceptions of students, and instructional
practices. The second strand focuses on STEM student trajectories at Texas
State, by measuring the effectiveness of course redesigns. The third strand
focuses on student graduation rates and STEM workforce outcomes for Texas State
and other HSIs, by measuring the impact of learning assistant programs on long-
term student outcomes. This research will reveal how theories and models that
operate at different levels and multiple contexts can be coordinated to produce
sustained, culturally relevant instructional change and improve workforce
outcomes and diversity. The knowledge generated by this proposal has the
potential to improve STEM student outcomes at diverse higher education
institutions across the nation. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program
will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.