* 1928248
* NNA Track 2: Collaborative Research: Planning for Climate Resiliency Amid Changing Culture, Technology, Economics, and Governance
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Henry Huntington, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2022
* USD 185,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is taking a unique approach
to investigating what is needed to enable subsistence communities in the Arctic
to remain sustainable in the future: questioning the common assumption that
climate impacts and sea ice loss are the most important changes impacting
subsistence activities in the Arctic. The group will broadly consider a set of
interconnected factors and feedbacks, including changing culture, technology,
economics, and governance in addition to climate. The proposal includes a clear
plan to integrate co-production of knowledge and to capture the linkage between
researchers and native communities. This project may lead to a holistic approach
to the evolution of subsistence living in the Arctic and to create a community
of practice including Arctic peoples with traditional knowledge and university-
trained scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is exploring a series of
hypotheses designed to stress-test assumptions about the role of rapid physical
environmental change in disrupting traditional ways of life for Arctic coastal
communities. A community of practice composed of academics from various
disciplines and residents of the Arctic communities of Utqiagvik and Kotzebue is
being established to consider a central guiding question: How can Alaskan
subsistence communities best prepare for and adapt to climate change in a world
where nothing else is static? The outcomes of this work include tools and
methods for understanding motives of climate adaptations in Alaska Native
communities and assessing their effectiveness. The project is also coproducing a
plan for future research aimed at improving community and individual resilience
in the face of impending Arctic changes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.