* 1928446
* The International Beacon Satellite Symposium 2019; Olsztyn, Poland; August 18-23, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Patricia Doherty, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 22,513.00

This award provides support for the International Beacon Satellite Symposium
that will be held at the University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, Poland on
August 18-23, 2019 (BSS2019). This meeting is an important international
conference with a particular focus on communication and navigation satellites
that exploit radio propagation properties of the Earth's upper atmosphere. The
award provides travel support and participant expenses for US scientists and
students to attend the conference as well as subsistence support for non-US
scientists from developing countries. The Beacon Satellite Symposium provides a
unique opportunity for US scientists and students working with global satellite
constellations to meet scientists from all over the world to share knowledge on
radio propagation through the upper atmosphere and implications for satellite
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This symposium is a premiere international
symposium dedicated to satellite studies. It provides unparalleled benefits for
US scientists and students to develop potential collaborations and partnerships
worldwide, to learn of the international advancements in their fields, and to
share their knowledge on a global scale. Studies using satellites have gained
new momentum and perspectives with recent developments in imaging and remote
sensing techniques, data assimilation models, distributed arrays of
measurements, monitoring natural hazards from space, national and international
space weather activities, and satellite-based navigation and communication
systems. This symposium is a unique opportunity for US scientists and students
to gain a worldwide perspective on the state of the art of these research
topics. It will also present opportunities for global collaboration and data
sharing. Finally, it may open opportunities for international exchange for US
students to work in global laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.