* 1928855
* Molecular mechanisms of tissue specific signaling for islet self-assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sha Jin, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2023
* USD 412,000.00

By 2030, diabetes is expected to be the third leading cause of death worldwide.
While beta cell (an insulin producing pancreatic cell) therapy has shown success
in animal studies, growing evidence suggests that beta cells alone do not offer
a long-term solution. Both type 1 (usually diagnosed in childhood) and type 2
(usually diagnosed in adults) diabetes diseases are affected by two hormones:
insulin, whose role is to reduce glucose in the blood stream, and glucagon
(produced by alpha cells), whose role is to increase glucose in the blood
stream. Interactions between alpha and beta cells are thought to be essential to
maintaining blood glucose stability. In fact, alpha cell dysfunction is a major
cause of excessive glucose production and insulin resistance in diabetic
patients. Furthermore, two other cell types (delta cells and pancreatic
polypeptide cells (PP)) regulate both insulin and glucagon secretion. Thus,
engineered whole islets (insulin producing tissues) should entail all cell
types: alpha, bet, delta, and PP cells, but such a diabetes tissue model is
currently unavailable. This team has pioneered the generation of islet organoids
(clusters of islets) from induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs = stem cells
that can become any cell type). A particular form of collagen, referred to as
ColV, was found to enable self-assembly of the iPSCs into islets that contain of
all the cell types and could generate glucose-responsive secretion of insulin
and glucagon. The goal of this project is to uncover and intensify the ColV
signal pathways required for islet development and maturation. Project outcomes
are expected to lead to the fabrication of functional islets from iPSCs, thereby
transforming the field by offering an endless supply of islets for diabetes
therapy, drug testing and diabetes related research. The project will extend the
team's efforts to establish a strong research and educationally integrated
program and to bring science and engineering to the public and younger
generations, especially to those from underrepresented groups. The research will
provide opportunities to train undergraduate and graduate students, including
minorities, and reach out to K12 students to encourage their pursuits in science
and engineering at the early stage of their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to generate whole islets from iPSCs to
address the need for an in vitro diabetes tissue model that entails pancreatic
cells known to be involved in maintaining blood glucose homeostasis: beta,
alpha, delta and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cells. The project builds on the
team's preliminary studies that revealed that cell clusters self-assemble into
functional islet organoids after exposing iPSCs to a tissue-specific ECM
(extracellular matrix) niche consisting of the pancreatic ECM protein Collagen V
(ColV) in Matrigel. These findings led to the project's central hypothesis that
pancreatic ECM proteins, such as ColV, are critical to islet organogenesis and
morphogenesis during iPSC pancreatic differentiation. To test this hypothesis,
the project plans to systematically interrogate ColV for its instructive role in
assembling a human islet architecture of iPSC derived indocrine cell clusters.
The synergistic ColV signal transduction pathways involved in islet development
and maturation will be unveiled. The Research Plan is organized under two
objectives. The FIRST Objective is to discover ColV's organogenesis signal for
islet development and maturation from iPSCs. Studies will be designed to examine
whether islet maturation can be further elevated by exposing iPSCs to a higher
concentration of ColV and to determine if the ColV signal is differentiation
stage-specific and if so, to determine which stage is the most critical for
exporting ColV signals to induce islet organogenesis. Cellularity and maturity
will be characterized at genotype and phenotype levels to evaluate their quality
and function for use as a tissue model for diabetes study or as human islet
replacement for diabetes treatment. The SECOND Objective is to decipher the ColV
signaling pathways involved in islet development and maturation considering both
extrinsic and intrinsic factors. Unlocking the underlying mechanisms of the ColV
signal will help design a better islet development system to enhance or suppress
key molecules engaged in transduction pathways critical to islet organogenesis,
morphogenesis, and maturation. The focus will be on elucidating ColV induced
signaling pathways and their role in regulating and controlling islet
organogenesis, morphogenesis, and maturation. Cellular receptors involved in
ColV-cell interactions will be identified and intracellular signaling proteins
and effector proteins for ColV signaling will be
pinpointed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.