* 1928409
* Enhancing Critical Transitions in Undergraduate Civil Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Haroon Stephen, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,483,977.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to enhance critical
transitions from lower- to upper-division undergraduate coursework for civil
engineering majors. The project focuses on addressing low retention and
graduation rates in civil engineering undergraduate degrees at the University of
Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV), which is a designated HSI. UNLV is also a Native-
American-Serving Institution and an Asian-American- and Pacific Islander-Serving
Institution. The project will increase retention and graduation in civil
engineering by: 1) increasing the sense of community among students and between
students and faculty; 2) innovating the undergraduate curriculum through course
creation and alignment of lower- and upper-division courses; and 3) assisting
STEM faculty and graduate assistants to develop and implement culturally
responsive teaching strategies. The project will develop evidence-based
strategies to manage cultural aspects of engineering education that can be
adapted by other institutions. By increasing retention rates and on-track
graduation of civil engineering students, including students of diverse
backgrounds, the project has the potential to contribute to increasing the
diversity of the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging a robust
collaboration of engineering and education researchers, the project will explore
causative and correlative interactions of factors affecting undergraduate civil
engineering education. To achieve the educational and research objectives, the
project will perform three interconnected activities including, 1) Community
Cohesion Building, 2) Transformative Curriculum Development, and 3) Culturally
Responsive Faculty Development. The project will engage civil engineering
students into cohort-based social activities to build learning communities. The
project will engage faculty to align the curriculum of lower- and upper-division
courses and to create an inclusive teaching environment. The project seeks to
develop evidence-based knowledge on culturally responsive engineering pedagogy
for the engineering and education research communities. To this end, it will
employ a quantitative and culturally responsive evaluation plan to track
progress, enhance resiliency in unforeseen circumstances, and guide future
sustainable activities. The project will also include an Advisory Board of
experts to provide feedback and guidance. It is expected that the research
studies will: 1) identify optimal support structures to enable students to
successfully complete the critical transition from lower- to upper-division
course; 2) reveal the relational support among cohort groupings to increase
retention in the freshman year and to improve learning achievement in upper-
division coursework; 3) examine the synergistic effects of incorporating
culturally responsive instruction and its impact on student learning. The
project outcomes will be disseminated through journal articles, presentations,
and a website. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.