* 1928623
* PREEVENTS Track 1: Meteorology and Impacts of Correlated Climate Extremes: New York, NY: May 28-31, 2019
* GEO,ICER
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Radley Horton, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2020
* USD 44,792.00

This workshop will bring together a diverse range of climate scientists and
climate-impacts researchers to establish the state of knowledge of correlated
climate extremes, survey current research, and delineate future research
programs and priorities. The intention is to expand and integrate the community
of researchers and practitioners considering correlation, whether it involves
climate events which are extreme in multiple variables (compound); events which
are simultaneous but separated in space (concurrent); or events which impact the
same location sequentially or persistently. Through cross-disciplinary dialogue,
which the organizers will foster through a variety of guided and freeform
discussions, the workshop will help clarify and distill lines of inquiry that
are still largely separated by distance and specialization. The resultant themes
will be emphasized further in a perspectives piece that will be made publically
available. This award provides travel support for diverse U.S.-based students
and early-career scientists. The award will enable participation of one of the
pioneers in the study of compound events who is based in the Netherlands.

Correlated climate extremes exist in a variety of forms and are expected to
increase greatly in frequency and severity as a consequence of anthropogenic
climate change. There has so far been very little communication among the
different communities that study such extremes, leading to a lack of consistency
in definitions and a paucity of understanding of the mechanisms that underlie
these events and their associated risks. This workshop will focus on the cutting
edge of work being done to understand statistics, dynamics, and thermodynamics
affecting correlated climate extremes, with a particular goal of beginning to
build a common framework around which future work can be designed. The attendees
will comprise experts in hydrology, climate dynamics, tropical climatology,
statistics, and other fields among whom structured dialogue will be fostered in
order to ensure that intellectual cross-communication is achieved.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.