* 1928331
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Hardware-assisted Plausibly Deniable System for Mobile Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/28/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Mobile computing devices typically use encryption to protect sensitive
information. However, traditional encryption systems used in mobile devices
cannot defend against an active attacker who can force the mobile device owner
to disclose the key used for decrypting the sensitive information. This is
particularly of concern to dissident users who are targets of nation states. An
example of this would be a human rights worker collecting evidence of untoward
activities in a region of oppression or conflict and storing the same in an
encrypted form on the mobile device, and then being coerced to disclose the
decryption key by an official. Plausibly Deniable Encryption (PDE) has been
proposed to defend against such adversaries who can coerce users into revealing
the encrypted sensitive content. However, existing techniques suffer from
several problems when used in flash-memory-based mobile devices, such as weak
deniability because of the way read/write/erase operations are handled at the
operating systems level and at the flash translation layer, various types of
side channel attacks, and computation and power limitations of mobile devices.
This project investigates a unique opportunity to develop an efficient (low-
overhead) and effective (high-deniability) hardware-assisted PDE scheme on
mainstream mobile devices that is robust against a multi snapshot adversary. The
project includes significant curriculum development activities and outreach
activities to K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project fundamentally
advances the mobile PDE systems by leveraging existing hardware features such as
flash translation layer (FTL) firmware and TrustZone to achieve a high
deniability with a low overhead. Specifically, this project develops a PDE
system with capabilities to: 1) defend against snapshot attacks using raw flash
memory on mobile devices; and 2) eliminate side-channel attacks that compromise
deniability; 3) be scalable to deploy on mainstream mobile devices; and 4)
efficiently provide usable functions like fast mode switching. This project also
develops novel teaching material on PDE and cybersecurity for K-12 students and
the Regional Cybersecurity Education Collaboration (RCEC), a new educational
partnership on cybersecurity in Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.