* 1928048
* Collaborative Research: Navigating Disturbance Regimes in the New Arctic
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Mark Lara, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/29/2024
* USD 383,083.00

The Arctic has experienced unprecedented warmth over the past several decades.
These areas have also experienced increased disturbances due to wildfires,
permafrost degradation, and shrub expansion. Evidence suggests dynamic
interactions and feedbacks exist among Arctic disturbance regimes. However, the
interdependence of these disturbances makes quantifying their impact
challenging. Overcoming this challenge is the first step in improving our
capacity to predict future disturbance regimes in the face of climate change. To
achieve this goal, researchers will evaluate the vulnerability of Arctic tundra
regions in northern Alaska to disturbances over decadal to centennial-time
scales. Successful completion of this work will facilitate our ability to
predict impacts to local indigenous communities, regional Arctic infrastructure,
and global carbon and energy dynamics. Outreach to 20 indigenous Arctic
communities will communicate results and develop knowledge to assist these
communities adapt to and mitigate impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research is to investigate decadal to centennial time-scale interactions
between climate, disturbances, and the physical environment across the Alaskan
tundra. This will be achieved by examining permafrost degradation, tall shrub
expansion, and potential biophysical and biogeochemical feedbacks during
disturbances induced by climate change. Historical observations of permafrost
degradation and tall shrub expansion will be used to project future landscape
evolution. Spatial heterogeneity will be represented by spatially disaggregating
the landscape into key state factors that are subdivided into terrain categories
and disturbance types. Sophisticated machine learning algorithms will be used to
assess decadal patterns of land cover change using high resolution aerial and
satellite imagery. These will be used to determine the primary drivers of change
to landscape evolution. Paleoecological reconstructions (2,000+ years) of
climate, wildfire, permafrost degradation, and shrub expansion will be derived
from lake sediment cores and linked with satellite observations to capture
patterns of land-cover change spanning decadal to centennial timescales.
Together, these results will provide an independent test of the historical
drivers of landscape evolution under a range of disturbance regimes. The
biogeophysical implications of landscape evolution will be estimated using
surveys of vegetation and soil properties, linked with empirical land-cover
change models. This project will reconcile several fundamental knowledge gaps
that currently limit global climate change projections. In addition, results
will help Arctic communities anticipate and adapt to environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.