* 1928166
* Strong Interactions, Topology, and Constraints in Emerging Phases of Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Fiona Burnell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 390,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
education towards understanding the properties of new phases of matter in three
dimensions, and the dynamics of low-dimensional quantum systems. One of the
frontiers of modern physics is understanding what new types of quantum phenomena
can occur in systems with many interacting particles. Striking examples of such
phenomena discovered in the 20th century include superfluidity,
superconductivity, and the fractional quantum Hall effect, all of which entail
macroscopic numbers of interacting particles entering a coherent quantum state.
More recently, rapid progress in our understanding of how specific abstract
properties (in technical terms, topological properties) of quantum many-particle
systems influence their real physical properties has led to the discovery of new
classes of materials, such as topological insulators and superconductors. The
latter, in particular, have drawn interest as a potential platform for quantum
computing, in which information can be stored in a way that is intrinsically
robust to random noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on two themes
that are of current interest both for expanding our understanding of new types
of possible quantum phenomena, and for investigating how strong interactions can
potentially help identify promising platforms for quantum computing. The first
theme is expanding our understanding of how topological properties can lead to
new types of interacting quantum matter in three dimensions. The second theme is
understanding how strong interactions, and ultimately the kinds of topological
properties that are already well-understood in these systems, help shape how
quantum systems evolve in time at finite temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will contribute to the workforce of highly trained STEM professionals
both by training graduate students, and through programs and events coordinated
by the PI focused on facilitating the transition of interested physics
undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Minnesota to jobs in
the private sector. This includes working with engineering departments to allow
interested physics undergraduates to participate in senior engineering design
projects, as well as helping coordinate extracurricular networking and career-
information events aimed specifically at physics
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and education towards
understanding the role of topology and constraints in two areas: new phases of
matter in three dimensions, and the dynamics of low-dimensional systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of phases of matter in three dimensions, the
proposed research will focus on recently discovered fracton phases of matter,
with the unusual feature that their low-lying excitations have restricted
mobility. A combination of field-theoretic techniques and tools for analyzing
group cohomology developed in the study of interacting symmetry-protected phases
of matter will be used to address the following questions. First, what field
theories exhibit the qualitative features of fracton phases? Second, when does
symmetry in these and related systems lead to protected gapless boundary modes?
Addressing these questions will expand our understanding of how the interplay
between geometry and topology in these systems leads to physical properties
qualitatively unlike those of other three-dimensional quantum
phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the area of dynamics in low-dimensional systems,
the focus will be on exploring the impact of constraints and topological order
on dynamics. The proposed research will use a combination of numerical (exact
diagonalization) and analytical approaches based in perturbation theory and
random-matrix theory. As low-dimensional systems that approximate constrained
systems become experimentally accessible, clarifying whether, when, and how
constraints can lead to unusually slow dynamics in quantum many-body systems can
significantly advance our understanding of how information can be more robustly
stored at intermediate time-scales in quantum many-body systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will contribute to the workforce of highly
trained STEM professionals both by training graduate students, and through
programs and events coordinated by the PI focused on facilitating the transition
of interested physics undergraduate and graduate students at the University of
Minnesota to jobs in the private sector. This includes working with engineering
departments to allow interested physics undergraduates to participate in senior
engineering design projects, as well as helping coordinate extracurricular
networking and career-information events aimed specifically at physics
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.