* 1928318
* EarthCube Data Capabilities: Collaborative Proposal: Reducing Time-To-Science in the Earth Sciences: Annotations to foster convergence, inclusion, and credit
* GEO,RISE
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Amy Myrbo, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2023
* USD 352,391.00

The long term sustainability of federally funded research depends on the
discovery, accessibility and reuse of data. However, data and research products
are often stored in different locations. This makes it challenging to find and
integrate related data. This project helps support the discovery of related but
distributed research products for Earth science and natural history data.
Researches will have a way to link data resources, add context, or provide
additional information about data, software and publications. Researchers use
this system to create annotations that link resources using unique identifiers.
Over time, these links connect to create a network of data resources. This
project will support the development of the underlying database, a user
interface for access and discovery, and a number of documentation tools and
workshops to help support the ongoing development and sustainability of the
Throughput database.The broader impacts of this project include the engagement
of early career researchers and the better sharing of data and other research
products in the Earth sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved discoverability of
data, metadata and services is a need shared across the geosciences. A barrier
that increases "time-to-science" in Earth Science research is the difficulty of
integrating individual observations, concepts, data models, and statistical
techniques across subfields. The Throughput Annotation Engine (TAE) offers a
solution to the challenge of managing interdisciplinary workflows by providing
multiple points of entry to access, annotate and interact with data, and to link
code, data, publications, or other elements to one another. The TAE will support
adoption as part of a system of systems, linking outside users to data
repositories, and providing data stewards a degree of flexibility in deciding
how to manage new information: whether to incorporate information in annotations
into their data models, or to access and report annotations using the Throughput
API. Throughput improves credit for data, software and documentation by
providing a mechanism to track use and implementation across a range of
publications and online resources, and will provide a new set of citation tools
based on FORCE11 recommendations. Linked annotations in the TAE support the
generation of metrics for research infrastructure beyond standard publication
metrics. The Cookbook will allow individuals and communities to identify
programmatic workflows, and link them to community data resources. The Cookbook
will provide researchers with access to community best-practices, and, by
leveraging ORCID user credentials, to individuals engaged in the development of
documentation and workflows. Throughput offers a user-centered solution to
deepening and densifying connections among the many nodes in the emerging linked
data ecosystem of scientists, data, software services, journals, and
funders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.