* 1928845
* Broadening Participation in Coastal and Estuarine Sciences: A Workshop of the 25th Biennial Conference of the Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation; Mobile, AL - November 2019
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Susan Park, Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,791.00

I. The Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation (CERF) has articulated full
organizational commitment to broadening participation in coastal and estuarine
science. CERF developed Rising TIDES (Toward an Inclusive, Diverse, and Enriched
Society) as a comprehensive program for enhancing the diversity and inclusion of
our scientific society and CERF conferences. The overall goals of this program
are to promote opportunities for all underrepresented and underserved minorities
while cultivating a culture that actively engages and leverages diversity
throughout our organization. Rising TIDES intentionally affirms and promotes the
value of diversity in all forms, including differences among individuals in
racial and ethnic backgrounds, genders, sexual orientations, nationalities, and
physical abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;II. Broadening participation in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) is widely recognized as
critical to the science and engineering enterprise. There is still a wide gap in
U.S. STEM educational attainment between URM individuals and whites and Asians,
and coastal and estuarine science faces similar gaps in URM representation. In
recognition of this gap and to incorporate&lt;br/&gt;fundamental change in the
way the CERF community supports and addresses the individual needs of all
members, CERF seeks funding to support diversity and inclusion efforts at its
2019 Biennial Conference in November 2019. Specifically, these efforts include:
(1) enhance URM student professional development throughout a two-conference
cycle, including cohort building, mentoring, and participation&lt;br/&gt;in a
URM-focused workshop, scientific sessions, and other conference activities; (2)
build the capacity of CERF to achieve DEI objectives through a workshop open to
all attendees, and through additional learning opportunities throughout the
conference; and (3) ensure broad engagement of the CERF community by infusing
DEI throughout the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.