* 1928243
* NNA Track 2: Coming Together to Learn
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Matthew Wooller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,793.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Arctic ecosystems are transforming at
rates that far exceed generations of living memory of Arctic Indigenous
residents, resulting in local-to-global impacts. This innovative planning grant
centers on collaborative science that incorporates Indigenous values, cultural
practices, and frameworks to innovate new forms of scholarship to inform
society's most pressing challenges. This project team and partners will develop
collaborative learning processes that will center on Indigenous approaches in
the sciences, advancing a key goal of the Navigating the New Arctic initiative -
the "co-production of knowledge." This concept is reflected in the project's
title, Atautchikkun Ilitchisukluta, from the Inupiaq language meaning "coming
together to learn." This approach sets the stage for building responsible,
ethical, and intentional relationships merging both Indigenous and western
knowledge and science, co-conceiving how to most appropriately address the
Arctic's most pressing questions and needs, and thus providing a roadmap towards
the implementation of future convergence research. This framework is intended to
serve as a blueprint for developing other Arctic research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project draws upon and strengthens existing
relationships between Indigenous and non-Indigenous university scientists,
Indigenous Tribes and organizations, international collaborators, and
communities in the Beaufort Sea regions of the U.S. and Canadian Arctic. The
project team and partners will undertake an intentional and collaborative year-
long planning process to design a multi-day learning event, likely to be hosted
in Utqiagvik (formerly Barrow), Alaska. Goals of this planning process and
learning event are to: (1) Strengthen the relationships necessary for crossing
boundaries to co-produce research questions and a project design, which address
key changes facing Arctic communities and their coastal ecosystems; (2) Develop
a shared mutually respectful process of knowledge co-production and co-create a
central conceptual model that will form the centerpiece of a Navigating the New
Arctic Track 1 proposal; (3) Provide space for mutual learning through the
inclusion and mentorship of Indigenous youth as the next generation of
scientists and community leaders. Participants in this project will link deep
levels of expertise that span many boundaries, including: Indigenous and western
knowledge systems; social, natural, and engineering sciences; U.S., Canadian,
Inupiaq, Inuvialuit nations; elders and youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.