* 1928901
* I-Corps: The Operating System for Cyber Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2021
* Placid Ferreira, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project accrues from the
cloud manufacturing capabilities of increasing sophistication that it enables.
These capabilities range from platforms to improve user access to manufacturing
resources to enterprise visibility platforms, supply network management systems,
and cloud technology-driven manufacturing marketplaces/exchanges. This project
fosters local innovation by enabling networks of easily accessible maker labs
and other manufacturing resources. The project can also potentially provide
economic development agencies a tool for assessing local manufacturing
capability and capacity as well as measuring manufacturing activity through
analysis of the in-flow and out-flow of transactions in the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project creates a cloud platform to
provide manufacturing resources with a secure network presence. The project
implements a kernel based on a resource-transaction model for manufacturing
resources, and surrounds it with services to enable several features, including:
a) Network visibility of its capabilities, availability, configuration and
state; b) Transaction services, including queue management, calendar, scheduler
and transaction processing for initiating and executing jobs; c) User services
for authenticating users and managing access and privileges on resources; d) IoT
services for gathering and manipulating data streams originating at a resource,
and secure distribution to authenticated end-points; e) Connectivity to a
curated store of cloud software applications for enhancing its visibility and
usability to broad classes of users. With these services and its use of well-
established shop-floor connectivity protocols, this platform simplifies the
complex tasks of creating and managing cyber-physical manufacturing networks of
interacting manufacturing resources or internal/external manufacturing
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.