* 1928282
* Phase 2 of Enhancements to the OOI Cabled Array at Axial Seamount
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* William Chadwick, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 626,877.00

Axial Seamount is the most active volcano in the U.S. Pacific Northwest - it
just happens to be located underwater, about 300 miles off the Oregon coast. It
has erupted three times in the last 20 years, and we know it is building toward
another eruption in the next few years. Consequently, it is an ideal site for
long-term monitoring with the National Science Foundation's Ocean Observatory
Initiative Cabled Array (OOI-CA) in the Northeast Pacific ocean, which is the
world's most advanced underwater volcano observatory. Previous monitoring with
the OOI-CA has shown that Axial Seamount has a very repeatable cycle of
inflation and deflation that has been used to forecast eruptions. This project
will deploy additional monitoring instruments at Axial Seamount over the next 5
years and these will allow us to better forecast the next eruption, will improve
our models of magma is supplied and stored within the volcano, and will test
ideas about the deep-sea marine environment is impacted by submarine eruptions.
This research serves the national interest and society because it will improve
our understanding of how volcanoes work and how eruptions can be better forecast
(both on land and underwater).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will fund
modest, cost-effective, and timely enhancements to the instrumentation on the
OOI Cable Array to address some deficiencies in the existing infrastructure. A
key element will be deploying Conductivity, Temperature, Depth (CTD) instruments
on the seafloor to measure changes in salinity to test the hypothesis that
hydrothermal brines are released in the summit caldera during some eruptions.
Specifically this project will: (1) keep one seafloor CTD that is already
deployed operating on the OOI-CA for 5 more years, (2) add two additional
seafloor CTDs at two other sites on the OOI-CA for expanded spatial coverage and
needed redundancy, and (3) build eight Mini-BPR (bottom pressure recorder)
sensors to replace other instruments that are part of the long-term geodetic
monitoring that augments the observations from the OOI-CA. These enhancements to
the monitoring effort at Axial Seamount will be available in time to be deployed
during the next eruption at Axial Seamount (currently expected between
2020-2022), which will help to increase our understanding of the shallow magma
supply and storage systems at active basaltic volcanoes, the processes that lead
to and trigger eruptions, and the impacts of submarine eruptions on hydrothermal
systems and chemosynthetic ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.