* 1929593
* Collaborative Research: Developing a multi-proxy approach for reconstructing deep-time silicate weathering
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Justin Strauss, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 246,900.00

Throughout Earth's history the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere has been
influenced by reactions with different types of rocks at the surface. The CO2
erodes rocks such as basalt which releases elements into rivers and eventually
these elements combine with seawater to form new rocks. The variations in
atmospheric CO2 content contribute to variations in the climate over tens or
hundreds of millions of years. There is good evidence that 700 million years ago
the Earth experienced the longest and most extreme glaciation in our planet's
history and ice reached all the way to the equator. Unfortunately, we do not
know what caused this glaciation or what the climate was like before the
glaciers. This project will investigate the lead-up to the glaciation by
examining specific elements in ancient rocks deposited in oceans using new
advanced analytical methods. By looking at the chemical composition of rocks
that formed in the ancient oceans prior to the glaciation, Earth scientists can
trace the changing ocean chemistry and then infer the ancient atmospheric
conditions leading up to this glaciation. These investigations will help to
train future Earth scientists and provide researchers with opportunities to
communicate Earth history and climate science from a novel angle to a variety of
audiences. The results from these studies will provide Earth scientists unique
insights into the chemical evolution of our planet and oceans during an
incredibly fascinating time period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neoproterozoic Era
(1000-539 Ma) witnessed the assembly and fragmentation of the Rodinia
supercontinent, huge swings in geochemical cycles, biological firsts and
innovations as well as extreme glaciations known as Snowball Earth events.
Recent advances in our understanding of the interplay between these Snowball
Earth events and the evolution of complex life have focused on the timing and
duration of the glaciations and of the evolutionary events. Despite these
advances very little progress has been made in understanding the drivers of the
Snowball glaciations. The geology of Svalbard, Norway is host to a thick
succession of pristine, low-grade sedimentary rocks that chart the lead-up and
aftermath of these global glaciations and represents a unique setting to test a
variety of hypotheses related to the causation of the glaciations and their
impact on bio/geochemical cycles. This award supports two early-career Assistant
Professors, a post-doctoral associate and a Masters student to conduct a
detailed geochemical, sedimentological and geochronologic study of these
sedimentary units. In particular, this research will couple numerous radiogenic
and stable isotope systems tied to a robust stratigraphic and geochronologic
framework to elucidate the mechanisms responsible for the Snowball Earth events
and trace the chemical evolution of seawater prior to and immediately after the
glaciations. Additionally, the project will provide two junior scholars the
opportunity to work in the Arctic, gaining exposure to and experience of the
logistical and environmental uniqueness of working in these regions. Although
the project is specific to the Neoproterozoic, The new approach that couples a
wide range of isotope systems will greatly benefit research in the Earth
sciences across all timescales. In addition to the scientific research products
that will result from this investigation, the PIs will collaborate with the Yale
Peabody Museum of Natural History and Yale's pre-college "Pathways to Science" a
program that operates within the New Haven public school system with direct
opportunities to experience college and learn more about upper-level STEM
education. Multiple undergraduate students at Dartmouth and Yale University will
also be involved in sample processing, wet-lab chemistry and mass spectrometry
as part of senior thesis projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.