* 1929874
* Circuits and Systems Design for UAV Swarm Enabled Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Yuanxun Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 481,175.00

Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been recently proposed as a solution for
mobile wireless infrastructure. Majority of research on UAV-based communications
considers either a single UAV or multiple UAVs as independent entities. This
project aims to explore the benefits of utilizing multiple coordinated UAVs,
also known as the UAV Swarm, within the emerging fog radio access networks (Fog-
RAN). By leveraging the mobility of UAVs with on-board radios and processor, and
the distributed processing within the swarm, the proposed system aims to enable
various on-demand applications of internet-of-things (IoT) and multiple-input
multiple-output (MIMO) wireless access with improved energy efficiency and
spectral efficiency. Due to its ease of deployment, the UAV swarm assisted Fog-
RAN can serve underprivileged communities and accommodate fluctuations in
capacity demands during emergency or other event-driven
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a set of unique
challenges in circuits and systems arising in UAV swarm communications: i) swarm
array synchronization and backhaul, ii) distributed processing on the edge
devices, and iii) UAV swarm placement for optimized link budget and distributed
MIMO channel capacity. Two different swarm systems will be explored: 1) weakly
coordinated swarm with light swarm synchronization and simple coordination
protocol, and 2) strongly coordinated swarm that requires tight synchronization
and distributed array processing. For weakly coordinated swarm, low-complexity
synchronization and coordination algorithms, low-power RF circuits and baseband
processing, with only a single antenna in each radio, will be designed. For
strongly coordinated swarm, a hybrid RF and base-band processing for frequency,
phase, and time synchronization, and novel array signal processing for
distributed MIMO combining within UAV swarm, will be designed to enable coherent
transmission. The framework for UAV swarm placement to achieve optimal capacity
and range will be developed and analyzed for robustness against channel,
location, and actuation uncertainties. A proof-of-concept prototype using off-
the-shelf UAVs and a radio testbed with customized RF components will be built
and tested in the air.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.