* 1929236
* Decoupled Ion-Conduction Mechanism of Protein-based Electrolytes: Simulation and Experimental Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Weihong (Katie) Zhong, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2023
* USD 585,529.00

High performance and safe batteries are increasingly demanded in today's energy
supply markets. Developing advanced solid electrolytes to replace liquid
electrolytes is critical for fulfillment of higher energy density and safer
batteries for automotive applications. Conventional solid polymer electrolytes
are of great interest owing to their processing ease and cost-effectiveness but
suffer from low conductivity and deteriorated mechanical properties. In this
project, a naturally occurring protein (soy from soybeans) will be studied as
the electrolyte matrix to replace the conventional polymers. The project will
study underlying ion conduction mechanisms to understand how both excellent
electrochemical and mechanical properties can be simultaneously achieved in
protein-based solid electrolytes. This family of materials have not been
sufficiently studied to date for the energy storage application. The outcome of
this project will be fundamental knowledge of the ion-conduction mechanisms that
are critical for generating new battery materials and designing next generation
of energy storage devices. This project will also have broader impacts on
related fields, such as all-solid-state electrochemical devices and 'green and
sustainable' functional biomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
the this fundamental research project is to study the decoupled ion-conduction
mechanism and fabrication and characterization of high-performance protein-based
solid electrolytes through a combination of molecular simulations and
experiments. The protein-based solid electrolytes will simultaneously have both
excellent electrochemical and mechanical properties. The molecular dynamic
simulations will be applied to identify and to quantify different contributions
to the ion-conduction. The experimental platform from this project will enable
coherent investigation from material fabrication, characterization to
performance evaluation of the protein-based polymeric solid electrolytes. The
simulations will provide detailed information on molecular interactions and
structural reorganizations, which will guide experiments during the fabrication
process. The objectives of this project include: (1) investigation of ion-
conduction mechanisms through atomistic simulations; (2) study of interactions
and structures of protein-ion complex under different fabrication conditions;
(3) characterization and evaluation of the properties of the final solid
polymeric electrolytes and establishment of structure-property relationships.
The intellectual merits of this research are: deepening fundamental
understanding of new ion-conduction mechanisms, initiating a new study route for
fabrication of advanced solid electrolytes and extending the mechanisms to other
natural and synthetic proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.