* 1929773
* Collaborative Research:  EarthCube RCN: "What About Model Data?": Determining Best Practices for Archiving and Reproducibility
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Gretchen Mullendore, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Womack
* 09/30/2023
* USD 143,199.00

Much of the research in the geosciences, such as projecting future changes in
the environment and improving weather and flood forecasting, is conducted using
computational models that simulate the Earth's atmosphere, oceans, and land
surfaces. These geoscience models are part of the full research workflow that
leads to scientific discovery. There is strong agreement across the sciences
that reproducible workflows are needed. Open and reproducible workflows not only
strengthen public confidence in the sciences, but also result in more efficient
community science, leading to faster time to science. However, recent efforts to
standardize data sharing and archiving guidelines within research institutions,
professional societies, and academic publishers make clear that the scientific
community does not know what to do about data produced as output from the
computational models. To date, the rule for reproducibility is to "save all the
data", but model data can be prohibitively large, particularly in a field like
atmospheric science. The massive size of the model outputs, as well as the large
computational cost to produce these outputs, makes this not only a problem of
reproducibility, but also a "big data" problem. To achieve open and reproducible
workflows in geoscience modeling research, this project will bring together
modelers representing diverse research areas and application types, and
representing modeling efforts from large to
small.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discussion across different modeling communities
suggests that the answer to "what to do about model data" will look different
depending on model descriptors. Examples of important model descriptors include
reproducibility, storage vs. computational costs, and value to the community.
Since the atmospheric model community is incredibly diverse, this project will
organize community workshops to tackle the problem. These workshops will involve
representatives from across the geoscience modeling spectrum, including both
operations and research, and ranging across complexity and size. The ultimate
goal of these workshops is to provide model data best practices to the
community, including scientific journal publishers, and funding agencies. To
achieve this goal, this team of researchers suggests to craft rubrics based on
the model descriptors that will help researchers and centers describe their
model data in consistent terms so that proper decisions are made regarding
archiving and retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.