* 1929131
* RII Track-4:  Applying Transient Reflectance Spectroscopy to Decipher the Impact of Energetics and Electronic Coupling on Interfacial Recombination in Hybrid Halide Perovskites
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/2020,10/31/2022
* Kenneth Graham, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 10/31/2022
* USD 179,150.00

Hybrid organic-inorganic halide perovskites (HPs) are promising materials for
use in next-generation solar cells and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Further
improvements in the performance and stability of these materials and devices
will help enable mechanically flexible, lightweight, and inexpensive solar cells
and LEDs that may be used in disaster relief areas, in military applications,
and broadly deployed to help create a more secure and sustainable energy future.
In both solar cells and LEDs, the HP is sandwiched between charge-transporting
layers that serve to remove or inject charge carriers (either holes or
electrons) into the HP. Interfaces between the HP and these transporting layers
are the dominant areas where harmful non-radiative recombination processes
occur, which can lower light generation efficiency and increase heat loss. Thus,
it is essential to better understand these interfaces and identify means to
reduce interfacial recombination rates. This research will directly probe
recombination rates at HP interfaces with various transport layers using
transient reflectance spectroscopy through a collaboration with Dr. Matthew
Beard at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The Graham group has
worked extensively on understanding and manipulating the surface chemistry of
HPs. Through this grant, the Graham group will be able to directly probe how
changes in surface chemistry impact interfacial charge recombination rates. The
findings of this research will help accelerate the development of HPs for solar
cells and LEDs, while the collaboration with NREL will help transfer knowledge
from the nation's premier renewable energy research facility to researchers in
Kentucky. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charge-transfer processes at interfaces are one
of the most relevant processes determining the performance of electronic and
optoelectronic devices, yet these interfacial processes remain much less
understood than those occurring within the bulk of the materials. The goal of
this proposed research is to use HPs as a platform to characterize how
energetics and electronic coupling influence interfacial recombination processes
through the application of transient reflectance spectroscopy. Transient
reflectance relies on ultrafast laser pulses to monitor charge carrier
recombination dynamics specifically at interfaces, thereby providing a powerful
tool to differentiate interfacial recombination from recombination occurring
within the bulk of the HP. Ultimately, the research will test the hypothesis
that interfacial recombination rates can be significantly reduced through
manipulating the interfacial energy landscape and electronic coupling at
interfaces between dissimilar materials using surface modifiers. Previous
research has investigated surface and bulk recombination in pure HPs in both
single crystal and polycrystalline film formats, but these investigations have
not been extended to include the presence of charge transport layers.
Recombination rates have also been investigated within completed PV devices, but
in these complete devices it is not possible to identify where recombination is
occurring; thus, targeted approaches to reduce recombination are hindered. In
this proposed research the principal investigator and a graduate student will
work with Dr. Beard at NREL on applying transient reflectance spectroscopy to
directly probe recombination rates at these important interfaces. Combining
these transient reflectance measurements with ultraviolet and inverse
photoelectron spectroscopy will uncover how interfacial energetics and
electronic coupling impact interfacial recombination, thereby helping to guide
the development of improved solar cells and LEDs based on
HPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.