* 1929535
* Learning for Dynamics and Control Workshop, To Be Held in Boston, MA, May 30-31, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Ali Jadbabaie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

Over the past few years, machine learning has had tremendous impact in numerous
areas such as computer vision and language translation. Over the next decade,
the biggest generator of data is expected to be devices which sense and control
the physical world. This explosion of real-time data that is emerging from the
physical world requires a rapprochement of areas such as machine learning, model
based dynamical systems, and control and decision theory. While control theory
has been firmly rooted in tradition of model-based design, the availability and
scale of data (both temporal and spatial) will require rethinking of the
foundations for the discipline. From a machine learning perspective, one of the
main challenges going forward is to go beyond pattern recognition and address
problems in data driven control and decision making as well as learning-based
optimization of dynamical processes.

We propose a two-day inaugural conference on the interface between learning,
dynamics and control to take place on May 30-31 at MIT. Long term we would like
to sustain this event as an annual conference where best results on this
emerging interface are presented. We aim to create a new community of people
that think rigorously across the disciplines, ask novel fundamental questions,
and develop the foundations of this new scientific area. We feel that our
proposed effort will result in a very influential annual conference that can
attract a lot of attention from numerous scientific communities. The
intellectual merit of this proposal is the creation of a scientific forum that
brings together pioneers and state of the art research in the areas of control
systems, optimization, machine learning, and related disciplines to create a
prestigious annual conference that defines the state-of-the-art in Learning for
Dynamical and Control Systems. An elite conference on this topic can have
tremendous impact not only scientifically by bridging two distant areas but also
from a community perspective that nurtures a growing number of junior
researchers working on this emerging interface. An elite conference across
control, optimization and learning will provide a natural and nurturing home for
the professional development for students, postdocs, and junior faculty.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.