* 1929228
* Conference: 5th World Congress on Integrated Computational Materials Engineering (ICME); Indianapolis, Indiana; July 21-25, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This grant provides financial support for the 5th World Congress on Integrated
Computational Materials Engineering (ICME2019) to be held from July 21-25, 2019
in Indianapolis, Indiana. Building on the success of the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th
World Congresses on ICME (held in 2011, 2013, 2015, 2017), ICME2019 is the
premier forum for sharing and dissemination of the latest scientific and
engineering advances in this field. Integrated Computational Materials
Engineering (ICME) is an approach that uses computer modeling programs to
predict the behavior of materials and integrate this information into the
overall materials, processing, and manufacturing design cycle. ICME has received
international attention due to its enormous potential to shorten product
development time, while lowering cost and improving design and manufacturing
outcomes. ICME2019 will assemble the community of ICME contributors--
researchers, educators, engineers, and students--to capture the current state-
of-the-art, identify current gaps in ICME efforts, and to set the stage for the
future growth and application of ICME worldwide. Student participation is
greatly encouraged to give students exposure to recent advances in ICME, and
thus help prepare the next generation of leaders in this field. This meeting is
open to all interested individuals from academic research, government, industry,
and educational professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of ICME has helped
to revolutionize materials and manufacturing design by providing the potential
to shorten product development time, while lowering the associated costs. The
key topical areas that will be considered at ICME2019 include: (1) the wide
range of materials programs where an ICME approach validated by experimental
efforts is applicable, including computational- and experimental-based talks,
(2) individual computational methods utilized in ICME, (3) the roles of ICME in
continuing education in industry, (4) high-throughput computing application in
ICME, (5) development of materials processing and materials characterization
technology, (6) incorporation of "big data, data fusion, and machine learning"
for materials and product development with ICME methodologies, (7) development
of database and database technology for ICME, (8) bridging the gap of across-
scales materials simulation, (9) success stories of ICME on materials
development, (10) ICME implementation strategies, (11) verification, validation,
and uncertainty quantification, (12) interoperability, data and communications
standards, and (13) ICME networking initiatives worldwide. This world congress
will include over 200 presentations from around the world, with over 100 podium
speakers and a robust poster session. The program has been designed to maximize
interaction among modelers and experimentalists and provide a balance between
breadth of information and depth of discussion and interaction
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.