* 1929824
* SUSRN-Advancing Conference: The Next Urban Giants: Building Resilience and Equity into Growing Megapolitan Regions by Greening the Urban Human-Natural System
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Brad Gaolach, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The goal of this Sustainable Urban Systems (SUS) workshop is to identify key
sustainability issues associated with megapolitan growth and promising research
areas that could be harnessed to promote a more equitable and healthy urban
future. By convening a diversity of expertise across an array of disciplines,
sectors, and locations, this conference aims to: (1) identify the key challenges
megapolitan regions and their adjacent communities and natural spaces face as
urbanization continues, (2) explore the myriad approaches used in megapolitan
regions to address these challenges, and (3) synthesize this information to
identify priority research areas that a research network could promote for
improving urban systems sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In pursuing the
megapolitan-focused approach, input will be solicited from a diversity of
experts through an interdisciplinary, synthesis-focused agenda. The target to
converge and focus on the most critical megapolitan challenges and opportunities
and outline a framework for building strong, collaborative relationships. It is
anticipated that the active engagement and participation of academics and
industry with local governments and non-profit groups who are tasked with
implementing sustainability initiatives will lead to a number of new
partnerships and outputs. The end products from this conference, shared widely
across the PI and co-PIs networks, will take form as a (1) white paper to NSF,
(2) peer-reviewed synthesis article journal article, (3) "Green Print" for work
managers and practitioners to help them transition material from the conference
into their daily work, and (4) scope of work for informing future education and
outreach products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.