* 1929882
* Financial and Academic Support for STEM Transfer Students
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Merrilee Guenther, Elmhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 04/30/2025
* USD 999,896.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Elmhurst College. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
two-year scholarships to 60 transfer students who are pursuing bachelor's
degrees in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, computer science, information
systems, mathematics, or physics. To retain these students, the project will
provide student supports, including a cohort-based summer undergraduate research
experience before their first semester, an integrated STEM transfer student
orientation, peer and faculty mentoring, and career exploration seminars. The
summer research experience aims to equalize research experiences for groups of
students who are traditionally less likely to participate in undergraduate
research. These interventions are expected to increase the students' sense of
belonging to the STEM learning community, enabling students to overcome
"transfer shock" and thrive academically. Because of Elmhurst College's location
and the changing demographics of its student population, this project has the
potential to increase the pipeline of talented, diverse STEM professionals
entering the Chicago-area workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project has three specific
aims: 1) Recruit 60 academically-talented transfer students with financial need
who are majoring in STEM; 2) Retain at least 54 (90%) of these Scholars in STEM
major programs; and 3) Increase their 4-year graduation rates to 85%. To
minimize transfer shock and increase the Scholars' sense of belonging, the
project will provide each Scholar cohort with a summer course-based
undergraduate research experience that also has an integrated STEM transfer
student orientation. It will also provide Scholars with peer mentoring and
career exploration (STEMinars), and other support services designed to increase
transfer students' sense of belonging in STEM courses and majors. The PIs will
assess whether the project interventions (Research Experience, Peer Mentors, and
STEMinar) collectively and individually lead to gains in belonging, academic
outcomes, and STEM career outcomes for transfer students. The PIs expect that
the core interventions will increase Scholar's sense of belonging, which in turn
will result in increased retention and graduation rates. Thus, the results of
this project have the potential to advance understanding of the extent to which
increasing transfer students' sense of belonging leads to stronger persistence
in STEM disciplines. The project will be evaluated using a mixed-methods
protocol utilizing existing data, survey data, and focus group data. The results
of this project will be presented nationally and published in peer-reviewed
journals. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.