* 1929972
* I-Corps: Solar Thermal Membrane Distillation System
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Peng Yi, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
affordable solution to safe drinking water for the people living in water-
stressed areas. There are over 1 billion people living under physical scarcity
of water and another 1.6 billion people facing economic water scarcity. In
addition, people who suffer from water system breakdown by natural disasters,
who live in water-contaminated areas or who need to survive in remote
undeveloped areas would also benefit from the commercialization of the
technology. This technology could also be used as part of the survival equipment
for military operation, oil and gas drilling workers, and life rafts used in
ships and aircraft. From the technical point of view, the invented system could
open a new research area in the field of point-of-use water system given its
innovative design in utilizing solar thermal energy, high energy efficiency in
extracting clean potable water with low capital and maintenance
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is a novel solar thermal
membrane distillation system which is capable of utilizing solar thermal energy
to produce potable water from untreated surface water, wastewater, and seawater,
without using any electrical devices. The main novelty of the novel solar
thermal membrane distillation system lies in its innovative mechanism of
localizing the solar thermal energy at the air-water interface for highly
efficient evaporation of interfacial water molecules without losing much heat to
the bulk feed water. Thus, the production rate of distilled water per unit area
of solar heat collector is higher than most conventional solar thermal membrane
distillation systems and the solar stills on the market. Another novelty is the
simplicity in the design of the invented system. It is the first membrane
distillation system that does not require any electrical devices, such as pumps
and photovoltaic cells. Thus, the capital and maintenance costs of the invented
system can be lower than conventional and other existing solar thermal membrane
distillation systems for the same production rate of distilled
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.