* 1929950
* Networking for Environmental Sustainability in Arid Region Urban Communities
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Danny Reible, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The sustainability of small- to mid-sized urban centers (population between
50,000 and 500,000 residents) is increasingly under threat. These communities
often lack the financial, technical, and human resources to adequately address
those threats. Small to mid-sized urban centers are much more common than the
megacities that receive more attention, and cumulatively serve as home for more
people. In addition, rural America depends upon small urban centers to drive the
rural economy and meet important basic needs such as health services. A workshop
is proposed with an overarching goal to conceptualize the sustainability
challenges that face the many urban centers that serve as the backbone of rural
communities. Additionally, this workshop will focus on urban centers in arid and
semi-arid regions where water of adequate quality and quantity is a defining
environmental need. The conceptual framework of the workshop is that of "One
Health", which posits that environmental, human, and wildlife health are closely
intertwined, and the path to a sustainable future requires meeting human,
economic, and environmental needs. The proposed workshop, scheduled for August
14-16, 2019, in Lubbock, TX, will engage researchers and other stakeholders from
communities in the arid southwest to identify the needs of these communities and
a path for research to meet those needs. Knowledge gained through the workshop
can be applied to communities facing similar challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important goal of the workshop is to build a foundation
for a global Sustainable Urban Systems Research Network that can formulate a
coordinated and convergent international research agenda to address the needs of
small- to mid-size urban communities. This workshop is an opportunity to engage
researchers, students, and stakeholders in identifying the requirements of and a
path for research to meet those community needs. This workshop will bring
together a multidisciplinary team of academics, practitioners, policymakers, and
other stakeholders to identify challenges these communities face and potential
research avenues to develop solutions for these challenges. The workshop also
seeks to more effectively engage Native American and minority communities in the
definition and conduct of research directed toward addressing the challenges
faced by their communities. These sustainability challenges will be evaluated in
each of the four workshop themes: Environmental Sustainability, Urban Design,
Water, and Public Health. The Environmental Sustainability theme is focused on
the problems of urban development in sync with the natural environment. The
urban design theme, while complimenting the Environmental Sustainability theme,
is more focused on how the design of the built environment respects the natural
environment while meeting the needs for human habitat. The Water theme focuses
on the common challenge that all arid regions face in meeting the water needs of
the environment, human potable water needs, and water for the competing forces
of agriculture, manufacturing, and energy development. The Public Health theme
recognizes that the population in small cities and surrounding areas do not have
easy access to health care, particularly mental health care, common in large
cities. The four themes are each individually important, but all intersect in
key ways that need to be explored in the contexts of long-term environmental
sustainability and integration with the surrounding rural
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.