* 1929849
* Exploration of Dynamically Reconfigurable Topological Insulators for Enabling Next-Generation Acoustic-Based Logic and Signal Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Amirebrahim Darabi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2023
* USD 428,652.00

This project will contribute to the progress of science and advance the national
health, security and prosperity, by producing new knowledge on dynamically
reconfigurable topological insulators. The topological insulators are materials
with unique properties that allow signals to travel through their edges, but not
the surface. Outcomes of this project will contribute to the advancement of
reconfigurable topological insulators technologies. These technologies have a
number of applications in communication devices, sensors and robotics, including
cellular phones, touch screens, and microfluidic devices. Educational outreach
is planned to underrepresented high school students and their teachers through
the Georgia Intern Fellowships for Teachers (GIFT) program, while recruitment of
new graduate students will include reaching out to several Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) local to Atlanta. Findings from the research,
together with educational outreach, will inform the scientific community and a
large and diverse cohort of students about new discoveries in the physics of
waves and electromechanical systems, which is expected to inspire the next
generation of scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topological
insulators represent a new class of materials in which the bulk material behaves
as an insulator (i.e., prevents wave propagation), while the periphery allows
such propagation (e.g., edge propagation or interface propagation). Furthermore,
due to topological protection, these edge modes are protected from
backscattering, and are therefore intrinsically protected from the presence of
defects and imperfections. This research will demonstrate the first
reconfigurable, mechanical topological insulators through the use of
theoretical, computational, and experimental techniques. Concepts to be explored
include mechanical means of reconfigurability using solenoids and piezoelectric
actuation. Both means will break inversion symmetry, resulting in a separation
of the material's Dirac structure, yielding non-trivial Chern numbers (an
integer measure of topology) and thus topological insulators. This is
anticipated to open pathways to new classes of commercially viable waveguides,
filters, and logic devices immune to back-scattering from defects and anomalies.
Much like ubiquitous surface acoustic wave (SAW) devices, these new devices are
expected to have advantages over their electromagnetic counterparts in terms of
size and cost, and are expected to be more efficient (e.g., consume less battery
power) than software solutions such as digital signal
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.