* 1929923
* Workshop DIG Around: Documenting Infrastructure and the Ground Conditions Around It; Brooklyn, New York; June 24-25, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Debra Laefer, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 04/30/2021
* USD 49,998.00

Managing our urban, subsurface spaces for sustainable and disaster resilient
transportation and utility use is hampered by the absence of a central
repository for relevant data and of computer systems that enable the
simultaneous viewing of such data. Presently, there are major problems
associated with the collection, integration, and visualization of subsurface
data. These cross the spectrum from (1) cultural and legal issues, with respect
to who owns that data and who is liable, if it is not correct, to (2) security
concerns, to (3) the highly technical issues involved in having fully compatible
data types and data systems that can accommodate intensely varied data related
to natural geology and hydrology, as well as that of constructed infrastructure.
Without such data resources, the next generation of urban infrastructure will
not benefit from the wide range of emerging technologies that have the potential
to make American cities safer, more affordable, and more resilient to natural
and manmade disasters. To this end, this award will pair a wide range of
scientists and engineers from academe and industry with governmental officials,
big data specialists, data standards organizations, and community groups for a
two-day workshop in New York City to help give voice to the individual needs of
each of these groups of stakeholder. The first day will be open to the public
and will accommodate as many as 200 participants including local area veterans
and students from underserved communities. The second day will focus on crafting
a document to promote a common understanding of the problems and challenges
surrounding comprehensive subsurface documentation of America's cities. Both an
artist and a science writer have been engaged to create dissemination vehicles
that will help ensure that the workshop's outcomes will be fully understandable
to the general public.

Urban subsurfaces are hotly contested spaces essential for the majority of urban
system infrastructure including water, sewer, gas, steam, electric,
telecommunications, and transit (road and rail), as well as hosting building
foundations, basements, and parking garages. Yet, the subsurface is not only
under-documented, but what documentation exists is typically held in siloed
systems and populated by incompatible or non-computer readable data. This
phenomenon of poor data documentation and integration in the intensively used
subsurface represents a significant barrier to creating truly sustainable urban
systems (SUS), both because these "invisible" assets are vulnerable to floods,
subsidence, digging accidents, and failures of degradation and neglect and
because the subsurface environment is not zoned akin to aboveground spaces.
Pioneering new SUSs solutions will require a full appreciation of both existing
systems and their surrounding constraints - built and natural. This demands
achieving seamless, interoperable, three-dimensional data storage,
visualization, and asset management systems. While not market ready, such
technology does exist, though not in the form of a Building Information Model
(BIM) approach, which is typically used for individual structures, or in the
form of CityGML (commonly used for aboveground, city-scale representation). In
fact, not only is there is not a widely agreed upon or even dominant approach
for documenting the subsurface, there are now more than two dozen related (and
arguably competing) initiatives. Some consider only constructed objects such as
gas utilities. Others include only geological or hydrological factors. Some are
strongly focused on compatibility with existing standards and undertakings,
while others cover only application-specific support for a single industry or
legacy system. Ultimately, if there are to be fundamental advances in the design
and long-term stewardship of SUS, as well as a larger understanding of the
development, zoning, and management of subsurface urban spaces, including the
emerging area of geothermal heat pump systems, such piecemeal approaches to
documentation and data access will have to be overcome. This includes addressing
real concerns about both security and liability, as many of the barriers are
based in policy and precedence. Importantly, to date there has not been a forum
in which US-based engineering organizations, designers, and contractors
interface with the asset stakeholders, stewards, and first responders. The DIG
Around workshop will be the first such event to facilitate this dialogue. The
two-day workshop begins with a full day event open to the public and concludes
with a day-long opportunity for experts in the field and leading stakeholders to
draft strategies and recommendations for transforming the disparate state of
play into a more cohesive vision. As part of this (1) areas of alignment and
gaps in existing subsurface data management paradigms and standards will be
identified; (2) a broader understanding of the challenges and opportunities
(scientific, technological, and policy-based) for effective subsurface data
sharing will be forged; and (3) critical scientific gaps in the support of
developing new SUS will be identified with input from an unprecedented diversity
of stakeholders from first responders, critical governmental agencies,
profession standards organization, domain-based professional societies,
community organizations, utility companies, and researchers. Community
accessible workshop outcomes will be developed by a writer and artist in order
to help urban stakeholders at all levels of engagement and expertise to
understand this crucial issue. Finally, this workshop will provide the first
forum for leaders in the geotechnical community representing the Geo-institute
of the American Society of Civil Engineers, the DIGGS effort, and other
undertakings to formally interface with other organizations developing relevant
standards (e.g. Open Geospatial Consortium).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.