* 1929545
* An Open-Access, Controlled-Source Seismic Dataset Across the Cascadia Accretionary Wedge From Multi-Scale Regional OBS and Focused Large-N Nodal Arrays
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Daniel Lizarralde, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,084,646.00

Geologic hazards such as large megathrust earthquakes and tsunamis occur at
convergent margins where tectonic forces push and drag one tectonic plate
beneath another. One example of a convergent margin is the Cascadia Subduction
Zone off western North America, where the slow ongoing descent of the Juan de
Fuca plate beneath coastal northern California, Oregon, Washington and British
Columbia has generated large earthquakes and associated tsunamis in the past.
Knowledge of the structural and physical properties of the sediments that are
being scraped off the Juan de Fuca plate and pushed onto the North American
plate is of great importance because the presence of thick sediments increases
the potential for great megathrust earthquakes. The scraped off sediments along
the Cascadia margin contain significant amounts of naturally occurring methane
gas and other fluids. The presence and variations of these fluids along the
margin have a large impact on how the seabed responds and shakes during an
earthquake. This project will deploy sensors (ocean bottom seismometers and
nodes) on the seabed along a series of lines extending from near the coastline
out to ~100 miles offshore Oregon, Washington and British Columbia to record
signals from human-made acoustic pulses as well as from naturally occurring
seismicity. The data recorded by these sensors will allow researchers to
document variations in earthquake shaking properties of the sediments off the US
west coast. Such information is critical for predicting shaking along the
western US under hypothetical scenarios of future large earthquake rupture and
assessing tsunami and submarine landslide hazards caused by earthquakes. This
project will be conducted in partnership with the USGS. The project leverages an
already funded seismic reflection survey of the Cascadia margin, increasing the
scientific return by enabling a whole new suite of scientific data to be
collected and broadening the base of potential users for these complementary
open-access data sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
acquire an open-access, marine wide-angle seismic reflection/refraction dataset
across the Cascadia accretionary wedge encompassing the full length of the
margin. This survey will consist of the deployment and recovery of short-period
multicomponent ocean bottom seismometers using standard free-fall and acoustic
release techniques, and the deployment and recovery of large-N arrays of ocean
bottom nodes leased from a commercial provider using a remotely operated
vehicle. The sensors will record the controlled-source acoustic signals of a
seismic reflection survey off the Cascadia margin planned for summer 2020. The
data collected will be open-access and will be released to the community
immediately after acquisition and checked for quality control. The data will be
reduced to standard digital formats as well as provided as a raw continuous
digital time series. The seismometer and nodal arrays will sample the seismic
wavefields at different spatial scales, thus providing a data set that is
optimal for obtaining seismic compressional- and shear-wave velocity models of
the Cascadia accretionary wedge at three complementary scales: 1. A margin-scale
model (~100-km lateral resolution) encompassing the full length of the
subduction zone. 2. Regional, intermediate-resolution transects (~10-km lateral
resolution) from the abyssal plain to the continental shelf. 3. Local, high-
resolution models (hundreds-of-meters lateral resolution) across three transects
representative of distinct accretionary wedge structural style and known
structural heterogeneities. The project will provide much needed data to create
accurate, multi-resolution models of the subsurface structure of the Cascadia
accretionary prism, filling a critical knowledge gap for improving earthquake
and tsunami hazard assessments for Cascadia. The data will enable researchers to
develop models at complementary spatial scales using a variety of state-of-the-
art methodologies, including multi-parameter 2-D elastic full waveform
inversion, to address multiple scientific problems of high importance, such as:
(a) Documenting variations in accretionary wedge site response, which is
critical for predicting earthquake-triggered shaking along the western US and
assessing tsunami/landslide hazards under hypothetical scenarios of future
megathurst rupture, and to test proposed linkages between paleo great
earthquakes and distribution of turbidites. (b) Determining accretionary
sediment properties (Vp, Vs, density, porosity, and fluid pore pressure)
indicative of fluid expulsion and/or retention, drainage networks, and their
relation to structural style and seafloor fluid
seepage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.