* 1929748
* Organic actuators for biomedical haptics and as tools for understanding the tactile sense
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Darren Lipomi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

The importance of the sense of touch in the medical sciences is nearly
impossible to overstate. For example, palpation (examining by touching) is a
first-line diagnostic tool in primary care, orthopedics, obstetrics, urology,
oncology, and speech pathology. Moreover, touch is a key part of all procedures
performed by hand--e.g., setting broken bones and dislocated joints, turning
breech babies, and nearly all surgeries. For communities located in urban and
rural "healthcare deserts," touch would greatly enhance the value of remote
patient visits or drug-store-based diagnostic tests. Despite the attractiveness
of virtual touch for remote care, medical training, and robot-assisted surgery,
medical haptic technologies are underdeveloped. The reason is that existing
systems cannot mimic the texture, softness, wetness, thermal conductivity, tack,
and other near-surface properties of biological tissue. The key hypothesis of
this project is that to mimic these sensations requires materials that can
change their mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties in real time. The
approach for doing so is to develop a system of haptic devices, i.e., devices
that can stimulate the sense of touch, based on materials that can create
sensations that can be transformed dynamically--e.g., rough vs. smooth, hot vs.
cold, and sticky vs. slimy. Three types of devices are proposed based on (1)
electricity conductive polymers to reproduce the feeling of fine texture, (2)
arrays of liquid crystal elastomers that can change their softness in response
to light, and (3) thermoplastics that can go from rubbery to stiff with small
temperature changes to give the feeling of solidness and elasticity of virtual
objects. Leveraging the flexible, wearable nature of these "haptic
biomaterials," the investigators will build a prototype haptic glove that will
allow a human user to differentiate between virtual objects by touch. By
exploring the intersection of very different fields--organic materials and
psychology--this project will provide a new toolkit for researchers to
understand the tactile sense and mechanical sensing in biological systems more
broadly. Research and education will be integrated through the following
activities: (1) creation of internships for underrepresented minority students,
(2) integration of the results into the investigators' graduate and
undergraduate courses, and (3) creation of a video series on YouTube on the
science of tactile perception and the results of this project which leverages
considerable experience in creating scientific and educational
videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to use
combinations of haptic devices that exploit multiple effects simultaneously to
achieve sensations of hot and cold, hard and soft, rough and smooth, furry and
scaly, or sticky and slimy. The focus of this project is on testing the
hypothesis that actuators made from stimulus-responsive polymers--"organic
actuators"--can supply new types of sensations for biomedical haptic devices
unavailable to "off-the-shelf" components. Organic actuators are defined as
structures made from polymeric materials whose oxidation state, electrical
conductivity, phase behavior, molecular conformation, or packing structure can
be altered by an electrical, optical, or thermal stimulus in real time to
produce macroscopic effects. The Research Plan is organized under three tasks,
each of which generates a tactile sensation using a different physical effect
generated by an organic actuator. The FIRST Task is focused on electrical
stimulation via spatially resolved electrotactile signals. A stretchable
conductive polymer patterned into an array of electrodes generates an
electrotactile signal that will be used to measure two-point resolution of
stimulation and generate spatially resolved sensations. Studies are designed to
test the hypothesis that the small size of the electrodes, along with the
ability to address them individually in a purpose-designed multiplexed socket,
can be used to produce sensations that translate in the x-y plane to give the
sensation of motion. Human subject volunteers will be tested using a double-
blind methodology. The SECOND Task is focused on optically-enabled mechanical
stimulation created by a liquid-crystal elastomer (LCE) that undergoes a change
in shape in response to light to generate sensations of variable softness,
texture, and motion at the fingertip. One set of experiments is designed to
measure softness thresholds that can be changed in real time by altering the
elastic modulus of the LCE with the intensity of irradiation. A second set of
experiments will use arrays of LCE microposts that can be moved with
illumination to give human subjects the sense of feeling different textures and
possibly the sensation of moving interfaces even as the fingertip maintains a
fixed position. The THIRD Task is focused on providing thermally-enabled
kinesthetic feedback via a thermoplastic polymer embedded into a textile glove.
When heated or cooled just above or below its glass transition temperature, the
glove will undergo a reversible change from stiff to soft to elicit a
kinesthetic response. Control over the temperature of the glove can be achieved
by pairing a thermistor that changes its resistance in response to thermal
fluctuations, with the thermoelectric devices to stabilize the temperature and
therefore the stiffness of the substrate. To achieve a human-machine interface,
the glove has been fitted with flex sensors to control a robotic finger on whose
tip there is a pressure sensor which, when activated, sends a signal to the
thermoelectric devices in the glove to cool (stiffen the finger) and thus
provide kinesthetic feedback to the user. Once the thresholds for stiffness
required to generate a kinesthetic response are determined, the information
gained will be used to design a game in virtual reality that asks participants
to grasp objects that appear visually and identify which is solid and which is
merely an image. Finally, textural information will be encoded in the solid
objects to determine if it is possible for subjects to discriminate between
objects by embedding haptic actuators of the type described in previous
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.