* 1929756
* Mentored Pathways from Community College to Graduate School and Chemistry Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Alexandra Hofler, Southwestern College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,230,840.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over five years, this project will fund 120 scholarships to four groups of
30 students who are pursuing associate degrees at Southwestern College, and 45
scholarships for 30 transfer students and 15 graduate students who are pursuing
baccalaureate and graduate degrees in chemistry and biochemistry at San Diego
State University. This project will create an integrated mentoring and research
pathway that bridges the chemistry and biochemistry programs at Southwestern
College and San Diego State University. Both Southwestern College and San Diego
State University are Hispanic-Serving Institutions. As a result, the project has
the potential to improve diversity in STEM graduate programs and careers by
identifying and removing roadblocks to student transfer and post-transfer
success. Along with financial support, scholars will have opportunities to
participate in sustained undergraduate research experiences throughout their
academic careers. Additional supports include: mentoring by faculty, graduate
students, and peers; opportunities for students to attend and present their
research at national and regional professional conferences; and career/graduate
school application workshops. Mentors will participate in training on best
practices in mentoring to ensure high-quality research experiences for all
students. These proposed activities are designed to provide a mentored pathway
from community college into graduate school and STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to: improve student
success, retention, and completion of chemistry courses and degrees at
Southwestern College and at San Diego State University; facilitate transfer of
academically talented, low-income students to San Diego State University as
Chemistry/Biochemistry majors; and increase graduate school acceptance rates
and/or STEM career placement rates after graduation. Knowledge generation
activities will focus on three areas. First, the project will examine how
scholarships and participation in program activities affect traditional metrics
of student success such as GPA, transfer rates, persistence, loans, time to
degree, career plans, and employment after degree. Second, using the lens of
social cognitive career theory and measurements of scientific self-efficacy,
confidence, scientific identity, and sense of belonging, it will examine how
students' affective domain is influenced by program activities. Finally, the
mentoring activities themselves will be evaluated to understand the effects of
structured mentoring experiences on both mentors and mentees. Dissemination of
results through peer-reviewed publications, conference presentations, and
outreach will enable other community college-university partnerships to apply
lessons learned from this program to enhance student success in other locations.
It is expected that the research projects in which students participate will
also produce new scientific knowledge in chemistry, including organic chemistry,
chemical biology, medicinal chemistry, biochemistry, catalysis, physical
chemistry, and analytical chemistry. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.