* 1929097
* RII Track-4: Operating High Purity Germanium Detectors in Liquid Scintillator
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Wenqin Xu, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 102,862.00

Neutrinos are subatomic particles abundantly produced in Nature. It has been
challenging to investigate the intrinsic properties of the ghostly neutrinos,
because they can pass through instruments and materials with barely any
interactions. Thanks to advancements of technology as well as long-term
commitment of the science community, recent breakthroughs have revealed critical
yet unexpected properties of neutrinos, such as the fact that neutrinos have
non-zero masses. New knowledge on neutrinos can probe fundamental symmetries in
Nature and could shed light on the key mystery of matter-over-antimatter excess
in the universe. Extrasolar neutrinos are also one of the messengers carrying
information about the universe that can lead us to a more complete picture of
the universe. This proposal aims at developing techniques that could facilitate
experiments to deepen our understanding of neutrinos, including probing the
origin of non-zero neutrino masses. It will also advance the collaboration
between the University of South Dakota (USD) and Los Alamos National Laboratory
(LANL) in new directions. The transformative new expertise gained by the USD
group will enhance the group's research capability in Underground Science and
Engineering, one of the high value research areas and assets aligned with target
industry sectors for South Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI at USD plans to
visit LANL to develop active veto techniques employing liquid argon (LAr),
intended for the proposed Large Enriched Germanium Experiment for Neutrinoless
double-beta Decay (LEGEND) project. Both the home and host groups are LEGEND
collaborators. The LEGEND collaboration aims to develop a phased, Ge-76 based
neutrinoless double-beta decay (NLDBD) experimental program with discovery
potential at a half-life beyond 10e28 years. LEGEND will operate up to one tonne
of high-purity germanium detectors inside a large volume of LAr. The LAr shield
serves as an active veto that is powerful in eliminating a wide range of
backgrounds for NLDBD. Specifically, the PI and trainees will collaborate with
LANL researchers to convert an existing cryostat at LANL into a LAr test stand
with purification capability and light collection instrumentation. We will
directly immerse and operate high-purity germanium detectors inside liquid
argon. Through this collaborative research between USD and LANL, we can evaluate
the overall performance of the integrated system and improve our understanding
of the background rejection performance of a LAr active veto. In addition to
advancing the preparation for the LEGEND project, this Research Fellowship will
arm the PI with expertise on liquid scintillator technologies and enable the PI
to sustain his career in experimental neutrino physics in the long-term. A
combination of hardware infrastructure and technical expertise at LANL is
essential to carry out the proposed activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.