* 1929792
* CAREER: Advancing the science and education of land surface-atmosphere interactions: Interweaving multiscale experimental and modeling approaches for  Land Surface Models
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Kathleen Smits, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 264,563.00

CAREER: Advancing the science and education of land surface-atmosphere
interactions: Interweaving multiscale experimental and modeling approaches for
&lt;br/&gt;Land Surface Models and experiential learning&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; A
critical challenge for Land Surface Models (LSMs) is to simulate processes at
the surface and the subsurface and their feedbacks to the atmosphere. Even given
the same climate forcings, LSMs predict different surface fluxes and soil
moisture conditions. This is due to differences in the formulations of
individual processes, parameterizations of those formulations, numerical
solution methods and representation of spatial heterogeneity. All of these
differences contribute to LSM prediction errors and uncertainty. Increasing
confidence in climate predictions requires revisiting fundamental process
understanding and using that understanding to improve representations of land-
atmosphere feedbacks. This research seeks to address this challenge by answering
questions on multiphase fluid transport mechanisms in surface soils and
mass/energy exchange at the soil-atmosphere interface. New knowledge and
modeling approaches will result in improved predictions for water supply and
food security as well as environmental issues across the nation. Linked to the
research plan is an educational framework for engaging minority middle school
students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). Focusing on
the integrating theme of water and climate, the investigator will help students
make the link between STEM they learn in the classroom and environmental water
resource problems in their own backyards, motivating and preparing students to
pursue college studies and ultimately careers in STEM fields. The integrated
activities will help to build a scientifically literate and informed citizenry,
while also answering critical water and climate questions. This project will
contribute substantially to the goals of the NSF in the production of
interdisciplinary knowledge and the education of middle-school students, young
scientists and engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overarching goal of this
research is to advance our understanding and modeling of mass and energy
exchange at the land-atmosphere interface over a wide range of scales, and
ultimately improve LSMs that are utilized in global climate prediction. The
proposed research will systematically explore how the shallow subsurface and the
atmosphere, specifically the layer very close to the soil surface, interact,
providing new insights into mass and thermal flux process interactions that will
be integrated into LSMs. A focus on scaling based on process understanding at
multiple scales will allow for process-rich parameterizations for multiple land-
atmosphere interaction and subsurface processes that contribute to LSMs. This
vision includes unique highly controlled mechanistic studies in the laboratory,
leveraging of existing laboratory and field data, modeling of critical mass and
energy dynamics, and the characterization of important interactions from the
laboratory to the watershed scales that drive feedbacks to climate systems.
Project results will yield unique, high-fidelity data that will greatly aid in
improving our understanding and modeling of the processes affected by
heterogeneity at various scales and the development of methods to
mechanistically represent the proposed processes at the watershed scale. A suite
of climate intermediate, and fine scale computational models will be used to
guide observations and interpret data; process studies will provide new
algorithms and process parameterizations and evaluate model performance.
Computational models in conjunction with experimental data will enable the
investigator to understand governing flow and transport mechanisms under
different atmospheric forcing at different scales. This research is expected to
improve the representation of mass and energy exchange processes across multiple
scales at the soil-land-atmosphere interface.