* 1929119
* NSF/GEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Multi-scale investigation of rheology and emplacement of multi-phase lava
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Julia Hammer, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 106,702.00

Lava flows displace communities, destroy homes and infrastructure, and can pose
a serious hazard to life and health. Accurate forecasting of lava flow
emplacement is essential to hazard mitigation and management, and requires a
level of understanding of the physical properties of lava which is not currently
available. This project will focus on improving this understanding by examining
the 2018 eruption of Kilauea volcano, in Hawai'i. This large eruption took place
on the lower east rift zone, and was significant in its large volume, fast
speeds, and large fraction of gas bubbles. A unique aspect of this eruption is
also the unprecedented volume of high-quality direct observations of in-situ
flow, including high-resolution videos of flowing lava collected by drones. The
team will use the observations from Hawai'i together with mathematical models of
lava flows, analysis of samples collected from the flow, and laboratory
experiments utilizing bubbly suspensions, to advance the ability to forecast how
volcanic eruptions evolve and mitigate their hazards. In addition, the project
will involve educators and students and produce educational materials based on
the eruption, to promote science literacy and broaden participation. This is a
project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation's Directorate
of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research Council (NERC) of
the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency Agreement. This
Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted and peer-reviewed
by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of the budget. Upon
successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of
the budget and the investigators associated with its own country (in this case,
Durham University).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the challenges is that lava is a
complex fluid that contains liquid melt, gas bubbles, and solid crystals, all
acting together to determine the lava's behavior. This interaction changes
during the advancement of the lava as crystals form, bubbles leave and the melt
cools. This project will address this challenge by resolving two issues: 1) how
multi-phase lava rheology evolves during emplacement; 2) how rheology impacts
emplacement. The 2018 eruption at the Lower East Rift Zone of Kilauea Volcano in
Hawaii (KLERZ) provides an opportunity to investigate lava emplacement in
unprecedented detail. During the eruption, Unoccupied Aerial Systems (UAS)
captured a uniquely comprehensive time-series of overhead videos of channelized
lava. This study will create a new physical-mathematical framework for
predicting lava flow emplacement based on new, quantitative understanding of the
coupled evolution of lava rheology. We will leverage unprecedented, linked field
data sets and combine them with analog experiments of channelized multi-phase
flows and laboratory measurements of natural and analog mutliphase samples to
investigate multi-phase rheology and flow at a range of length scales. This team
will: 1) Perform laboratory rheometry and microstructure analysis of KLERZ
samples; 2) Use UAS data to characterize the evolution of KLERZ channelized
flows; 3) Used scaled lava analogues to construct and calibrate fundamental
physical models; 4) Synthesize all observations to produce scale-sensitive
rheological laws for KLERZ lavas; and 5) Integrate new rheological relations in
existing flow emplacement models and test those on KLERZ flow field. The core
deliverable of the proposed research will be a validated quantitative framework
for predicting lava flow emplacement. This outcome is expected to improve
assessment and mitigation of volcanic hazards. In addition, all numerical models
and measurements from analog experiments will be made open, so that they can be
used as benchmarks for future models. This study will enable scientists and
practitioners to determine material properties and flow behavior of the natural
system and, conversely, to use field observations of lava emplacement to deduce
the properties of the lava.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.