* 1929734
* Collaborative Research:  Workshops to Develop a Community-Informed Framework Characterizing the Impact of Engineering Education R&amp;D
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Jeremi London, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 05/31/2019
* USD 22,842.00

The goal of this project is to broadly and comprehensively define impact in the
context of engineering education research, allowing the results of that research
to be used more effectively in the education of future engineers. By doing so
this project will increase the impact of NSF's prior and future investments in
engineering education research. Researchers and educators will work together to
develop a shared understanding and language around how engineering education
research can influence educational practice. This will enable them to
effectively articulate the impact of their work to diverse audiences and more
carefully plan broad impacts for their future work. The results will provide a
basis for future studies on better indicators and measures for assessing impact
at the project level and across funding programs as well as directly impact
current engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is engaging the
global engineering education community in creating a valid research impact
framework for the field of engineering education that is inclusive of
researchers and practitioners' perspectives on impact; and describing
practitioners' insights on the role of research in engineering education
practice. In an environment of increased accountability, engineering education
researchers are being asked to identify the tangible impacts of their work on a
regular basis. Unfortunately, there is a dearth of scholarship within and beyond
engineering education on how to characterize the impact of research. A shared
understanding among engineering education researchers and practitioners of what
research impact looks like for this field lends itself to conversations on how
engineering education research can influence practice. The engineering education
research impact framework resulting from this study will draw broadly upon the
perspectives of practitioners and researchers as well as existing research
impact frameworks developed by other disciplines, including health sciences and
science in general. As such, it will be robustly relevant across a wide range of
engineering education research and practice activities. Workshops, interviews
and recruitment procedures ensure representation of perspectives from a wide
range of stakeholders and experts. The methodological approach to achieving the
project goal adapts an instrument development procedure for framework
development and validation, and will serve as the basis for a follow up study of
an impact assessment. Because this project seeks to broadly and comprehensively
define impact in the context of engineering education research, the resulting
definition will extend beyond esoteric scientific impacts such as journals and
academic communities to focus on the social impacts of engineering education and
related research. Workshops engage a large number of community members in
development, which positively impacts awareness, quality, robustness of
usability/applicability, dissemination, buy in, and helps develop consensus in
the community around impact. Additional efforts and interviews will ensure
representation of practitioner perspectives in the resulting framework, even if
these groups do not attend the engineering education conferences. This work may
also inform initiatives around broader impacts in other engineering disciplines
and across NSF.