* 1929311
* Topology and Frustration in Spin-Orbit Coupled Quantum Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Natalia Perkins, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2023
* USD 335,237.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education that is aimed to advance understanding of novel magnetic states that
arise in materials where electrons can interact strongly with each other through
the Coulomb interaction and with atomic cores through their motion and intrinsic
magnetic properties. This area of research has recently experienced rapid and
exciting developments both in theory and in experiment. The discovery and
understanding of novel materials are crucial to sustain technological progress,
and close work between theory and experiment has accelerated research on these
materials. A particular focus of this project will be the study of quantum spin
liquids. These are fascinating states of electron matter which show no
signatures of magnetic ordering down to the absolute zero of temperature. The
research team plans to elucidate remarkable phenomena involving quantum spin
liquids, and to investigate their potential applications for topological quantum
computation. Topological quantum computers are envisioned to do computation by
manipulating a kind of particle-like quantum state that may emerge under the
right conditions in interacting systems of many-electrons. An important part of
the broader impact of the PI's scientific activity will be mentoring PhD, Master
and undergraduate students in advanced condensed matter physics. The research
will be integrated with educational activities at the University of Minnesota
and in the broader research community, including summer schools, conferences,
and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research and education to study novel quantum phases
arising from collective behavior of correlated electrons in the presence of
strong spin-orbit coupling, non-trivial topology, and disorder. In particular,
the PI will focus on the development and analysis of effective super-exchange
Hamiltonians to describe Kitaev materials, which are realized in a variety of
systems such as transition metal oxides, rare-earths, and halides. The research
team will compute ground state phase diagrams of these models and identify the
nature of possible quantum states and phase transitions among them. The research
team will also study finite temperature properties of these models and the
effects of magnetic field; the presence of anisotropic interactions in these
models often significantly modifies the magnetization processes. The research
team will also study the effects of disorder in these systems, as the
competition of disorder, frustration and topology can potentially give rise to
many unexpected&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. PI will also be working on the microscopic
modeling of QSLs and developing of appropriate field-theoretical methods to
describe them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be integrated with
educational activities at the University of Minnesota and in the broader
research community, including summer schools, conferences, and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.