* 1929466
* Mountain-Wave Evolution and Orographic Precipitation II
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 705,041.00

Mountainous terrain has a significant impact on local and regional weather
conditions. The flow over mountains is known to enhance precipitation on the
upslope sides, and the impact of the air rising to different levels of the
atmosphere has a downstream impact on larger-scale weather patterns. However,
many questions about the details remain. This award provides funding for a
researcher and two graduate students to study topics related to atmospheric
interactions with mountain topography. In addition to the training of the next
generation of scientists, this award will have a broad societal impact through
the potential to improve weather forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two main
thrusts of the work are on improving understanding of: 1) the dynamics and
predictability of multi-scale orographic precipitation and 2) mountain waves and
their feedback on the synoptic-scale flow. The orographic precipitation work
would be conducted using idealized modeling. The research team will investigate
the relative contributions of dynamics and microphysics toward increasing
precipitation by diagnosing those processes in scenarios with and without
mountains and cyclones using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF)
numerical model. Additional work will be conducted using cases with different
background static stabilities, moisture fluxes, and ridge positions. The
orographic precipitation component will also include work on mesoscale
predictability as the researchers hypothesize that small perturbations to the
large-scale flow will generate large perturbations to the precipitation patterns
associated with mesoscale terrain features. The mountain wave work would use
modeling, theory, and observations from prior field campaigns to address how
gravity-wave-drag influences nontrivial large-scale flows and under what
conditions nonlinear processes strongly regulate the amplitude of mountain
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.