* 1929580
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: ADIDS: An Air-gapped Distributed Intrusion Detection System for the Power Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Raheem Beyah, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

The power grid is a highly complex control system and one of the most impressive
engineering feats of the modern era. Nearly every facet of modern society
critically relies on the proper operation of the power grid such that long or
even short interruptions can impose significant economic and social hardship on
society. The current power grid is undergoing a transformation to a Smart Grid,
that seeks to monitor and track diagnostic and operational information so as to
enable a more efficient and resilient system. This significant transformation,
however, has made the grid more susceptible to attacks by cybercriminals, as
highlighted by several recent attacks on power grids that have exposed the
vulnerabilities in modern power systems, especially power substations that form
the backbone of electricity networks. Motivated by this, this project aims to
develop practical solutions for securing the power system against sophisticated
cyberattacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant effort has been invested to
develop effective intrusion detection systems for power system substations to
detect cyberattacks and/or reduce their damaging consequences. Existing
techniques, however, require some level of trust from components on the
supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA) network, rendering them
vulnerable to sophisticated attacks that could compromise the SCADA system. This
research presents an air-gapped radio frequency based distributed intrusion
detection system (ADIDS) that remains reliable even when the entire SCADA system
is considered untrusted. The system has two inputs: SCADA network traffic, and
the radio frequency signals emitted by substation components. The control
actions in substations can be reliably inferred from the radio signals they
generate. The integrity of the radio signals is provided by the verification of
quasi-random lightning strikes embedded in the signals. When properly
configured, ADIDS is able to verify the correctness of the SCADA network traffic
without relying on the SCADA network itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.