* 1929557
* I-Corps: Improving Detection of Stroke using Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Andrew Southerland, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project results from
enabling first responders and emergency providers to have on-demand access to
expert neurological knowledge when assessing stroke patients. Missed strokes in
the emergency setting can result in patients suffering from increased long-term
disability and cost the healthcare systems millions of dollars in medical
expenses and lost productivity. By using artificial intelligence and mobile
devices to bring the experience and knowledge of vascular neurologists closer to
the patient at the time of their stroke, this technology can help reduce the
number of strokes missed. In particular, rural and low population density areas
can benefit from increased access to expert neurological knowledge that may not
be readily or reliably accessible in their communities. Additionally, the
increasingly aging population is at an overall higher risk for stroke further
increasing the demand and potential impact of this technology in preventing the
long-term consequences of stroke on patients and the healthcare system. The
underlying technology can also be expanded to include assessment of other
neurological disease such as multiple sclerosis, headaches and Parkinson's
disease thereby opening up new market opportunities in the the diagnosis and
monitoring of these conditions.

This I-Corps project is based on technology that combines knowledge from the
fields of neurology and computer science to create a set of algorithms that will
accurately assess patients for signs of stroke. The algorithms use computer
vision techniques to analyze videos of patients undergoing a stroke assessment.
Machine learning classification techniques are then used to decide if the video
is likely showing a positive or negative stroke assessment. The algorithms are
trained and tested with data validated by vascular neurologists thereby learning
directly from human experts. Proof-of-concept has been demonstrated for
algorithms detecting individual signs of stroke but development of a
comprehensive stroke assessment algorithm is underway. Further development of
the technology for specific applications requires a thorough understanding of
customer and key stakeholder needs and will be focus of this I-Corps Team
project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.