* 1929173
* RII Track-4: Formation, Photolysis, and Bioaccumulation of Dissolved Hydrocarbons from Chemically-Herded and Burned Crude Oil at High Latitudes
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Patrick Tomco, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 11/30/2023
* USD 165,406.00

Oil spilled into the marine environment undergoes a process of photodegradation
when exposed to sunlight. Photochemically-degraded oil is highly complex and
poses a hazard to marine organisms. As the circumpolar north loses ice at an
unprecedented rate, oil drilling in the Arctic is forecasted to increase,
raising the possibility of a major oil spill in a remote cold region. Surface
collection agents, or "chemical herders" have gained attention recently for the
ability to thicken slicks to allow in-situ burning in ice-associated areas for
over 90% oil mass removal. However, little is known about the formation of
dissolved residues stemming from this process, how dissolved residues are
transformed in the presence of sunlight, and what impacts may occur on
susceptible marine organisms. This project will advance our understanding of how
oil is transformed into a water-soluble form following combustion; it will
assess the chemical character and biological uptake of the residues as they
weather in Arctic waters. The project will involve residue extraction and
analysis at the University of New Orleans and National High Magnetic Field
Laboratory. The results will guide future oil spill response and contingency
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longitudinal dissolution rates governing
hydrocarbon-derived dissolved organic matter, especially those deriving from
oxygenation, remain understudied in the Arctic and Subarctic domains with regard
to treatment options of oiled water following a maritime point release. Extreme
seasonal swings in photoperiods further complicate this process via
photodissolution and may have broad impacts on bioaccumulation potential in
susceptible marine organisms such as mussels, Mytilus trossulus. Surface
collection agents (chemical herders) have gained popularity recently for the
ability to thicken oil prior to in-situ burning, a process that is capable of
removing &gt;90% of oil from the surface. However, little is known about the
formation of dissolved residues stemming from this process and the chemical
character as these dissolved residues weather. This project will assess these
factors using two new emerging technologies, fluorescence excitation emission
spectra (EEMs) coupled with Parallel Factorial Analysis (PARAFAC) and Fourier
Transformation Ion Cyclotron Mass Spectrometery (FT-ICR MS). Bench-scale
simulations will be conducted at the University of Alaska Anchorage with ANS
Crude oil, two herder formulations (OP-40 and ThickSlick), and mussels collected
from Resurrection Bay, Alaska. Residues are extracted and EEMs analyzed at the
University of New Orleans, with FT-ICR MS analyses conducted at the National
High Magnetic Field Laboratory. This study will fund PI Tomco and one graduate
student assistant to travel to New Orleans, LA and Tallahassee, FL. This will
lead to broader integration of advanced spectroscopic and spectrometric
techniques at the PI's home institution and increase institutional capacity to
compete for external research support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.