* 1929893
* Regional Cybersecurity/Cyberinfrastructure Workshop Targeting Minority Serving Institutions: Low-Cost/High-Impact Cyberdefense and Cyberinfrastructure Resources
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Tracy Doaks, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2021
* USD 66,886.00

The CyberRISK (Regional Information Security Knowledge-sharing) workshop brings
together twenty Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) with diverse
characteristics and academic missions, but with a shared need for training,
resources, and peer networking on Because cybersecurity postures arise from
policy and technical designs, attending institutions bring two participants: one
policy lead (CIO or senior leader with policy-setting authority) and one
technical lead (security or networking resource responsible for security
protections). Workshop programs follow policy and technical tracks, emphasizing
their coordination for effectiveness and coherence. Pre-workshop surveys shape
workshop content so it is relevant for the diverse institutional circumstances,
priorities, and levels of cybersecurity maturity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;National
and regional cyber experts, network operators, and research university peers
participate to broaden and diversify insight into best practices and relevant
service offerings, and to promote interaction around campus cyberinfrastructure,
science use cases, and regional / national cyberinfrastructure
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop's intellectual merit stems from
information exchanged at the event, which leads to new ideas, relationships and
collaborations among the diverse participants: colleges and universities,
regional and national cyber experts, and relevant consortia. Evaluative
instruments employed before, during, and after the event shed light on changes
and actions arising from the workshop that improve participants' cybersecurity
postures. Broader impact of this workshop begins with the dissemination of
workshop materials, presentations, and plans that are publicly available for
adaptation and reuse; it extends further by providing a framework and model for
future regional workshops, with the results of evaluative instruments available
to guide improvements of those workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.