* 1929775
* Variability in the Rate and Pattern of Global Warming: Forced and Unforced Components
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* David Battisti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 282,370.00

The observed increase in global temperature has varied in time, with periods of
enhanced or reduced warming (such as the so-called "global warming hiatus"
between 1998 and 2013) and in space, with regions that warm more or less than
the global mean. The goal of this work is to understand the different processes
contributing to this variability in the rate and pattern of global warming.
Determining the relative importance of greenhouse gasses, anthropogenic
aerosols, and internal atmospheric and oceanic variability for observed
temperature changes is critical to constrain the climate response to further
greenhouse gas emissions over the 21st century. This research helps bridge the
gap between our scientific understanding of global climate change and the
practical need to understand how it manifests in a particular place and at a
particular time. The statistical methods to be developed and tested under this
project will provide a valuable new resource for monitoring climate variability
and change, and the associated code will be shared publicly. This project
involves the support and mentoring of a postdoctoral researcher, thus helping to
train the next generation of climate scientists. The results of this project
will be disseminated widely through publications, conference presentations,
press releases, and outreach to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to identify spatial patterns of surface temperature anomalies (or
fingerprints) that are associated with particular mechanisms of climate
variability and external forcings (e.g., due to greenhouse gasses or
anthropogenic aerosols) by using statistical analysis of both climate model
output and observations. The skill of these methods in separating forced climate
responses from natural climate variability will be tested within large ensembles
of climate model simulations where each simulation has a unique realization of
internal variability. These methods will then be applied to give a new best
estimate of the anthropogenic influence on surface temperature changes in
observations. These fingerprints help disentangle and understand influences on
climate from external forcings and internal variability such that the evolution
of climate signals associated with external forcings can be tracked. The
findings of this project will contribute new insights on the mechanisms of
temperature variability in the tropical Pacific and Southern Ocean and on the
role of the ocean in moderating the global climate response to anthropogenic
perturbations. The temperature fingerprints identified in the work will help to
understand where ocean observations can lead to the largest improvements in
model-based multi-year forecasts of climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.