* 1929945
* Future Cities, Livable Futures: Toward a Sustainable Model for Urban-Watershed Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Zheng Fang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 04/30/2020
* USD 49,530.00

As the global population continues to grow, cities must address the challenges
and opportunities of urban watersheds, urban and surrounding lands that
contribute runoff to a particular water body such as a river. To do this
effectively, cities must use a systemic approach that integrates perspectives of
science, engineering, design, planning, and policy, while incorporating input
from citizens along the water's edge. The "Future Cities, Livable Futures:
Toward a Sustainable Model for Urban-Watershed Systems" workshop will be held at
the University of Texas at Arlington in the Dallas-Fort Worth (DFW) metroplex on
August 16 and 17, 2019, to discuss approaches to these complex problems.
Participants will have an opportunity to discuss and evaluate the environmental
impacts from transportation and related infrastructure systems, climate change,
and economic and population growth on the Trinity River Watershed from a variety
of disciplinary perspectives to examine the complexities of urban-watershed
systems. The future of the Trinity River Watershed will be re-envisioned as a
relevant model for future urban watershed management and planning across the
United States. The workshop will provide a great platform to introduce cross-
disciplinary dialogues around urban-watershed management, explore best
practices, and explain and better understand the different factors that interact
to form an urban-watershed system. This workshop will result in an
interdisciplinary research partnership targeted at developing a research
initiative on the creation and stewardship of sustainable urban watershed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will incorporate a unique
participatory approach with design and systems thinking to explore the needs of
different stakeholders and the concrete constraints that hydrological and human-
made systems impose on urban watersheds, while also examining the manner in
which these needs and constraints reinforce social inequity and economic
disparity. This approach will begin with cross-sector presentations on best
practices and lead to a hands-on re-imagination of the future of the Trinity
River Watershed system. With inputs from participants, the principal
investigators will identify activities and research areas that will engage
stakeholders and collaborators in future endeavors with positive impacts on
future urban watershed development in the DFW region and other cities in the
United States. Systems sciences will be applied to decipher how different
social, environmental, and economic factors, patterns, and behaviors of the
urban watershed interact to form a complex system. Network analysis will also be
used for the study of the urban watershed as a dynamic system in order to
simulate the heterogeneous factors that interact and constitute urban-watershed
relationships. Based on the information gathered from the conference, the
workshop leaders will better understand the interactions among environmental,
social, and economic variables within a dynamic
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.