* 1929292
* I-Corps: H-meter - point of care device for the analysis of hormones in blood
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Luis Polo-Parada, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
improvement of the quality of life of patients. Modern medicine relies heavily
on the use of laboratory analysis to assess patient health, diagnose disease and
monitor treatment efficacy. Many laboratory tests can be performed speedily at
low cost, whereas other tests are expensive and take more time due to their need
for skilled technicians and costly instruments. This project involves
development of a rapid, low cost, point of care (POC) diagnostic system that can
measure hormone levels with the sensitivity and specificity of clinical lab-
based tests using only a single drop of blood. Currently, the high cost of
laboratory-based hormonal tests is a barrier to their use in the diagnosis and
treatment of hypogonadism in aging men and clinical management of gender non-
conforming populations. An accurate and affordable hormone POC tests will allow
more patients to receive optimal hormone therapy, reducing treatment side
effects and improving patient quality of life. The proposed low cost, accurate,
POC diagnostic system will improve the health care of rural populations,
impoverished communities and third world countries. The proposed system also has
veterinary applications that will improve animal health and the economics of the
sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves a technology that
combined recent advances in nanotechnology, instrumentation, biology and
medicine in a low cost, portable diagnostic test system that can accurately
measure free testosterone at the point of care (POC) using blood collected from
a finger prick. It will include a novel strip like sensor and a reading unit
that can be interfaced with any smart phone/tablet. The sensor can selectively
capture testosterone molecules from the blood sample and produce an optical
signal proportional to the concentration present in the sample. As opposed to
currently available technology, the sensor does not include antibodies in the
recognition system, which results in longer shelf-time, lower cost and higher
reliability. The reading unit will communicate via Bluetooth and/or WiFi
interface, and interact with different mobile platforms; and include privacy-
preserving features to address patient privacy concerns. The system will also
provide information directly to the physician using encryption code and provide
a support a telemedicine environment. The assessment feature of our product will
lead to the improvement of doctor's diagnosis, which will result in an
improvement on patient health. Proof-of-concept was demonstrated in 2018 and
beta prototype will be complete by the end of summer
2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.