* 1929678
* EAGER: Biochemical and Genetic Tools for Analysis of Paralogous Polymerase Subunits in Grasses
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Rebecca Mosher, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,092.00

One of the most important questions in biology is how every cell in an organism
can contain the same set of instructions (the DNA the comprises the genome) yet
produce diverse cell types that respond differently to various environmental
signals. This diversity of cells and responses occurs when different parts of
the genome are transcribed by RNA Polymerases (Pols). Understanding the function
of various Pols might help us engineer organisms in beneficial ways, and will
therefore have impacts on medicine, agriculture, and environmental conservation.
This project is focused on new Pol subunits discovered in the grass family,
which includes key crops such as rice, wheat, and corn. This project will test
the function of these novel Pol proteins and create genetic and biochemical
tools for subsequent investigations. Additionally, this project will train a
graduate student in cutting-edge biological approaches such as genome editing
and analysis of high throughput sequencing data. This project also contains
experiments suitable for undergraduate students to participate in research and
these students will be recruited from groups that are underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants have evolved two specialized RNA
polymerases, Pol IV and Pol V, which are responsible for transcriptional gene
silencing of transposons and adjacent genes. Although they share a number of
smaller subunits, these polymerases have divergent biological activities due to
unique subunits that arose through gene duplication and functional divergence.
Grasses have additional duplications of Pol IV and Pol V subunits. Phylogenetic
analysis indicates that these duplicates have neofunctionalized with respect to
both function and holoenzyme assembly. The goal of this project is to
genetically and biochemically test whether the duplicate (paralogous) Pol
subunits have diverged in function and evolved into a sixth RNA Polymerase in
grasses. These questions will be answered through the creation and analysis of
Pol subunit mutants and tagged transgenic lines in rice. Comparison of mutant
phenotypes and assessment of subunit interactions will determine whether the
paralogous subunits have distinct phenotypes and binding partners, or whether
they function redundantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.