* 1929774
* SaTC: STARSS: Small: Combined Side-channel Attacks and Mathematical Foundations of Combined Countermeasures
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Selcuk Kose, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2021
* USD 209,159.00

Digital information has become an integral part of our daily lives and there is
a growing concern about the security of information. The amount of information
that should be kept secure is increasing with the proliferation of high-tech
electronics such as smart-phones, tablets, and wearable devices. Accordingly,
the number of attacks from malicious parties to obtain the secret information
that is stored in a secure (i.e., encrypted) device increases. Side-channel
attacks are widely used to extract information from an integrated circuit (IC)
or a smart card by observing different leakage sources such as power
consumption, timing information, temperature, electromagnetic (EM) emanations,
and acoustic waves while loading/executing/storing information. Due to the low
cost and potentially non-invasive nature, side-channel attacks pose a serious
threat to the security of personal, commercial, and military information. By
providing design guidelines against side-channel attacks, our project benefits
companies, governments, and individuals in securing the digital
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the power and
feasibility of combined side-channel attacks including both physical side-
channel attacks (i.e., power, timing, and electromagnetic) and fault injection
attacks. Since each attack vector leverages a different leakage mechanism, the
countermeasures against different attack vectors may differ significantly.
Accordingly, mathematical foundations of combined countermeasures against
multiple attack vectors are developed. In this project, the existing resources
are utilized as a countermeasure against combined attacks together with
dedicated countermeasures to minimize the energy and performance overheads of
security. This project provides several opportunities to underrepresented groups
and undergraduate students to engage in hardware security research.&lt;br/&gt;