* 1929163
* RII Track-4: Deciphering the Role of Polarization on Ion Transport in Ionic Liquid Batteries
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Jindal Shah, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 274,882.00

Safe and reliable operation of Li-ion batteries depends critically on the type
of electrolytes used. Ionic liquids, novel solvents composed entirely of ions
much like common salt but existing as liquids at the temperatures of battery
operation, present exciting opportunities as electrolytes due to low volatility
and nonflammability. Potentially a million ionic liquids and roughly a billion
ionic liquid-ionic liquid mixtures can be designed providing a materials
platform for developing next generation of Li-ion batteries. Despite these
significant advantages, the progress in ionic liquid-based Li-ion batteries has
been limited due to slow Li-ion transport, which increases the time for
charging. The objective of the current project is, therefore, to understand
ionic liquid-Li interactions to enable the design of novel ionic liquids for
fast Li-ion transport. By partnering with researchers from the Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory (PNNL), the PI will develop the capability to study ionic
liquid-Li interactions using state-of-the-art modeling techniques and DOE's
Leadership Computing Facilities. The expertise developed will be shared with
undergraduate and graduate students at Oklahoma State University and researchers
in the jurisdiction. It is expected that the collaboration resulting from this
fellowship will foster engagement of researchers at OSU with those at PNNL and
lead to development of new ideas accelerating discoveries in multiple science
and engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Li-ion batteries present a
promising technological solution for sustainable transportation. One of the
major components of Li-ion batteries is the electrolyte through which an
efficient transport of Li ions is critical for reliable operation. Room
temperature ionic liquids easily fulfill the required electrolyte properties
such as electrochemical stability, nonvolatility, nonflammability, and high
conductivity over a wide range of temperatures. Despite significant advantages,
application of ionic liquids as electrolytes is hampered because the high
viscosity of many ionic liquids hinders transport of Li ions causing slow
charging and discharging times. Mixing two ionic liquids offers a simple yet
powerful strategy to overcome this challenge. However, currently there is a lack
of fundamental understanding regarding which ionic liquid combinations are
likely to yield promising electrolytes. Further, accurate modeling of such
mixtures necessitates capturing the composition-dependent changes in electronic
distributions around ions, highlighting the need for polarization. First
principles molecular dynamics (FPMD) based on density functional theory approach
naturally incorporates this crucial aspect in modeling ionic liquids. The PI
will develop this capability in his research group by partnering with
researchers from the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. FPMD simulations
will be performed on DOE's Leadership Computing Facilities for ionic liquid
mixtures, Li+-ionic liquid mixtures, ionic liquids at electrode interfaces and
in the presence of electric field. The newly developed expertise will be shared
with researchers at the host institution increasing its research capacity. The
proposed fellowship will lead to the training of a graduate student and
integration of FPMD simulations in the PI's 'Molecular Modeling and Simulation'
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.