* 1929729
* Towards Accurate and Efficient Dynamics Modeling and Control for Soft Robots in Unstructured Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Chengzhi Yuan, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 445,618.00

The field of soft robotics is growing rapidly in recent years, with the rising
demand for advanced robotic systems to operate efficiently, robustly,
intelligently, and safely under unstructured environments. Compared to
traditional rigid robotic systems, soft robots are highly dexterous in the sense
that they can deform their soft body to adapt to clustered environments without
damage or jamming. In addition, soft robots can be made to be low-cost, low-
power, lightweight, and human friendly, promoting many applications that are
otherwise not available, such as picking up fragile objects (e.g., tomatoes) in
agriculture harvesting, non-invasive endoscopic surgery in medical applications,
and soft robotic grippers in deep-sea exploration, etc. However, implementation
of soft robots in real-world applications presents challenges in many
technological aspects, including material, sensing, modeling, and control. The
research of soft robotics is still in its primitive stage as a unified framework
for the design, modeling, and control of highly dexterous soft robots is still
lacking. This project supports fundamental research to provide the knowledge
needed to fill this important technology void, so as to promote a wide range of
soft robot applications, e.g., in-space/underwater exploration, aerospace,
healthcare, biomedical, and agricultural industries. Therefore, results from
this research will not only promote the progress of robotics science and
engineering, but also benefit the U.S. economy, society, and national defense.
This research involves multiple disciplines including robotics, control theory,
machine learning, computational mechanics, and material science. The
interdisciplinary approach will help boost minority involvement in scientific
research and promote engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to investigate an efficient and accurate dynamics modeling and
control framework for soft robotic manipulation and locomotion under
unstructured environments. Specifically, the research team will develop modular
plug-and-play soft robotic arms with distributed power, actuation, and tactile
sensing. A three-dimensional, reduced-order, geometrically exact, finite element
model of soft robotic arms with internal actuation forces from tendon
contraction will be formulated and implemented. An efficient and accurate
simulation program for the dynamics of soft robots interacting with the
environments will be developed. Dynamic controllers, hybridizing model-based and
data-driven control strategies, will also be devised and tested. Through a
series of simulations and physical experiments, the team will identify
fundamental design principles and develop controllers for enabling autonomous
soft robots such as elephant trunk-like dexterous soft manipulators and octopus-
like walking/swimming soft robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.