* 1929124
* RII Track-4: Turbulence Effects on Cloud Microphysical Processes: Development and Testing of Subgrid-Scale Parameterizations for Large Eddy Simulation
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Scott Salesky, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 11/30/2022
* USD 223,658.00

Clouds play a critical role for many processes in the Earth system, including
precipitation, atmospheric chemistry, and climate. Over the past few decades,
scientists have shown that turbulence within clouds can cause large fluctuations
in humidity, temperature, and water droplet concentrations, which directly
impact cloud lifetimes and rain formation. Despite the importance of small-scale
cloud turbulence, few studies have focused on how to represent its effects in
computer models used for research and weather forecasting. In this project, the
Principal Investigator (PI) will partner with experts at Michigan Technological
University (MTU) to develop models that accurately represent the effects of
small-scale cloud turbulence in computer models. In order to achieve this goal,
the PI and a graduate student will perform laboratory experiments in the MTU
cloud chamber, the nation's only turbulence chamber capable of creating and
sustaining turbulent clouds in a controlled laboratory environment. This funding
will establish a lasting collaboration between the PI and hosts and will support
the education of a graduate student by providing access to unique laboratory
facilities. By expanding the PI's expertise to encompass laboratory experiments
and cloud turbulence, this project will enable future collaborations between the
PI and partners in the National Weather Center, thereby strengthening the
overall competitiveness of the Central Oklahoma weather
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulence is a key driver of cloud mixing and
entrainment, causing significant fluctuations in temperature, humidity, cloud
particle concentrations, and collisions or breakup. Recent studies have
demonstrated that turbulent fluctuations of supersaturation can lead to a
broadening of the cloud droplet size distribution, initiating rain formation
significantly faster than what theory predicts for a quiescent environment. As
computational power increases, large eddy simulation (LES), which directly
resolves the largest scales of turbulence, is becoming a promising technique for
both weather forecasting and for studying the linkages between turbulence,
microphysics, and large-scale cloud properties. This project aims to develop new
subgrid-scale models that can accurately represent small-scale turbulent
fluctuations of supersaturation in LES. The PI and a graduate student will
partner with hosts at Michigan Technological University to perform experiments
in the MTU cloud chamber, where steady-state turbulent clouds can be produced
through moist Rayleigh-Benard convection. An ensemble of laboratory experiments
will be performed to investigate the distribution of supersaturation
fluctuations across spatial and temporal scales, and to develop new models that
can recover the subgrid supersaturation variance based only on knowledge of
resolved-scale features of the flow. This project will allow the PI to develop
research expertise in laboratory experiments and cloud turbulence, thereby
enabling future collaborations with partners in the National Weather Center. The
future research areas enabled by this project have significant societal
benefits, including improved precipitation forecasts and radar measurements, and
an improved understanding of the role of clouds in Earth's present and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.