* 1929452
* Probe the conformational dynamics of a protein targeting machine at single molecule resolution
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Shimon Weiss, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 838,699.00

Observing the dynamic movements of molecular machines in action and deciphering
their roles in biological function are the frontiers of life science research.
This project aims to elucidate the molecular movements in a protein targeting
machine, the signal recognition particle (SRP), as it delivers ~30% of newly
synthesized proteins to the correct biological membrane in the cell. The project
will generate valuable reagents, tools, and assays that are useful to many other
researchers. The results of the research will be disseminated through
publications in academic journals as well as animated movie illustrations that
will be available to the general public. The education component of the proposal
will emphasize the training of graduate students and postdoctoral scholars in
multidisciplinary biochemical and biophysical research. It will also expose high
school and undergraduate students to state-of-the-art research tools and provide
leadership experience for the graduate students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project will combine the
expertise of the Shan lab in mechanistic biochemistry and the Weiss lab in
biophysics to decipher the dynamic motions that drive co-translational protein
targeting by SRP at single molecule resolution. The recent works by the Shan lab
indicated the presence of multiple largescale conformational rearrangements in
SRP during the protein targeting cycle. This project will develop solution-based
single molecule fluorescence assays to directly observe the conformational
rearrangements in SRP during targeting, decipher the molecular forces that drive
them, and understand their regulation by the GTPase cycle of SRP and by spatial
and temporal signals in the pathway. The results will elucidate the molecular
basis for the spatiotemporal control of this targeting machine, and reveal
generalizable principles that underlie the action of nucleotide-driven
macromolecular machines in biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.