* 1929694
* CIBR: Collaborative Research: Providing sustainable Galaxy service on XSEDE resources
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Vincent Hilser, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 2,035,468.00

Due to proliferation of high throughput sequencing and imaging techniques
biology has become a de facto data-driven discipline. Yet the ability to take
full advantage of these technological advances is still lagging for most
biological researchers. The Galaxy Project started in 2005 to create a system
enabling biologists without informatics expertise or local compute resources to
perform computational analysis through the web. The main site located at the
Texas Advanced Computing Center allows researchers to analyze data freely and
access training materials on analytic approaches, their assumptions and
limitations, and best practices. Galaxy combines the accessibility of GUI with
infinite power of exploratory analyses provided by interactive environments.
This combination empowers high quality research and, again, provides a robust
launchpad for quantitative and data analysis training. The public instance of
Galaxy is used by tens of thousands of registered users and performs between 300
to 500 thousands of analyses every month and has been cited in over 7,000
publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at changing how Galaxy
utilizes existing and procures additional infrastructure to put it on a
sustainable footing going forward. The plan for achieving these goals involves
two primary focal areas: The first objective is to adapt Galaxy architecture to
take advantage of tiered storage. This will allow significantly reducing the
cost and ensure effective management of storage infrastructure. Within this aim
the team will develop and implement strategies for the management of existing
data and leverage an existing policy-based system for controlling when and what
data to move between tiers. The second objective is to design and implement
functionality for "premium storage". The work undertaken within this aim will
allow users with existing XSEDE allocations to "extend" their storage. Other
users will be able to acquire additional Galaxy storage on TACC systems by
paying for it directly. These changes will allow the Galaxy service to continue
to provide a basic level of storage to all users while supporting a flexible set
of options to scale beyond that level as needed. For more information about
Galaxy visit the website at
https://galaxyproject.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.