* 1929941
* Conference: Challenges to and Opportunities for Resilience in Rapidly Developing Urban Corridors; Austin, Texas; August 14-16, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 05/31/2020
* USD 49,925.00

This project funds a three day conference to be held August 14-16, 2019 at the
University of Texas, Austin. The goal is to bring together researchers,
stakeholders, and policy influencers to explore scientific themes around natural
-engineered-human subsystems comprising Sustainable Urban Systems in semi-arid
regions. The ideal outcome of the conference is a cohesive network of project
proposals around the grand challenges of Sustainable Urban Systems. The
conference will have presentations and breakout sessions and innovative
activities of breakout sessions mental models exercises, toolbox dialog
initiative, and design thinking. This scientific research contribution thus
supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our
national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve urban
sustainability which will save lives and economic
losses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference explores four themes: 1) Processes
and Feedbacks, 2) Big Data, 3) Integrated Models, and 4) Co-Designed Research.
While necessarily technical in nature, these conference sessions are designed to
elucidate disparate and converging approaches to these themes within the context
of holistically advancing cross-sector partnerships that engage the broadest
range of participants, from citizen scientists and community organizers to
sustainability professionals and elected policy makers. To support this
approach, facilitated break-out sessions will use established system-modeling
toolkits to delve deeper into discussions initiated during presentations to
integrate ideas across theme topics. Improving transdisciplinary communication
is an overarching goal, and the discussions will enhance scientific
collaboration by developing a common research language and by measuring the
degree of pre- and post-conference convergence among participants around their
epistemic valuation of Sustainable Urban Systems
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.