* 1929651
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Strain-Rate and Time-Dependent Plasticity of Metal Nanowires
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Harold Park, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,185.00

Nanomaterials such as metal nanowires play a critical role in many device
applications ranging from stretchable electronics to nanoelectromechanical
systems. Understanding their time-dependent deformation and failure mechanisms
is essential for characterizing their reliability, durability and life-cycle
performance in device applications. However, due to both experimental and
computational shortcomings, the reliability of nanowires, which depends on
deformation and plasticity over multiple time scales or strain rates, and which
is essential to predicting device performance over its lifespan, has not been
widely investigated. This award supports fundamental research on how the
mechanical properties and reliability of metal nanowires are controlled by rate-
dependent plastic deformation mechanisms. This award also supports: outreach to
introduce research through practical demonstrations and to provide research
opportunities for middle school and high school students, and the enhancement of
undergraduate mechanics courses at both Boston University and North Carolina
State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will establish a
fundamental understanding of how strain rate impacts the rate-dependent
plasticity transitions, and thus the mechanical behavior and properties of metal
nanowires across multiple time scales. Quantitative in-situ TEM experiments will
be carried out using a novel MEMS device with the strain rate ranging from
0.0001 to 100 /s. Strain rate effects on deformation will be characterized
through stress-strain behavior, extraction of activation parameters, and in-situ
TEM observation of defect dynamics. A key feature of this collaboration is that
the experiments will be complemented by novel atomistic simulations that can
access the time scales and strain rates that will be applied experimentally,
which will elucidate the atomistic mechanisms underpinning the experimentally-
measured mechanical properties and observed deformation mechanisms.
Specifically, the simulations will be used to capture both diffusional events,
as well as surface nucleation events to not only elucidate the mechanisms by
which diffusion contributes to surface dislocation, but also the mechanisms that
emerge when diffusive and displacive deformations are simultaneously operant.
Finally, the simulations will characterize the localized (brittle) or
distributive (ductile) plasticity that emerges from strain-rate-dependent
deformation of nanowires containing twin boundaries. This understanding may
transform the key technologies, i.e., stretchable electronics, NEMS, and
optoelectronics, for which metal nanowires represent a fundamental building
block.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.