* 1929896
* Collaborative Research: Novel neurocognitive assessment of engineering education interventions applied to systems thinking
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* John Gero, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 01/31/2024
* USD 200,790.00

The challenges facing society today and in the near future are inherently
complex systems problems. For example, improving transportation in cities or
managing the growth of an international company both involve complex systems.
The ability to recognize interactions and optimize connections between
components in a system is called systems thinking. This type of thinking is
vital for innovation and necessary for humanity’s longer-term survival. However,
systems thinking is not intuitive for many people, and it can require
significant mental effort. Most engineers benefit from the formal instruction
provided in their undergraduate program. There are numerous methods to teach
students about systems thinking but, unfortunately, assessing the effectiveness
of these methods is a challenge. Assessment typically focuses on what students
are able to produce rather than the mental effort required to produce it.
Measuring mental effort is important because if mental effort can be measured
and minimized, systems thinking is more likely to be adopted by students when
they experience a real-world context. This research will test an approach to
help students--more quickly and with less mental effort--solve complex systems
problems using systems thinking. The research tests the effectiveness of priming
students to think about the connections and interactions between components in a
system using concept maps, a type of conceptual diagram to depict relationships
within a system. This project tests the effects of concept maps to help students
solve complex problems in engineering. The project will not only evaluate
student solutions but measure their mental effort using a brain imaging
technique. The expectation is that concept mapping makes complex systems
problems mentally easier to solve, and this is measured via patterns of
activation in their brain. Priming students for systems thinking with concept
maps holds the potential for adoption across many college programs because of
the minimal adjustments needed in teaching and the possibility of widespread
application of concept maps in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will use concept maps to prime students to think about the complex and dynamic
relationships in engineering problems. Measurement of students’ brain activation
will provide new data about the effects of this approach to help aid engineering
students to solve complex engineering problems. Three cohorts of undergraduate
engineering students will receive either multiple, single, or no concept map
priming intervention. Assessment of students’ solutions to subsequent
engineering systems problems will be correlated with patterns of brain
activation. Brain activation will be measured using a non-intrusive technique
called functional near infrared spectroscopy. Students will repeat the
experiment to measure the effects of priming over time. The proposed research
will extend current knowledge by measuring how changes in brain function
persist, and how repeated educational priming interventions affect students’
ability to solve complex engineering problems. The results will offer a new type
of evidentiary support for cognitive load theory in engineering education by
demonstrating how priming students in ways that use specific regions and
patterns of activation in their brain reduces subsequent cognitive effort to
solve complex engineering problems. The research findings will be translated
into short research briefs for college instructors to implement in their
classroom. The project will also offer annual training in the brain imaging
technique used in this project at engineering education conference workshops and
a summer program for faculty and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.