* 1929467
* Tribology: From Atomic Interactions to Macroscopic Response
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,02/28/2022
* Brian Camley, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2022
* USD 97,911.00

NONTECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education on the microscopic origins of tribology with an aim
toward enabling the design of materials with desired tribological properties.
Tribology is the study of sliding surfaces and encompasses adhesion, friction,
lubrication and wear. The origins of friction have remained one of the great
intellectual challenges since da Vinci, and tribological processes have a
tremendous impact on daily life and technology. Indeed, friction is estimated to
account for more than 20% of global energy consumption. There is a large gap
between traditional macroscopic models of tribology, which must be fit to
experiments that closely mimic the application, and recent studies that reveal a
wealth of intriguing behavior in molecular scale contacts. The goal of the
proposed research is to link behavior at these different scales for systems of
practical relevance: polymers like plexiglass, layers of short molecules
(surfactants) bound to solid surfaces, and small lubricant molecules under the
extremes of pressure and shear found in automobile bearings. These systems have
been chosen because there is an unusual amount of data from experiments and
models at different scales, and because their behavior should be affected by
fewer processes than metals or other crystalline systems. Specific questions
that will be addressed are: i) How do adhesive and external forces determine the
contact area where surfaces interact to produce friction and adhesion? Ii) How
does permanent plastic deformation of the surfaces influence contact and
friction? Iii) Why does friction in many systems depend on past history as well
as the current velocity? Iv) How are changes in the viscosity of lubricants with
pressure, temperature and rate related to changes in molecular configurations
and/or thermal activation and what may they teach us about the glass transition?
The software developed in the project will be shared with other researchers
through public repositories and an online tool that provides users with
calculated contact properties and builds a database of rough surfaces for future
research. Research will involve students from high school through graduate
school levels and demonstrations of tribological behavior will be shared with
the public through outreach efforts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research, and
education on the microscopic origins of tribology with an aim toward enabling
the design of materials with desired tribological properties. Our ability to
probe tribological processes at the nanometer scale has developed rapidly in the
last decades, revealing a wide range of new physics and phenomena. However,
connecting this rich behavior to the phenomenological models widely used to
describe macroscopic experiments has proved extremely challenging. The goal of
the proposed research is to use simulations to make this link for specific
systems: polymers, self-assembled monolayers and small molecule lubricants,
where new theoretical methods, computational algorithms, and experimental
techniques are able to bridge the gap between nanometers and micrometers.
Multiscale simulations of elastic surfaces will be used to study how van der
Waals interactions and roughness on scales up to tens of micrometers determine
the contact geometry and macroscopic adhesive force between surfaces. Then the
conditions for substrate plasticity to occur and its effects on contact,
adhesion and friction will be evaluated. The history dependence of friction is
often described by rate-state models that describe the evolution of the sliding
interface with a phenomenological “state” variable. Simulations of polymers and
self-assembled monolayers will be performed to search for a quantitative link
between the changes in state variable and molecular processes. Simulations of
surfaces with roughness on nanometer to micrometer scales will be tested against
the growing body of experimental data for contact areas, stresses and
macroscopic friction coefficients of polymers and self-assembled monolayers.
Elastohydrodynamic lubrication offers a window on rheology extremely far from
equilibrium, with extreme pressures that may drive fluids through the glass
transition and rates high enough to overlap with molecular relaxation times and
simulations. Simulations will be used for quantitative tests of assumptions
underlying rheological models that assume viscosity is determined by changes in
molecular order or stress-biased hopping in a complex energy landscape. They
will also test ideas about the nature and existence of the glass
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.