* 1929435
* Conference: The Future of Botany: Educating for a Diverse and Inclusive  21st Century Workforce; July, 2019, Tucson, AZ
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Kyra Krakos, Botanical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 63,599.00

This project addresses the need for training, expertise, and innovation in areas
of national importance that depend upon the plant sciences for future solutions,
including research relevant to the impacts of changing environments or
sustainable food production. The US population is racially and ethnically
diverse, and broadening participation in the plant sciences can bring fresh
perspectives leading to new approaches and solutions. Although scientific
professional societies meet throughout the US, it is uncommon for them to make
an intentional effort to reach out to local institutions such as community
colleges, thus ignoring institutions which enroll a large proportion of
underrepresented students. Community colleges often have the most diverse
student bodies but few resources for science and technology research training
and careers. The Tucson, AZ location of the BOTANY 2019 meeting provides
opportunities for several plant societies to engage faculty from local community
colleges and tribal colleges that provide educational access for students at
schools with high proportions of American Indian and Hispanic students. This
project provides travel awards to BOTANY 2019 for community college and tribal
college faculty who train these students, and for local undergraduates who may
be interested in the plant sciences (through PLANTS, a program to increase
student motivation to pursue further academic and career opportunities in
botany). It also supports a hands-on, inquiry-based workshop for botany and
biology instructors, engaging them in the latest active learning
techniques/methods that are especially effective for underrepresented students
with limited science backgrounds. In addition, a special session of talks with
discussion of programs that have been implemented to reduce barriers in
recruitment and retention of underrepresented students will follow the workshop.

BOTANY 2019 is the annual gathering of six scientific societies (Botanical
Society of America (BSA), American Society of Plant Taxonomists, American Fern
Society, Society of Herbarium Curators, International Association for Plant
Taxonomy, and American Bryological and Lichenological Society). Although these
meetings are attended by more than 1000 plant scientists, less than two percent
of BSA membership is from community colleges, and the proportion of
underrepresented minorities is low. The meetings cover scientific studies of
plants at all levels of biological organization and include topics such as
ecology, conservation biology, plant morphology, development, and systematics.
This project strategically links new professional development opportunities: a
workshop for faculty on inquiry-based learning and equity-based teaching
strategies in the plant sciences, and an interdisciplinary session evaluating
the efficacy of interventions for equity and inclusiveness and their impacts on
faculty and institutional practices. This project also includes travel grants
for undergraduates interested in the plant sciences, focusing on students from
underrepresented groups and from local community and tribal colleges. Students
are part of PLANTS, a program designed to increase their level of academic
excellence and motivation to pursue advanced degrees and/or careers in the plant
sciences. Undergraduates are paired with both a peer mentor (grad student) and a
senior mentor (faculty/professional) for the meeting and beyond. Students are
exposed to the breadth and depth of botany, with mentors facilitating
discussions of research, networking, and with professional development
workshops.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.