* 1929662
* RAPID:  Deployment of the UMass Simultaneous Frequency Microwave Radiometer (USFMR) for the 2019 Hurricane Season
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Stephen Frasier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2020
* USD 57,720.00

Obtaining measurements of surface wind speed during hurricanes is extremely
difficult. At the present, there are two main techniques that are used to
conduct these measurements in open waters. One is the dropsonde, which is an
instrument package that is dropped by an aircraft and takes measurements on the
way down. The main drawback of a dropsonde is the expense of making limited,
point measurements. The other technique is a remote sensing instrument called a
microwave radiometer. This project will test a new version of a microwave
radiometer that has the potential to provide more precise and accurate
measurements of wind speed. Improvements in these measurements would provide
researchers more information to test their theories and models against, thereby
increasing the accuracy of hurricane forecasts. In addition, the project will
provide training opportunities for the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding will be used to deploy the UMass
Simultaneous Frequency Microwave Radiometer (USFMR) on the NOAA P-3 research
aircraft for the 2019 hurricane season. The USFMR has potential advantages over
the current Stepped Frequency Microwave Radiometer systems in that it adds dual-
polarization and measures all frequencies in parallel, resulting in a 4 to
5-fold decrease in the measurement time. The main work tasks are the testing and
calibration of the USFMR in the laboratory, shipment and installation on the
NOAA P-3, operation of the instrument on the calibration flights and during the
hurricane missions, and then processing the measurements for brightness
temperatures, 10m winds, and column-integrated rain rates. The observations will
be compared to those produced by the operational SFMR and dropsondes, with a
focus on observations at the eyewall and in narrow rain
bands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.