* 1929348
* Institute for Mathematical and Statistical Innovation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2025
* Douglas Simpson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 12,000,000.00

The Institute for Mathematical and Statistical Innovation (IMSI) will apply
mathematics and statistics to urgent, complex scientific and societal problems,
and spur transformational change in the mathematical sciences communities. The
Institute aims to catalyze new mathematical and statistical approaches to
further understanding of complex phenomena and issues of great societal
interest. As part of its mission, IMSI will facilitate rapid and effective
dissemination of these advances to both the mathematical sciences research
community and broader audiences. IMSI will also train a new generation of
mathematicians and statisticians equipped to advance multidisciplinary research
through immersion in the challenges encountered within and beyond the
mathematical sciences. All of the IMSI programs will foster diversity and
inclusion in the mathematical sciences and engage in impactful outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IMSI will address major challenges facing society
by building conduits from the core disciplines of mathematics and statistics to
a broad range of disciplines and applications that need mathematical and
statistical insights to understand the dynamics of data- and computation-
intensive phenomena. IMSI research affiliates will immerse themselves in major
projects, organized around themes, driven by societal challenges such as climate
forecasting, epidemiological modeling, economic crises, cancer-marker
identification, and neural processing. Conceptual and technical challenges from
interdisciplinary applications will create the impetus to advance mathematical
and statistical approaches that are urgently needed to understand the principles
governing such systems and to make accurate predictions along with quantifying
the uncertainty of the predictions. Mathematical scientists at IMSI will be
systematically exposed to and deeply engaged with these grand challenges. IMSI
programs will bring together mathematical scientists and researchers working in
these fields to promote collaborations on important problems and to enrich
fundamental mathematics and statistics. One mechanism for achieving this will be
through the development of national and international collaborations and
partnerships with industry and national labs. The initial long programs will
explore distributed decision making processes and the impact of uncertainty in
the development of effective models in the social sciences. In addition,
workshops will explore topics such as computational materials science, the
complexity of machine learning tasks, dimension reduction methods in genomics,
topological data analysis, optimized decision making in health care, and the
development of verification, validation, and uncertainty quantification methods
across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.