* 1929994
* BEE:  Spatio-temporal factors shaping symbiotic networks: a case study with cyanolichens
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2025
* Francois Lutzoni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2025
* USD 474,810.00

Symbiotic interactions, including parasitism, commensalism and mutualism, form
complex networks that are common in nature. Ultimately, a more complete
understanding of life can be accomplished only through the study of all
symbiotically interacting organisms. This study aims to understand the processes
that shape those networks using cyanolichens, which are iconic symbioses
consisting mainly of mutually beneficial fungi and cyanobacteria. Questions that
will be addressed by this project include: Does the abundance of various free-
living cyanobacteria in nature dictate the main lichen partner pairs (one
fungus, one cyanobacterium) who shape lichen communities? Do broadly distributed
cyanobacteria who associate with many fungal species (generalists) do so mostly
with closely related fungal species? What are the biomolecules that determine
which cyanobacteria interact with which fungal partners? How do the rules of
association for lichen partners differ when compared to other symbiotic systems?
This project includes training and educational components for graduate and
undergraduate students, the dissemination of new methods for innovative research
on symbiotic systems, outreach activities, and the development of a new advising
model to help underrepresented students interested in science and engineering
reach their academic goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of this study
is to determine how mutualistic networks are shaped by evolution and
environmental gradients at different spatial scales. To reach this goal, a fully
integrated approach combining evolutionary biology and ecology will be
implemented. Recent studies of the lichen model genus Peltigera and its Nostoc
symbionts have revealed: (i) that Peltigera species are mostly specialized on
generalist Nostoc phylogroups, (ii) that the interactions and the high level of
specialization by the fungus are phylogenetically conserved, and (iii) that
bioclimatic factors, at an intra-biome scale, are more limiting than cyanobiont
availability for explaining geographic distributions of Peltigera species. This
study will capitalize on the large-scale, systematic, and multi-taxon,
monitoring program of the Alberta Biodiversity Monitoring Institute (ABMI). This
project represents a unique opportunity to test three important drivers of
symbiotic network assembly: (1) Spatial scales and gradients - Are interactions
well predicted by environmental biotic and abiotic properties, and/or spatial
overlap due to stochastic dispersal? (2) Phylogenetic history - Do Nostoc
symbionts show phylogenetic conservatism in their selection of Peltigera
partners, as shown by Peltigera towards their Nostoc partners? (3) Specific
recognition molecules - Are Nostoc genes differentially expressed in lichen
thalli vs a free-living state, and do they explain the observed specificity
between symbiotic partners in nature?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.