* 1929730
* LTREB: Using forecasting and long-term experiments to understand ecological dynamics under novel conditions
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Morgan Ernest, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 11/30/2024
* USD 637,157.00

Ecosystems and the services they provide are changing. This makes predictions
for how systems will change crucial for decision making by land managers and
policy makers. However, current capabilities for making ecological forecasts are
limited. Making forecasts requires understanding how ecosystems will respond to
changing conditions. Because ecosystems are governed by complex interactions
among species and their environment, our knowledge from the past may provide
limited information about the future as conditions change. Thus, it is critical
to develop and assess our ability to make forecasts when novel conditions occur.
For over 40 years, the Portal Project has been collecting data on mammals and
plants as part of a long-term experiment in southeastern Arizona. Continuing
data collection at this site provides a unique opportunity to (1) assess how the
occurrence of novel conditions impact the ability to forecast the population
sizes of plants and mammals and (2) determine the best methods to forecast
changes in ecological systems. This project will support the growing field of
ecological forecasting by providing a high-quality, openly available data source
for other researchers. The research team will also develop forecasting
competitions to engage the broader scientific community in forecasting efforts
and produce online educational materials to support classes to teach the next
generation of ecological forecasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will use the unique strengths of the Portal Project to improve ecological
forecasting under novel conditions. Comparing the performance of forecasting
approaches under novel conditions requires long-term data and novel
environments. Over the past two decades, the climate at the Portal Project has
become warmer and drier. This creates novel environmental conditions for
species. Additionally, experiments at the site create novel combinations of
species. Ongoing data collection will be used to assess: (1) if models with more
ecological complexity perform better, (2) if data from experiments can improve
forecasts, and (3) if forecasting models can handle rapid changes. This research
will use an automated forecasting system that serves as a model for ecological
forecasting. The research requires ongoing data collection to test forecasts and
to provide information on ecological changes as species and the environment
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.