* 1929256
* Collaborative Research : Engineering Hyperstable Enzymes via Computationally Guided Protein Stapling
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Rudi Fasan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 412,253.00

Enzymes are proteins that facilitate reactions. At modest temperatures or in
response to pH changes, enzymes will lose their three-dimensional structure
which leads to a loss in their activity as catalysts. If enzymes were more
stable, then they could be used more widely in industrial applications. This
research project will investigate a new method for designing proteins in which
chemical links will be made between certain parts of the enzyme, also called
"molecular stapling." This method might increase the stability of proteins at
elevated temperatures or in the presence of chemicals. The activity of the new
enzyme with "staples" should be unchanged from the original enzyme. The results
of this project could lead to enzymes that could be designed to manufacture
pharmaceuticals or to produce chemicals in a more sustainable manner. The
research project serves as a training ground for undergraduate and graduate
students to perform cutting edge research, leading to a skilled STEM workforce.
The researchers will host local high school students for a research experience
on enzymes and proteins. They will also participate in outreach to area
community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea behind this research project
is that enzymes can be stabilized by genetically encoded, redox-stable covalent
crosslinks. A novel computational design method for protein stabilization via
covalent stapling will be developed via iterative design-build-test cycles,
using a carbene transferase as testbed. The scope of this methodology will be
extended to different stapling strategies for maximizing both thermodynamic and
kinetic stability of the target enzyme, leading to hyperstabilization.
Computational methodology development will be guided by detailed investigations
of the stapled enzyme variants via functional assays and complementary
biophysical techniques. The generality of this approach will be demonstrated
through its application for the rapid and efficient thermostabilization of
different enzymes of biotechnological importance. It is envisioned that this
method will be broadly applicable to enzymes and proteins, providing an
effective, and potentially general strategy for protein
hyperstabilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.