* 1929850
* IIBR Informatics: Integrating codon evolution and sequence-assembly error models into multiple sequence alignment
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Reed Cartwright, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2024
* USD 846,958.00

The information age has fundamentally changed the way most areas of science
operate. Advances in genomics and informatics have radically reshaped the life
sciences, producing innovations that impact multiple ares including medicine and
agriculture. This project will design new computational methods and software to
manage the complexities of modern genomic datasets, addressing challenges that
existing approaches have overlooked. As computational training is essential for
modern biology students, this project will broaden the participation in
computing by training faculty and instructors at regional, community, and tribal
colleges in evidence-based practices for teaching computing skills to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new computational
methods to analyze genetic data using statistical models that are optimized for
the challenges of modern datasets. First, new finite-state transducer models
will be developed for aligning genetic and genomic sequences that capture the
biological and technical process that shape modern datasets. Second, these
models will be implemented in COATi, a new multiple-sequence alignment tool that
will be free and open-sourced. Thirdly, COATi will be used to understand
understudied features of molecular evolution. In addition, Software Carpentry
Instructor training workshops will be held for faculty at regional, community,
and tribal colleges, which will improve the quality of computational instruction
at these institutions, and thus broaden the participation in computing for
students from underrepresented and underserved backgrounds. The results of the
project are available at https://cartwrig.ht/coati/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.