* 1929996
* Cyber Generation Tech Stars: Supporting Student Success in Computer Technology, Industrial Technology, and Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Peggy Campbell, Florence-Darlington Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 989,113.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over four years, the project will provide one-year scholarships to at
least 120 low-income, academically talented students who are pursuing Associate
of Applied Science degrees, with majors in Computer Technology/Network Systems
Management, Industrial Technology, or Engineering Technology. The project
incorporates an innovative variable scholarship amount that aims to cover each
Scholar's entire unmet need. In addition, it includes a loan-to-own laptop
technology model with wireless connectivity to provide Scholars with access to
internet service and high-quality computers with virtual reality capabilities.
By supporting more students to stay in college full time, this project expects
to increase student retention, improve degree-completion rates, and increase the
number of technical education students who transfer to four-year institutions.
Thus, this project directly supports national policy goals to improve post-
secondary education attainment, while advancing knowledge by addressing research
questions concerning the impact of the "digital divide" on student success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase the STEM
degree completion of low income, high achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project builds on work from a prior S-STEM grant, which
established a comprehensive student support structure that has proven successful
in increasing retention and success among underrepresented groups in STEM
fields. This project will expand the existing support model to include providing
Scholars with laptops that have virtual reality capability, as well as faculty
mentors, customized virtual student support, and social media connections. It is
expected that resources and supports provided by the project will close the
digital divide for diverse scholars and advance students' knowledge of STEM
careers and the skilled technical workplace. An external evaluator will provide
formative and summative feedback. Project dissemination plans include news
releases, social media messaging, conference publications, and publications in
peer-reviewed journals. The project is funded by the NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low income, academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.