* 1929940
* Conference: Southeast Urban Systems Summit (SEUSS); Greensboro, North Carolina; August 7-8, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Selima Sultana, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 09/30/2020
* USD 49,995.00

This grant funds a conference to be held August 7-8, 2019 in Greensboro, North
Carolina, titled the Southeast Urban Sustainability Summit (SEUSS). The
objective of the conference is to develop a collaborative group comprised of
academics, municipalities, industries, and advocacy groups who share the vision
of advancing research in urban sustainability specific to the state of North
Carolina. The resulting research agenda for the group developed at the
conference will have implications for the entire southeast region due to
similarities of cities and towns in North Carolina to those across the greater
region. This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to
promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare. In this
case, the benefits will be insights to improve urban sustainability which will
save lives and economic losses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SEUSS will form a diverse
network of stakeholders across the state committed to identifying and addressing
the state's most pressing sustainability and resilience issues associated with:
energy, water, waste, transportation, housing, health/safety, and
food/agriculture. SEUSS will be led by North Carolina Agricultural &amp;
Technical State University, in collaboration with leadership from University of
North Carolina Greensboro, Appalachian State University, and North Carolina
State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.