* 1929655
* Supporting Marine Geoscience Research with ongoing Growth of the Global Multi-Resolution Topography Synthesis and Maintenance of GeoMapApp
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Suzanne Carbotte, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,025,125.00

Knowledge of the depths and morphology of the seafloor is essential for many
areas of marine science. The morphology of the seabed provides a record of the
diverse geologic processes that affect the submarine environment including
volcanic eruptions, faulting, submarine landslides and sediment transport from
the continental margins. Detailed seabed bathymetry is also important for other
areas of marine science research including evaluation of biological habitats,
ocean circulation studies, and prediction of tsunami inundation, as well as for
applied studies including fisheries and coastal resource management.
Measurements of depth and morphology are now typically achieved through the use
of modern swath multibeam echosounders (MBESs). However, the global ocean is
vast, and only a small fraction (&lt;15%) of the seafloor has been mapped with
direct measurement, and the total area that can be mapped during a typical
expedition is very limited. This makes preservation of and easy access to seabed
mapping data of high value to the science community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MBES
data collected during research expeditions funded by the NSF are now routinely
archived and accessible through public databases provided by NOAA's National
Centers for Environmental Information. However, specialist processing is needed
to translate the raw expedition data into formats useful for diverse scientific
and resource management applications. To help meet this need, the research team
has developed the Global Multi-Resolution Topography (GMRT) synthesis which is a
unified compilation of spatially sparse, quality controlled gridded MBES data
merged with lower resolution global-scale ocean data, high-resolution
terrestrial elevation data, and a collection of gridded bathymetry datasets at
resolutions of meters to hundreds of meters. GMRT is the only such global
synthesis, composed of a suite of multi-resolution grids and images, which at
highest resolution preserve the full resolution of the underlying data, as well
as attribution and access to source data. GMRT can be accessed through a variety
of tools including GeoMapApp (GMA), which is a map-based visualization
application that enables users to easily visualize seafloor morphology and make
custom maps, as well as to visualize and analyze many other marine data types
without the need for specialist expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for
this project supports the continued development and growth of the GMRT synthesis
and maintenance of the GMA data visualization and analysis tool. The overall
goals of this project are to (1) continue to build the GMRT global synthesis
with the processing and integration of new quality controlled MBES coverage from
expeditions of the U.S. academic fleet, (2) develop the tools and workflows to
enable a distributed mode of GMRT data processing, and the efficient integration
of processed MBES data generated by other mapping experts within the science
community into the synthesis, (3) provide support for GMA to ensure that this
tool is available for GMRT and other data visualization. Broader impacts of this
project include greater ease-of-access to marine geoscience data for specialists
and non-specialists alike; enhanced research productivity, obviating the need
for the time-consuming data processing tasks needed to obtain usable products
for scientific inquiry; and facilitating broad re-use of marine geoscience data,
which enhances the return on tax-payer investments in ocean
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.