* 1929524
* ESA SEEDS:  Exploring Science and Careers in Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,343,379.00

The goal of ESA SEEDS: Exploring Science and Careers in Ecology award is to a)
Increase exposure of underrepresented college students to the field of ecology
and to careers in ecology; b) Promote the use of diverse ecological knowledge in
research, policy, communication, outreach and leadership; and c) Develop
students' sense of identification as scientists and belonging to the scientific
community. This award will use a robust approach to the orientation, support and
mentoring of diverse talent in the ecological sciences. To accomplish this, ESA
will organize and support diverse undergraduate students to attend the annual
ecological fieldtrips and leadership meetings and travel to the ESA ecological
conference to present their research. An annual workshop designed for
underrepresented minority graduate students will address critical research
skills that have been gaps in graduate programs. These gaps include data coding,
data management and analysis, interdisciplinary approaches or translational
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshops and activities aim to
provide the personal interactions that serve to deepen participants' sense of
identity and efficacy as scientists. Through intensive engagement and extended
networking, this award will recruit and retain ecological scientists and
professionals representing all racial and ethnic groups in the workforce.
Increasing the racial and ethnic diversity of the ecological field is critical
to developing a workforce that is prepared to be responsive to the serious
issues threatening ecological systems while involving diverse communities and
decision-makers at all levels of our society. This project is well-positioned to
reach many more diverse people and communities through the efforts of
participants in campus activities, national conversations about the relevance of
science in society and contributions by graduate students to the scientific
literature. The award will evaluate success based on three components in its
theory of change: explicit socioemotional and culturally responsive mentoring;
understanding how career information flows based on career development theories:
social cognitive career theory, social capital theory, social and resources
theory; and professional identity and community supported by a disciplinary
society. This award will contribute to the literature on how these three
elements are interwoven and their short and long term impacts on students'
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.