* 1929731
* Mechanics-based Metrics for Vaginal Tear Evaluation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* David Dillard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 527,431.00

Around 80 percent of women experience vaginal tears during labor, when the
diameter of the vagina has to increase from 2.5 cm to 9.5 cm in order to allow
the passage of a full-term baby. Complications associated with vaginal tears
include postpartum hemorrhaging, fecal incontinence, urinary incontinence, and
dyspareunia. Current evaluation methods of vaginal tears after childbirth are
qualitative and rely on the expertise and training of obstetricians and
midwives. This reliance upon subjective assessments often leads to incorrect
diagnosis and inadequate treatment that severely compromise the quality of life
of women. In order to establish new quantitative metrics for evaluating vaginal
tears, a seamless experimental, theoretical, and computational characterization
of the mechanical properties of the vagina -- including the tear resistance
properties -- will be studied. This project will examine fundamental mechanical
properties and response of this very under-studied tissue. The knowledge gained
will support improved understanding of the response of vaginal tissue to the
natural stretch that occurs during childbirth, and this will then support
improved diagnostic, assessment, and treatment methods. Undergraduate and
graduate students, mostly from underrepresented groups, will be recruited to
participate in this highly interdisciplinary research and education program,
which involves synergistic exchanges between the medical and STEM fields. In
addition, in order to inspire, prepare, and empower undergraduate women to
pursue graduate studies in engineering and help close the gender gap, a new one-
day workshop offering preparatory information about graduate school will be
organized at Virginia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to meet these project
goals, entire vaginal canals from virgin and late pregnant rats will be
subjected to inflation tests to induce tearing, and the resulting large
inhomogeneous deformations will be measured using the digital image correlation
technique. By using multi-photon microscopy and second harmonic generation
imaging, the collagen fiber organization in the near- and far-fields of the
tears will be measured. The experimental data will guide the development of new
microstructurally-based constitutive models for the vaginal wall that are
validated using a highly efficient data-driven reduced order modeling approach.
Finally, new mechanics-based metrics for vaginal tear evaluation will be
established following the theory of critical distances approach, using both the
experimental data and data-driven models. This will include markers for levator
ani trauma, predictors for maternal trauma, and protocols for pelvic floor
trainer devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.