* 1929514
* Integration and modularity in grass diversification
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Kellogg, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 843,142.00

The tallgrass prairie is an iconic American landscape dominated by a single
group of grasses known as the Andropogoneae, which is responsible for much of
the plant productivity world-wide. This group also characterizes the vast
tropical grasslands of central Africa and Brazil and contains many economically
important crop species, such as corn and sorghum. However, how this group came
to dominate these habitats and diversify into approximately 1200 species is
unknown. Species within the group have a range of floral architectures, which
suggests that the evolution and diversification of this group may be influenced
by the function of its reproductive structures. This project will test this
hypothesis using comparative morphological and functional analyses of these
reproductive structures in the context of the phylogeny of the Andropogoneae.
The research plan incorporates a range of training opportunities for early-
career researchers, including members of underrepresented groups, and methods
for disseminating the results. Outcomes of the research will reveal how
morphological development and natural selection have interacted over
evolutionary history for this tribe of grasses and will provide agronomists with
new insights for improving the productivity of its grain crops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will test whether shifts in the integration
and modularity of reproductive structures correlate with diversification in the
Andropogoneae using three integrated aims that assess the phylogenetic,
morphological, and functional consequences of these changes. They will produce a
near-complete species-level phylogeny of Andropogoneae by leveraging extensive
nuclear genome sequence data already in hand. Morphometric data for spikelets
and spikelet pairs from all species will be captured using semi-automated tools
and will be analyzed to assess the covariance between spikelet and spikelet pair
structures (integration) and the morphometric distances between them (disparity
and modularity). Integration, disparity, and modularity will then be mapped on
the phylogeny, as will the underlying morphological characters, to be correlated
with patterns of diversification. Experiments will test the performance of the
spikelets and spikelet pairs for pollination and seed dispersal to quantify the
functional consequences of integration and modularity. In doing so, researchers
will augment herbarium collections with new metadata and contribute to genomic
data repositories that will facilitate future research on grass systematic
biology and plant breeding. The contributions of the research will create an
integrated evolutionary view at the genomic level of morphological and
functional diversification in a group of plants that are central to grassland
ecology and US agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.