* 1929080
* RII Track-4: Making Galaxies Out of An (Ultra) Light Invisible Matter Halo
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Chanda Prescod-Weinstein, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 11/30/2022
* USD 216,093.00

Understanding the formation of large-scale structures is one of the most
challenging tasks in both observational and theoretical cosmology. When and how
did particles -- as we understand them today -- come into existence? How did
these particles then go on to produce the large-scale structures familiar from
astronomical observations, such as galaxies and the apparent invisible halos
around them, commonly called dark matter halos? Our capacity to answer these
questions specifically depends on linking the microphysics of dark matter
particles to the macrophysics of structure formation at scales larger than
galaxies: the dark matter halos in which galaxies form. The dynamic between
galaxies and dark matter halos is known as the galaxy-halo connection. Although
it is expected that galaxies will subsequently form out of dark matter halos,
the galaxy-halo connection is still not well understood. The dynamic between
galaxies and dark matter halos is known as the galaxy-halo connection. Using
computer simulations, the PI and a trainee will work with KIPAC director and
Stanford faculty member Risa Wechsler to produce insights into how observations
of the galaxy-halo connection can provide insight into specific dark matter
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there are many candidates for dark matter,
there is no known and observed particle that can adequately explain how dark
matter halos and therefore galaxies, form. One extremely promising, yet still
hypothetical particle type is a class known as axion-like particles (ALPs).
Direct detection experiments are not the only way to constrain the properties of
dark matter -- looking at the structures dark matter is expected to form on
large scales is another way. The PI will use simulations to test, for the first
time, how the microphysics of ALPs leave a unique imprint on the halo occupation
distribution function, which describes how galactic matter is distributed
throughout the dark matter halo. Our team will simulate the distribution of
galaxies in a dark matter halo made only of ALPs to make strong predictions of
distinct properties unique to ALP-only halos. The PI is an expert on axion-like
particle dark matter theory, while host Risa Wechsler is an expert on
computational cosmology, the galaxy-halo connection, and observational cosmology
in the optical. Initial steps will include simulations of a boson dark matter
field with a publicly available numerical cosmology code that specifically
accounts for the quantum pressure associated with axion-like dark matter and can
be used to simulate the interactions of multiple subhalos -- correlated with
satellite galaxies -- orbiting one central potential, the massive central
galaxy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.