* 1929903
* Symposium to Honor the Legacy of Vera Rubin
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Jeffrey Urbach, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 04/30/2020
* USD 31,373.00

This award provides partial support for a symposium to honor and celebrate the
legacy of Dr. Vera Rubin, one of the most important astrophysicists of the 20th
and 21st centuries. The meeting will be held at the Georgetown University
campus, June 24-26, 2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Vera Rubin, who passed away
in December 2016, pioneered the study of galaxy rotation rates that provided
definitive evidence for the existence of Dark Matter. Dr. Rubin was also a
fierce and effective advocate for women in science. This symposium will bring
together astrophysicists whose research was made possible by Dr. Rubin's
discoveries, and will explore the current state of astrophysical topics
associated with her discoveries. Leaders at the cutting edge of the field will
discuss her work and build connections for future
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, there will be activities to honor
Dr. Rubin's advocacy for women in science and her work to increase scientific
literacy, including a keynote lecture for the general public and a workshop on
current issues facing women in science that will include secondary school
science teachers. These events will inspire scientists working to improve the
environment for women in Physics and Astronomy and to broaden participation.
They will equip teachers with powerful tools to motivate the next generation of
girls to pursue STEM careers, and adjust their classes to make a real change for
a large number of girls into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.