* 1929602
* Lake- and Sea-Effect Precipitation Systems in Complex Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* W. James Steenburgh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 09/30/2023
* USD 512,763.00

Intense lake-effect snowstorms frequently occur during cold-air outbreaks over
large bodies of water such as the Great Lakes of North America. Salty bodies of
water, such as the Sea of Japan, can generate similar storms. For example, "sea-
effect" snowstorms produce prolific snowfalls in Japan near the Sea of Japan
coast. Such storms, however, pose a major challenge for forecasting because they
are often highly localized, leading to dramatic contrasts in snowfall from one
community to the next. The research seeks to advance the knowledge and
prediction of lake- and sea-effect snowstorms by determining how the presence of
hills and mountains affects the intensity and distribution of snowfall
downstream of large bodies of water such as the Great lakes and Sea of Japan.
The project involves the mentoring of two graduate students, a research
experience for an undergraduate student from an underrepresented group each
summer, and international collaboration with meteorologists in
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research focuses on two critical questions
concerning the interaction of lake- and sea-effect snowstorms with complex
terrain: (1) how does the interplay between lake- or sea-effect processes and
orographic forcing influence storm dynamics and the inland and orographic
enhancement of precipitation, and (2) how does the presence (or absence) of
orography modulate inland penetration? In addition, the research examines the
capabilities and limitations of forecasts produced by convection-permitting
models and ensembles, which is a critical step for improving lake- and sea-
effect forecasts. To explore a diversity of lake- and sea-effect processes and
topographic interactions, the research team will examine and compare lake- and
sea-effect systems generated by Lake Ontario and the Sea of Japan. In addition
to using observations collected during the 2013/14 Ontario Winter Lake-effect
Systems (OWLeS) field program in North America and well-sited radar and dense
precipitation networks in Japan, the research will involve the use of real-data
simulations by the Weather Research and Forecasting model and idealized
simulations by the Bryan Cloud Model version 1 (CM1).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.