* 1929817
* Travel to attend 2019 Spring MRS Symposium on Emerging Thermal Materials - From Nanoscale to Multiscale Thermal Management, in Phoenix, Arizona, April 22-26, 2019.
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2019
* Yongjie Hu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 09/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The 2019 Spring MRS Symposium on Emerging Thermal Materials - From Nanoscale to
Multiscale Thermal Management will be held April 22-26, 2019, in Phoenix, AZ.
The aim of this symposium is to cover recent advances in the development of
thermal transport processes and to stimulate innovative research ideas among
scientists and researchers from different disciplines in the overarching area of
thermal materials. In particular, three emerging research areas will be
highlighted, namely: new thermal phenomena and functionalities, novel theories
and characterization techniques, and emerging applications and devices.
Understanding and discovery of new thermal transport phenomena, energy carriers
interactions, and how they affect the existence, behavior and dynamics of
components and systems, are central to thermal science and engineering and are
closely related to the scientific interests in the Thermal Transport Processes
(TTP). The Symposium also aims at providing the means for participants to
exchange technical knowledge, become aware of advances in the state-of-the-art
from international experts, and learn of future directions in solving thermal
transport problems.

The symposium will cover advanced topics, such as: emerging thermal interface
transport and thermal boundary resistance, thermal insulation and
multifunctional behaviors (mesosporous materials, ambient gels, aerogels),
phononic, thermal-mechanical, and -acoustic meta-structures, thermal management
of electronics, photonics, thermal management of batteries, super capacitors,
and electrochemical systems, thermal transport in 2D, 1D and 0D materials, non-
equilibrium and femto- to pico-second thermal transient behaviors, nanoscale
heat conduction in materials, devices, and integrated systems, and new
metrologies. This workshop will enable state-of-the-art knowledge and training
to be made available to the attendees to help advance their efforts in
developing and utilizing novel techniques. The technical exchanges and
information shared among the attendees will lead to future collaborations and
new projects, including working with world-renowned researchers. In addition,
the workshop will provide useful information and procedures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.