* 1929829
* Sex differences in corticotropin releasing factor regulation of the septohippocampal memory circuit
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Vinay Parikh, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 02/28/2023
* USD 950,000.00

Anecdotally it is easy to think of examples of how stressful life events can
impair cognition. Of interest to Dr. Bangasser’s laboratory, is the ability of
stress to impair certain types of memory. Previous researchers have studied this
question by exploring whether stress hormones directly impact a region critical
for declarative (e.g., autobiographical) and spatial memory, called the
hippocampus. However, the hippocampus is part of a memory circuit and it
receives input from another region called the medial septum. The studies in this
project will investigate how a stress hormone, corticotropin releasing factor,
impacts the medial septum of male and female rats to disrupt memory. Preliminary
data indicate that females are more resilient to the memory deficits caused by
corticotropin releasing factor and a goal of the project is to determine why.
Experiments will evaluate how gonadal hormones and sex differences in
corticotropin releasing factor binding protein — which reduces the efficacy of
corticotropin releasing factor — promote female resilience to the memory defects
caused by corticotropin releasing factor in the medial septum. Additionally,
chemical changes in the hippocampus that result from corticotropin releasing
factor in the medial septum will be investigated to better understand circuits
by which stress can affect memory. The results may eventually be utilized to
develop compounds that improve cognition in healthy subjects experiencing
stress, as well as in patients with disorders characterized by stress
dysregulation and mnemonic impairments (e.g., patients with schizophrenia and
depression). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stress impairs hippocampus
(HPC)-dependent memory, so many researchers investigate how stress hormones
directly impact HPC function. Yet, the HPC does not work in isolation, but is
regulated by afferent structures, such as cholinergic projections from the
medial septum (MS). Dr. Bangasser’s laboratory discovered that the stress
neuropeptide, corticotropin releasing factor (CRF), administered to the MS
impairs HPC-dependent spatial memory, and males are more sensitive to this
effect. Female resilience to CRF in the MS was not due to ovarian hormones but
was associated with an increase in CRF binding protein (CRF-BP), which reduces
the bioavailability of CRF. This project will determine how this sex difference
is established and how CRF in the MS regulates the HPC. Aim 1 will test whether
testosterone mediates male vulnerability to the spatial memory deficit caused by
CRF in the MS. Aim 2 will characterize the sex difference in CRF-BP in the MS by
first determining the MS cell-type that expresses CRF-BP and identifying sex
differences therein. Next, CRF-BP function will be blocked in females to see if
it increases their sensitivity to the low dose of CRF in the MS, mimicking the
male effect. Aim 3 will use amperometric recordings to confirm that CRF in the
MS alters ACh release in the HPC. Then proper ACh levels will be restored to
assess if this rescues the mnemonic deficit resulting from CRF in the MS.
Collectively, these studies will determine how biological sex and CRF interact
to drive vulnerability vs. resilience to stress-induced cognitive
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.