* 1929279
* Travel Support: Student Program for Practice and Experience in Advanced Research Computing Conference (PEARC19)
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Thomas Furlani, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 19,994.00

Computing and in particular advanced computing plays a vital role in virtually
every aspect of society today, including the U.S. economy, manufacturing,
science and engineering. Access to and an understanding of advanced
computational resources by researchers and practitioners from a wide variety of
fields from the traditional sciences and engineering to medical research and the
humanities/social sciences is no longer a luxury but rather a necessity if they
hope to stay at the forefront of their respective field, advance knowledge, and
improve the quality of life. In order for this to happen, it is critical that
there exists a robust pipeline of experts with the requisite skills needed to
leverage advanced computing resources. The Practice and Experience in Advanced
Research Computing (PEARC) Conference series goal is to provide a forum for
discussing current practices, challenges, and opportunities across the entire
spectrum of research computing practitioners, including computational
scientists, end-users, students and support staff, as well as industry and
government agency representatives. Building on the success of past conferences,
this project aims to provide travel support to students to attend the PEARC19
conference and participate in the Student Program. This project, thus, serves
the national interest as stated by NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PEARC conference (now in its 3rd year),
follows the five-year NSF supported the Extreme Science and Engineering
Discovery Environment (XSEDE) conference series. Students, including
importantly, students from underrepresented groups and economically
disadvantaged sectors are recruited to attend PEARC19. The proposed PEARC19
Student Program provides the students with practical hands-on training in
modeling, machine learning, scientific computing, data analytics and many other
tools in the modern researcher?s toolkit that are needed to facilitate today's
multidisciplinary research programs. The aim is to expose students to as broad a
range of topics and practices in advanced research computing as possible with
the goal of helping to recruit and train the next generation of research and
computational scientists. Students participating in the student program receive
an opportunity to contribute to the technical program by submitting a student
paper and/or poster, sharing their research efforts and gaining feedback,
insights and inspiration from like-minded experts at the conference. In
collaboration with XSEDE Campus Champions program, students have the option to
participate in the Student Champions program that provides them resources and a
community of experts whom they may consult, which enables an opportunity to
begin building a community around PEARC19 Student Program efforts that extends
well beyond the one week in July when the students attend the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.