* 1929147
* RII Track-4: Robust Matrix Completion State Estimation in Low-Observability Distribution Systems under False Data Injection Attacks
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Hongyu Wu, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 11/30/2023
* USD 198,686.00

The operational landscape at electric distribution grids is undergoing a radical
transformation. Notably, the impact of distributed renewable energy sources and
the impetus to improve cybersecurity are challenging the status quo and calling
for innovative techniques to enhance situational awareness in the distribution
grid. With the support of an EPSCoR Research Fellowship, the PI and a Ph.D.
student will receive training on new techniques, including a novel state
estimation approach and a next-generation cyber-physical system simulation
platform, at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The PI and the
student will closely collaborate with NREL researchers by focusing on how to
acquire better state estimation in low-observability distribution grids under
cyber data attacks. This fellowship will provide an excellent opportunity for a
Ph.D. student and an underrepresented undergraduate to gain valuable experience
and develop new skillsets. The PI will bring the new techniques back to the home
institution, i.e., Kansas State University (KSU), and introduce them to other
investigators in related fields. This fellowship will foster a strong
partnership between KSU and NREL, and help the state of Kansas better meet its
renewable energy goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legacy distribution systems
traditionally have very low observability due to a limited amount of sensors.
Obtaining required situational awareness is currently not feasible due to the
immense scale of the network and limited availability of measurements. While the
use of information from advanced metering infrastructure and phasor measurement
units can improve the observability of distribution systems, another growing
concern with the use of information is its susceptibility to cyber data attacks.
The overarching goal of this fellowship is to support the PI?s training and
collaborative research at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). The
training and research will focus on the development and validation of a novel
state estimation approach in the low-observability distribution system under
cyber data attacks. Specific training and research objectives include: i)
developing a bad data detection approach based on matrix completion state
estimation; ii) designing a fully distributed solution for scalability; iii)
modeling false data injection attacks in distribution networks; iv) receiving
training on Hierarchical Engine for Large-scale Infrastructure Co-Simulation
(HELICS) platform; and v) performing proof-of-concept validation. This project
will expand the PI?s research capacity and transform his career path towards a
promising direction in enhancing cybersecurity of the power grid. This project
will result in novel tools that can be used by system operators to enhance the
situational awareness of distribution systems. The research outcome of this
project will be integrated into the PI's courses to aid the retention of current
STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.