* 1929722
* Facilitating Undergraduate Success in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Through Improved Student Competencies
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* James Pellegrino, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,024,205.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Illinois at Chicago. Over its five-year duration, the
project will fund both two-year and four-year scholarships to 35 students who
are pursuing bachelor's degrees in chemistry and biochemistry. The project will
provide Scholars with access to new activities including: 1) A three-day
internship immersion workshop; 2) Student Success workshops through University's
Academic Center for Excellence; and 3) A Professional Presence course taught at
the College of Business. Peer Success Coaches from chemistry and biochemistry
programs will provide Scholars with mentoring that can help them tackle both
professional and personal challenges. The University of Illinois at Chicago is a
public, urban, land-grant institution and a federally-designated Hispanic-
serving institution, so the results from this work will have wide applicability
in understanding the support of STEM students. As part of the broader impacts,
the project will serve as a pilot to evaluate proposed activities and their
impact on developing undergraduate competencies and academic success in a
Research 1 Institution. The project will also contribute to the science
education community by evaluating effective strategies for supporting low-income
talented students at different stages of their undergraduate careers at Research
1 Institutions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The specific aim of the project is to evaluate
if activities aimed at growing intra- and interpersonal competencies can help
support and retain undergraduate students within STEM programs of study. The
project aims to determine if an internship immersion workshop, a student-success
workshop series, and a professional presence course can help strengthen self-
efficacy and collaboration, thus improving students' academic outcomes. It is
predicted that the Scholars who complete the curricular and co-curricular
activities will have higher grade point averages in their majors, as well as
higher rates of degree completion and a shorter time-to-degree than their peers.
An independent evaluator will study project documentation and internal
assessment to address if the project has achieved benchmarked process activities
and if the project has used resources and expertise to support the Scholars as
STEM majors. Results from this project will be disseminated through a dedicated
webpage, publications in peer-reviewed articles, and presentations at symposia,
workshops, and seminars. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.