* 1929096
* RII Track-4: The Rational Design of Higher Energy Barrier Molecular Magnets
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 11/30/2022
* USD 136,581.00

Big data processes require the storing of substantial amounts of information.
For this reason, single molecule magnets have great potential to be a vehicle
for high-density information storage. Currently, single molecule magnets remain
limited to operating under temperatures of minus 190 degrees Celsius. This award
supports furthering the fundamental understanding of the design principles
needed for increasing the operating temperature of single molecule magnets.
Because of the need to understand the fundamental properties of these molecules,
the PI from Louisiana Tech will utilize the resources and expertise available at
Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). With this fellowship, the PI and collaborators
will synthesize new single molecule magnets and characterize their structure and
magnetic properties. The facilities of TAMU will be critical to the success of
this work. TAMU has the necessary air-sensitive equipment and the
characterization facilities needed to achieve the scientific objectives of this
project. With further collaborations sustained between the PI's laboratory at
Louisiana Tech University (LATech) and TAMU, there will be increased publication
output and research productivity at LATech. This award will also enhance the
training, education and research opportunities for students in the Northern
Louisiana region in the chemical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
objective for this fellowship is to rationally design single molecule magnets
(SMMs) with higher blocking temperatures through systematically increasing
magnetoanisotropy and reducing quantum tunneling of the magnetization (QTM). The
PI plans to probe the structure-function relationship of single molecule magnets
through systematically investigating the electronic effects of the ubiquitous
beta-diketonate family of ligands on the magnetic properties of SMMs. New
radical anion ligands with terpyridine and quinone moieties will be coordinated
to both 4d/5d metals and 4f metal ions. Azophenine derivatives, with increased
magnetic coupling to metal ions, will also be synthesized and used as ligands to
reduce QTM. The first examples of full spectroscopic and computational
investigations of mixed metal complexes will enhance our understanding of the
design principles needed for increasing uniaxial magnetoanisotropy and for
reducing QTM. Ultimately, this knowledge will lead to the rational design of new
SMMs that have increased energy barriers and higher blocking temperatures. TAMU
will provide the glove boxes and Schlenk lines needed to conduct air-sensitive
chemistry necessary for synthesizing and characterizing the complexes for this
project. TAMU also has the necessary characterization equipment, such as a SQUID
magnetometer, single crystal X-ray diffraction, electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometers, on site. The advanced
facilities at TAMU are crucial to the success of the project and to the rational
design of SMMs with higher thermal energy barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.