* 1929360
* I-Corp: Surface Engineered Iron Particles for Enhanced Degradation of Chlorinated Contaminants in Groundwater
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2019
* Weile Yan, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this project is to understand the market driving force for
a process-based technology to increase the efficacy of remediating chlorinated
solvent-contaminated underground environment. Degradation of chlorinated
solvents using earth-abundant minerals or metallic reagent is a topic of immense
interest due to the prevalent presence of these solvent contaminants at
hazardous waste sites and their recalcitrance to natural degradation. More
effective and cost-efficient technologies to clean up these sites can generate
societal benefits including decreasing the costs of remediation, accelerating
the process of restoring land for re-development, and protecting human health
and ecological well-being. This project will allow the project team to discover
customer segments, identify key attributes of commercially successful
remediation methods, and translate research outcomes to products that have
commercial competitiveness and are amenable to large-scale
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops
fundamental understanding of reductive decomposition of chlorinated ethenes on
reactive engineered surfaces. While the main research project seeks to explore
the potential of adapting the surface properties of engineered materials to
create highly reactive and selective surfaces for groundwater decontamination,
this project aims to translate the research findings into prototype products or
process-based technologies that have relevance to the practical needs of the
remediation market and are commercially competitive against the existing
remediation methods. This exploratory effort is aligned with the overall goal of
advancing science to address the formidable challenges posed by groundwater
contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.