* 1929755
* Correlating Shear and Drying Physics to  Carbon Microstructure and Electrochemical Performance in Composite Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Maureen Tang, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 426,943.00

Electrodes composed of particle-polymer composites are used in a variety of
technological applications including electric vehicles, microelectronics, and
environmental remediation. The efficiency of ion and electrode transport across
the electrode strongly affects the overall performance of the electrode. The
electrodes are fabricated by flowing a concentrated suspension of particles over
a surface and allowing the suspension to dry. The resulting particulate
microstructure formed at the surface influences charge transport of the final
electrode. The goal of this project is to visualize the evolution of the
microstructure before, during and after the flow, coating and drying processes
of electrode manufacturing. The final films will be characterized and tested to
help understand the relationship between processing conditions and electrode
performance. The research team will provide opportunities for students at
various academic levels to participate in the research, including high school
students who will be recruited to the project through the STAR and STAR LITE
programs at Drexel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This hypothesis underlying this project
is that nanometer-scale carbon particles dictate properties of the wet slurry
and dry electrode microstructure, which strongly affect charge transport.
Techniques are proposed to visualize the location of the particles and their
connectivity during the coating and drying processes. To accomplish this,
carbon-coated metallic nanoparticles will be seeded into the electrode slurry so
that three-dimensional tomographic images of the slurry and two-dimensional
elemental maps of the coating can be obtained. Microstructure visualization will
be combined with in-situ measurements of slurry impedance during flow and
drying, which will enable dynamic characterization of particle connectivity
throughout the manufacturing process. Results of this project will provide
practitioners with a better understanding of how material compositions and
processing conditions can be manipulated to form more efficient
electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.