* 1929356
* Unconventional Heteroanion Ceramics: 2D Layered Seleno- and Thio-Phosphates
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Vinayak Dravid, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The performance of silicon-based architecture is now
approaching fundamental limits governed by physics. Thus, there is a critical
need for new materials and novel structures that may follow the meteoritic
growth of conventional silicon microelectronic technology of the past few
decades. In this context, new scientific opportunities are presented by emerging
two-dimensional (2D) materials, especially those whose composition can be
tailored and optimized. Ever since the discovery of graphene, a single 2D layer
of carbon atoms, which was the subject of Physics Nobel prize a decade ago,
other 2D layered structures are being pursued worldwide. This research focuses
on a new class of 2D layered materials, called chalcophosphates where
phosphorous, sulphur and analogous elements are arranged in an intricate planar
mosaic pattern. This research develops and explores metal chalcophosphates as a
new class of ceramic materials for their magnetic, ferroelectric, and coupled
properties, with unusual quantum behavior. This unique combination of non-linear
phenomena provide rich opportunities to advance science of ceramics, and creates
a potential platform for new generation of magneto-electronic devices. This
emerging research field is likely to generate new technology industries and
require workforce with extensive hands-on expertise in novel multicomponent
ceramic materials and their characterization. As a result, research activities
are integrated with educational and societal outreach initiatives, anchored by
the unique platform for 2D layered ceramic materials. The other broader impact
goals include training of undergraduate and graduate students in advanced
materials research and incorporation of research results into course and
curricula. Through an innovative "Materials-Journalism" program, Medill school
journalism students immerse to witness the scientific process and report their
findings in their journalism blogs and reports. Conversely, the research team
members learn journalism practices of story-telling and how to synthesize
complex scientific undertaking into meaningful discourse with the public.
Collectively, the research advances scientific insights with prospects for
technology breakthroughs in the new class of 2D ceramics, with educational
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, and societal outreach
through the journalism initiative.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This
research revolves around synthesis and advanced characterization of 2D layered
metal chalcophosphates (MCP), i.e. thiophosphates and selenophosphates, as a new
and novel class of 2D layered ceramic systems. Anchored on a variety of possible
chemical combinations, especially with heteroanions, the synthesized structures
are readily amenable to extensive multimodal characterization methods to map
their complex structural characteristics in conjunction with their linear and
non-linear properties. Of specific interest are single- and few layered 2D
structures to explore the role of spatial and dimensional constraints. This goal
is accomplished by classical mechanical exfoliation as well as vapor-based
deposition methods developed in the laboratory. Also, this project investigates
the nature and extent of coupling between ferroelectric and ferromagnetic
properties, especially in the few- and single layers. The primarily focus is on
magnetic M2P2Q6 (M= Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Q=S, Se) and ferroelectric/ferromagnetic
AMP2Q6 (A=Ag,Cu, M=In,Ga,Cr,Mn,Fe,Gd). A diverse yet integrated multimodal
techniques and characterization methods are employed to unravel the complex
labyrinth of microstructure across multiple length-scales. Advanced scanning and
transmission electron microscopy techniques probe the local structure, phases,
chemical partitioning, and related phenomena. Theoretical work conducted in
close connection with the experimental efforts examines the bulk properties of
materials and analyzes the meso and nano-scale phenomena in heterostrucure
architectures of thio- and selenophosphates and its interaction with substrates.
The scientific insights governed by unusual combination of heteroanion systems
with spatial and dimensional constraints are expected to display unusual linear
and non-linear ferroelectric and ferromagnetic as well as coupled properties and
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.