* 1929914
* Conference Proposal: Food and Innovation Sustainable Urban Cities Rural-Urban Linkages
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Andrew Sanderford, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports a collaborative workshop for researchers, students, non-
governmental organizations, federal agencies, and industry experts to explore
sustainable urban systems connections between urban and rural places. In
addition to Central Michigan University (CMU) and the University of Arizona,
steering committee member organizations include Harvard University,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the U.S. Department for Housing and
Urban Development. The workshop will be held July 29-30, 2019, at the CMU campus
near Detroit, Michigan. Specifically, the workshop focuses on how food,
community, and related innovation reveal and create opportunities to better
understand the links between urban and rural communities. The workshop will
feature small and large group discussions, student and expert presentations, and
dialogue between researchers, students, and practitioners in both formal and
informal settings. The primary output of the conference will be a set of
researchable questions that reflect the needs of industry and build upon
previously-funded research efforts supported by the National Science Foundation
(NSF) and the Partnership for Sustainable Communities. These researchable
questions will serve as the foundation for new collaborative research and
practice partnerships composed of industry, government, and/or academic
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prosperity and sustainability of cities
are inextricably linked to rural regions. This workshop will use food and
community to develop new basic and applied science methods, questions, and
projects to improve understanding and efficiency of rural-urban connections that
enhance the social, economic, and ecological sustainability of urban systems.
Professionally facilitated discussions will help drive science-practice
dialogue, across industry, government, and academic participants that will shape
a set of use-inspired research questions. These are questions to which industry
and government need answers to drive more efficient policy, investment, and
sustainability outcomes. The use-inspired questions emerging from the trans-
disciplinary facilitated discussions will serve as the basis for an array of new
collaborative research efforts to be undertaken by combinations of academic,
industry, and policy teams. The insights generated will form the foundation for
the proposal of a new sustainability research network addressing enhanced
sustainable urban systems through urban-rural linkages. Additionally, the
workshop will support and mentor students in an array of disciplines; facilitate
opportunities to develop related interdisciplinary research projects; create
space to discuss new theory and methods of analysis; and develop new
understanding of urban-rural linkages and their role in the sustainability of
urban systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.