* 1929074
* Understanding High-Impact Rainfall Events over the West African Sahel: Resolving the Role of Environmental Conditions on Storm Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Kerry Cook, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 11/30/2023
* USD 657,103.00

While flooding is a complex process involving both meteorological systems and
surface conditions, most high-impact events are characterized by high rainfall
totals. This study focuses on understanding storm systems that deliver high
rainfall amounts over the West African Sahel, a relatively remote region known
to be particularly vulnerable to flooding due to the frequent occurrence of
intense rainfall and relatively low adaptive capacity. The overarching goal is
to advance our physical understanding of the development of extreme rainfall-
producing systems over the West African Sahel by investigating how environmental
conditions contribute the development of such storms. Given the consequences of
high-impact rainfall events for the livelihoods of West Africans, as well as the
known role of these systems over the West African Sahel in Atlantic hurricanes,
the knowledge gained from this study will be valuable for improving not only the
prediction of high-impact rainfall events over the West African Sahel but also
the weather forecast for our own national interests. The project also
contributes to the education of the next generation of atmospheric scientists
through involving and training a post-doctoral researcher and a graduate student
as well as through a K-12 outreach program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
objectives of this project are: (1) to understand the characteristics of
precipitating systems that deliver high-impact rainfall amounts; and (2) to
determine the set of environmental conditions that favor the development of
these rainfall events. These objectives will be addressed by utilizing high-
resolution satellite-derived rainfall products, state-of-the-art atmospheric
reanalysis data, along with convection-permitting regional climate modeling.
Satellite-derived rainfall estimates and ground-based observations will be used
to identify and characterize high-impact rainfall events over the region, and
these will be cross-referenced with ground-truth to identify events associated
with reported flooding. Atmospheric reanalysis data and convection-permitting
modeling will be used to identify the environmental conditions associated with
intense storms, and to develop and test hypotheses regarding how they are
related to deepen our understanding of the physical processes associated with
the development of high-impact rainfall events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.