* 1929190
* RII Track-4: Quantum Control of Molecular Interactions with External Electromagnetic Fields: From Few to Many-Body Physics
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Timur Tscherbul, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2023
* USD 212,898.00

Ultracold molecular gases hold potential for transformative applications across
physics and chemistry, ranging from quantum information processing and quantum
simulation of novel materials to probing and controlling chemical reactions with
external electromagnetic fields. This proposal explores two exciting frontiers
recently made available by pioneering experiments at the host institution (JILA
Physics Frontier Center). First, we intend to explore how the relative
orientation of approaching molecules affects the outcome of a molecular
collision or chemical reaction. Second, we propose to study the properties of an
artificial crystal of polar molecules in an optical lattice, an exquisite
quantum-many body system recently realized experimentally at the host
institution. The proposed research will enhance our understanding of how
electrons behave in real materials (a key goal of modern condensed-matter
physics and material science) and to novel ways to control chemical reactions
with electromagnetic fields (an important goal of modern chemical
physics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to address two outstanding
open problems in the physics and chemistry of cold molecular gases: (i) the lack
of understanding and control of quantum stereodynamics of low-temperature
molecular collisions in the presence of external electromagnetic fields, and
(ii) the nature of the phase diagram of an ultracold gas of chemically reactive
polar molecules in an optical lattice recently created for the first time at the
host institution (JILA Physics Frontier Center). Using numerically exact quantum
theory of molecular collisions, we propose to elucidate the effects of external
fields on the stereodynamics of cold molecular collisions, with a focus on Ne-OH
collisions currently studied experimentally at JILA. We also plan, by taking
advantage of recent developments in computational condensed-matter physics, to
explore the phase diagram of the extended dissipative Fermi-Hubbard model of
ultracold KRb molecules in a two-dimensional optical lattice. The proposed
research may lead to new ways to control the quantum dynamics of molecular
collisions and to engineer novel quantum many-body states with ultracold
molecules in optical lattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.