* 1929637
* VIRTMorph Symposium and Workshop at the 2019 International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology; July 21-25, 2019; Prague, Czech Republic
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Colleen Farmer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 06/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award partially supports travel for participants in a symposium and
workshop at the International Congress of Vertebrate Morphology (ICVM), a
triennial meeting of the International Society of Vertebrate Morphology to be
held in Prague, Czech Republic, in July 2019. The symposium and workshop bring
together scientists and software developers to advance the use of virtual
reality (VR) for the purposes of both research and teaching in the field of
functional morphology. Progress in the morphological sciences has been impeded
by the difficulty of understanding and quantifying three dimensional structures
from two dimensional images, for example photographs and illustrations, and from
the opacity of most structures, which generally makes it impossible to see
inside organisms without dissecting them. A major leap forward came from the
development of three-dimensional (3-D) radiographic methods, such as computed
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, which enable 3-D data of differences
in density to be acquired noninvasively, visualized, and manipulated. A novel,
and perhaps similar, leap forward comes from software and hardware developments
that enable these data to be studied and quantified using virtual reality.
Scientists can virtually step inside or walk around a virtual organism, and
better understand the relationships of individual structures to the whole
organism. Because these data and visualizations are digital, they are advancing
the ways scientists share and archive data and develop teaching tools. The
symposium will bring together scientists from across the globe who are using VR
to advance understanding of structure and function in a range of organisms, and
will expose other scientists to the use of multiplayer platforms to collaborate
in real time and over long distances. Training at the workshop will enable
scientists to publish VR-ready data on their websites and in existing
repositories, to bring mobile VR experiences into classrooms and museums, and to
make better use of scientific collections. VR will help researchers use a
ubiquitous modern tool - the smartphone - to bring immersive, scientific
experiences to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in scientific
understanding often follow technological innovations that afford researchers new
insights into complex problems. VR promises to do this for the complex, three-
dimensional morphology that is at the heart of organismal biology. The VR
environment is superior to examining individual research specimens, especially
of rare or endangered species, because virtual objects can be digitally sliced,
rotated, and scaled up at will. The VIRTMorph symposium and workshop to be held
at the international ICVM meeting will advance the study of functional
morphology by illustrating how the understanding of complex anatomy can be
facilitated using virtual reality. The workshop will familiarize scientists with
VR software and hardware so that a transition to the use of this powerful new
tool can occur smoothly and effortlessly. Scientists will learn how to use VR to
set up a web framework for digital meetings, and thereby will facilitate
international collaborations. It will enhance the ability of scientists to
communicate research results to the public in effective ways. Anticipated
outcomes include a collaborative white paper, to be published in a scientific
journal, that will detail how recent innovations in VR may best be used for
research in functional morphology and for outreach. A Beginners Guide to Using
VR in Biology will be produced, and a tutorial series and posting board will be
established on the principal investigator's website to more broadly disseminate
the workshop training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.