* 1929970
* Conference Support: the Future of Cyber-Assisted Chemical Engineering Education
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Gintaras Reklaitis, Cache Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2019
* USD 29,700.00

This award is partial travel support of the 2019 conference Future of Cyber-
Assisted Chemical Engineering Education on July 19-20, 2019 in Breckenridge,
Colorado. The conference focuses on future directions in the innovative use of
computing technology, data science, and internet-based communications
infrastructure to enhance chemical engineering education. This conference
immediately follows the CACHE (Computer Aids for Chemical Engineering Education)
Corporation sponsored research conference, Foundations of Computer Aided Process
Design in Copper Mountain, Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference program
includes 12 plenary speakers who will offer their views of important directions
in cyber-assisted education as well as highlights of the accomplishments and
current thrusts of CACHE in molecular modeling, systems biology and process
systems engineering. It will also involve 20 invited oral presentations as well
as posters contributed by outstanding young faculty reporting innovations in the
development of educational media, exploring novel ways of organizing student-
instructor interactions to enhance learning and experimenting with alternative
knowledge delivery modes. The presentations and discussion will serve to
identify gaps across the curriculum and at all degree levels and to outline the
content and identify the most effective vehicles to deliver the content that
would fill the identified gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.