* 1929448
* CSBR:  Curating the Early Anthropocene Record of circum-Caribbean Animal Biodiversity in the Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Reitz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 763,978.00

An award is made to the University of Florida that will enable The Florida
Museum of Natural History Environmental Archaeology Program (FLMNH-EAP) to
improve curation of their circum-Caribbean zooarchaeological collections, in
part using 3D digitization and genetic methods. These collections include animal
remains from archaeological sites across the Southeastern US, Central America,
Caribbean, and northern part of South America that represent 14,000 years of
human-environment interactions and document the early "anthropocene period," the
period dominated by human impact on our world. Central to the FLMNH-EAP
collections are the legacy Elizabeth Wing Collections, including more than 800
archaeological site assemblages, representing over three million identified
animal specimens. Animal remains from archaeological sites are an essential
repository of early anthropocene biodiversity data, recording pre-industrial
human-environmental interaction reaching far back into our prehistory. These
legacy collections include specimens documenting early human exploitation of now
extinct monk seal (Neomonachus), passenger pigeon (Ectopistes migratorius) and
great auk (Pinguinus impennis), as well as early animal translocation and
management both within the Americas (e.g., guinea pigs, Cavia porcellus), and
with first European arrival (e.g., rats and cats at En Bas Saline, Haiti,
possibly Columbus's first landing site). Equally important, cultural data about
human actions linked to these anthropocene biodiversity records inform on human
perceptions of the environment and motivations in interacting with environmental
resources particularly under conditions of environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FLMNH-EAP will enhance, digitize, and make
accessible their collections of archaeological animal remains and their
associated data with a focus on the legacy Wing collection. This project will
protect and make available identified anthropocene animal specimens and their
data records. Data from these collections bridge a gap between the records of
paleontological and neontological biodiversity, providing baselines for the
period before historical record-keeping and detailing the complex history of
human impact on biodiversity over time. The project team will verify, digitize,
and publish through the iDigBio-GBIF biodiversity network a subset of ca. 35,000
catalog comprising more than 300,000 specimens. For select specimens, ancient
DNA and chronometric data will provide a record of circum-Caribbean early
anthropocene animal biodiversity under human influence. In addition to specimen
data, images and 3D models of newly created skeletal specimens will be shared
online via the iDigBio web portal and MorphoSource. The project will also engage
citizen scientists via Notes from Nature, and will provide training for middle-
school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.