* 1929752
* BIOROBOOST travel support for US-based researchers to workshops to develop standards in synthetic biology
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Drew Endy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 98,997.00

Development of internationally accepted standards in synthetic biology is
essential for the advancement of the field, to ensure interoperability of
infrastructure, reliable exchange of data and materials, and the facile
operation of commerce across supply chains that currently exist throughout US,
Europe, and Asia. US involvement in such endeavors is also essential to maintain
US competitiveness in the field as an active area of research. This award
supports four teams of US-based researchers, whose expertise covers the breadth
of US interests in synthetic biology, to participate in a series of workshops
that are part of the European Commission (EC) funded Coordination Support Action
(CSA) focused on the development and dissemination of standards in synthetic
biology (BIOROBOOST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most research in biology and
bioengineering remains ad hoc and idiosyncratic, with results taking the form of
natural language-encoded claims and conclusions. Synthetic biology promises to
further transition research with living matter from "reusable concepts" to
"reusable reality," both in terms of biological measurements and functional
biomaterials. But, doing so requires focused research and coordination of effort
across areas of diverse expertise, and within a context of competing interests
and divergent incentives. Success requires careful consideration of cultural and
ethical aspects of research involving biological materials as well as facile
integration of computational and administrative tools that reduce or eliminate
transaction costs, hence the importance of the development of international
standards. This award supports four teams of US-based scientists to participate
in a series of BIOROBOOST workshops that are held in Europe. The workshops focus
on overcoming the cultural and technical hurdles of the development of standards
in synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.