* 1929913
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Origin of Multiethnic Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Ryan Smith, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,087.00

This research addresses the development of multiethnic coexistence and the ways
past societies effectively ordered and maintained contexts of social pluralism.
In the globalized world today, many of cities and neighborhoods are vibrantly
multiethnic, yet socially diverse communities are largely considered a fact of
large, well-organized societies. Nevertheless, there is enough evidence for
cases of multiethnic diversity in smaller, less-centralized societies to
challenge this relationship and to question how groups of different levels of
political complexity were able to effectively negotiate multiethnic coexistence.
Archaeology is uniquely suited to address the long-term development of
multiethnic societies, how they were ordered, and what sort of institutions were
used to mitigate divisive and destructive forces which often plague inter-ethnic
relations. In particular, by collecting data across periods when state-control
was either suspended or in full-swing, this research will provide insights
regarding the role of multi-ethnicity in a variety of political contexts,
helping us better understand how different approaches to multiethnic coexistence
may encourage stability or instead lead to hostility and
conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has highlighted the political,
often hostile nature of inter-ethnic interactions and the need for centralized
judicial mechanisms for groups with diverse identities to peacefully live
alongside one another. In this regard, states are considered uniquely suited to
deal with inter-ethnic animosities through structural hierarchies and state-
sponsored infrastructure which can control, channel, or suppress ongoing
competition between ethnic groups, allowing different groups to live amongst one
another as neighbors within the same city or in adjacent settlements.
Alternatively, non-state societies are considered ill-equipped to manage inter-
ethnic animosities, leading groups to instead live in exclusive, spatially
segregated territories where inter-group conflict is an omnipresent threat.
Under the direction of Dr. Elizabeth Arkush of the University of Pittsburgh,
doctoral candidate Ryan Smith will conduct full coverage pedestrian survey,
intensive site mapping, and a program of systematic surface collections near the
Lake Titicaca basin of southern Peru to understand changes in the ethnic
landscape directly before and after the arrival of the Inca state in the area
(AD 1000-1530). These investigations are specifically centered on an important
transition zone between the high plains around Lake Titicaca and the eastern
Andean piedmont, forming what has been described as a 'multiethnic frontier'
where ethnic groups coexisted alongside one another under Inca control, if not
earlier. This research will first test the hypothesis that state-level political
organization was necessary for multiethnic coexistence, investigating whether
multiethnicity appears prior to or after the arrival of the Inca state. Survey
data will also allow researchers to test how multiethnicity was effectively
ordered through addressing what institutions, organizational forms, or spatial
frameworks were enacted and how these approaches to inter-group interaction
differed between state and non-state societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.