* 1929810
* Corrosion and Passivation Mechanisms of Li-Ion Battery Cathodes from  Ab Initio Interfacial Reaction Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Vitaly Alexandrov, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 302,291.00

Corrosion and surface passivation of redox-active materials is a crosscutting
theme in electrochemical energy storage and catalysis, but the processes and
their fundamental molecular underpinnings remain poorly understood. Active metal
dissolution is one of the main reasons for degradation of Li-ion battery (LIB)
cathodes, regardless of their crystal structure and chemical composition. The
results of this research project will provide fundamental insights into the
molecular origins of corrosion and passivation mechanisms necessary to explain
and predict degradation behavior. The knowledge obtained will enable the
development of an improved methodological foundation to attack other slow and
rare event phenomena related to electrochemical
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To capture the transient nature of the LIB
dissolution process and account for changes in the electronic structure
dynamically, atomistic ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations will be
employed. Such calculations in combination with enhanced free-energy sampling
techniques can provide key insights into the dynamics, mechanism and kinetics of
statistically rare events at a single event level. The obtained results can be
used to explain experimental findings that are often challenging to interpret
and to propose ways to inhibit surface degradation and passivation. The primary
objective of the proposed research is to build a detailed atomistic
understanding of reaction dynamics at LIB cathode/electrolyte interfaces
focusing on transition-metal dissolution and electrolyte decomposition. The
research plan focuses on three important classes of oxide-based LIB cathode
materials, namely, spinel-type LiM2O4, layered-oxide LiMO2 and phospho-olivine
LiMPO4 (M = Mn, Co, Ni, Fe) compounds. The emphasis will be on studying
interfacial reactions in the chemically rich environments considering multiphase
electrolyte solutions, multi-component cathode materials, structural
heterogeneities and elevated temperature effects. The research will focus on
understanding the role of: 1) surface chemistry of cathode materials including
transition-metal disproportionation reactions; 2) complex mixed electrolyte
chemistry involving two or more components in the presence of moisture; and 3)
local structural heterogeneities such as the presence of oxygen vacancies and
varying state of charge (Li content). The scientific goal of the project is to
untangle the intimate relationships between cathode chemistry/structure and
mixed electrolyte chemistry through a detailed characterization of elementary
reaction steps. A set of simple descriptors will be determined that can be used
to predict the propensity of the cathodes to corrode in complex LIB
environments. The project will provide unique opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, including members of underrepresented groups in STEM, to
work on the application of first-principles techniques in interfacial reaction
dynamics. Key results from the project will be incorporated into course
materials and presented to high school students at a Nanophysics High School
Camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.