* 1929308
* Workshop: Student Travel Support for the 2019 IEEE Data Science Workshop to be Held in Minneapolis, MN June 2-5,2019.
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Gonzalo Mateos Buckstein, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This project helps support the participation of up to 20 US-based students in
the 2019 IEEE Data Science Workshop (DSW), which will take place in Minneapolis,
MN, during June 2-5, 2019. The DSW is a recently established annual conference
of the IEEE Signal Processing Society, which offers a unique opportunity to its
participants for sharing scientific discoveries related to various aspects of
data science theory and applications. The event will gather researchers and
practitioners from a gamut of data-driven disciplines, including learning, data
mining, signal processing, optimization, statistics, and computing. It will
bring together experts from Academia, Government, and Industry groups with
interests on fundamentals and applications, as diverse as agriculture,
personalized health and medicine, biology and physics, grid analytics, earth and
the environment, education, finance and economics. Student participation in the
2019 IEEE DSW will contribute to the preparation of the next cadre of data-
analytic engineering professionals. Ultimately, the vision is to further promote
and leverage a Big Data research and development enterprise that will positively
impact the society, economy and healthcare, along with consequent improvements
in quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students attending the 2019 IEEE
DSW will benefit from a stimulating environment to learn about emerging research
areas in data science, and to network with other researchers and leading
academic and industrial experts in their research areas of interest. The
conference will feature several events specifically designed to enhance student
research experiences, including a student paper contest to recognize outstanding
papers in which the primary author and presenter is a student. Through these
travel awards, special efforts will be devoted to attract students from
traditionally underrepresented backgrounds in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.