* 1929856
* A Proposed Workshop on Interdisciplinary Sustainable Solutions for Urban Systems in a Changing Climate
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Donald Wuebbles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This is a grant in support of a SUS workshop Research on urban sustainability
often engages multiple disciplines, but this work is often limited in several
important dimensions. First, much research on urban sustainability focuses on
solutions that work for very large urban systems, leaving the problems of people
in small or urban-fringe communities unaddressed. Second, scholarly researchers
may tend to carry out work without engaging stakeholders in communities and
industry. Third, many research disciplines in arts and the humanities are not
integrated into sustainability research teams. This workshop targets to fill
those gaps. It will: explore new solutions to sustainability challenges in
water, energy, and climate adaptation; study how sustainability solutions must
vary with the scale of an urban system; identify novel ways to integrate
researchers from arts and the humanities into sustainability research teams; and
study how research is altered by deep integration of researchers with
stakeholders from business, communities, and NGOs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will develop implementable strategies to create and sustain a large
scale research network that tackles urban sustainability in cities of all sizes
with deep integration between researchers in many disciplines, municipalities,
NGOs, and business partners. The workshop will identify critical gaps in
research methodology and knowledge for solving sustainability problems in
energy, water, and climate adaptation in a range of different types of urban
systems, directing future sustainability research to improve the lives of more
people in the coming time of climate change. Finally, early career researchers
will gain networking and career development opportunities in a mode that is
enhanced by reaching outside the academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.