* 1929346
* Elucidating the Role of Protein Lysine Acetylation in Regulating DNA Replication
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Lata Balakrishnan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 611,000.00

The ability of cells to duplicate DNA with high accuracy is a hallmark of genome
stability. This research project addresses fundamental questions about DNA
replication by investigating how protein machinery at the DNA replication fork
is regulated by post-translational chemical modifications in order to optimize
fidelity. The project will also provide research training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students, and broaden STEM participation through a
structured program developed to recruit and mentor veteran undergraduate
students in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
hypothesis that lysine acetylation of lagging strand DNA replication proteins
may function as a regulatory switch that dictates the choice of the Okazaki
fragment processing (OFP) pathway. This pathway choice mechanism may allow the
cell to balance replication fidelity and efficiency by triggering protein
acetylation during replication of specific regions in the genome to ensure high-
fidelity DNA synthesis. Experiments in the first aim will investigate how
cellular perturbations influence lysine acetylation of OFP proteins, define the
sites of modification, and identify the protein modifiers involved. The second
aim will apply biochemical approaches to assess changes in individual protein
activities following lysine acetylation and evaluate how these changes influence
the entire lagging strand maturation pathway. The results will provide new
insights into why cells may choose this regulatory mechanism during DNA
replication, and have broad implications for understanding how organisms
maintain genome stability and cellular health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.