* 1929148
* RII Track-4: Canary in the Watershed: Concentration-Discharge Relationships as a Sentinel of Change
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Adam Wymore, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 11/30/2022
* USD 182,185.00

The goal of this project is to improve understanding of how climate and
watershed characteristics interact to control solute and sediment export and
ultimately water quality. The export of material from watersheds to river
networks and downstream receiving ecosystems is influenced by a myriad of
factors including climate, lithology, hydrology, soil type and porosity and
vegetation, among others. These factors and their complex interactions make
developing predictive models of watershed solute and sediment export difficult
and synthesizing the required data for continental-scale analyses is wrought
with computational challenges. The overarching vision of this EPSCoR Track 4
project is to synthesize and analyze spatially and temporally rich data sets to
develop a more holistic understanding of how material export (expressed as
concentration-discharge relationships: C-Q) changes across broad environmental
gradients including climatic variability. Understanding these processes has
direct implications for water quality and determining how watersheds and
ecosystems will respond to climate-based perturbations. Results will be shared
through peer-reviewed manuscripts, international conferences, and a series of
departmental seminars. The proposed work offers unique training opportunities
for an early-career faculty member and a female post-doctoral
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis of concentration-discharge (C-Q)
relationships provides a holistic and systems-level approach to assess where
material is stored within a watershed and the internal and external controls
that regulate the mobilization of this material from the landscape to river
networks. Putting C-Q behavior into a predictive framework is extremely
challenging however, as factors vary with space and time. Traditional approaches
to data synthesis and analytics may be inadequate to fully take advantage of
novel data resources and to quantify, predict and describe complex dynamics at
the earth?s surface. This project will address this challenge by taking a big
data and data synthesis approach to 1) build predictive continental-scale models
of C-Q behavior and 2) to understanding how C-Q behavior responds to climate
variability. This project will advance the field by examining the efficacy of
multiple predictive algorithms including machine learning based approaches which
may be able to handle the unique challenges associated with big environmental
data. The outputs of this project will help to stimulate competitive research at
the University of New Hampshire including the future use of high-frequency
environmental sensor technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.