* 1929587
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Development of a Complex Production Network
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Wenpeng Xu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 29,326.00

Under the direction of Dr. Laura Junker, Wenpeng Xu, a Ph.D. candidate at the
University of Illinois at Chicago, will undertake research to study the
development of large-scale production in the context of premodern globalization.
Export-oriented mass production is often associated with modern western
economies, but similar production systems had already developed prior to the
modern era. So far, little attention has been paid to examine how large-scale
production was organized at the local level to meet the global demands in the
premodern period. Archaeology is uniquely suited to provide relevant insight
because it can examine the production activities that were rarely mentioned in
historical texts and trace their development through a long-time perspective. By
focusing on the large-scale, non-elite production that is not often investigated
by archaeologists, this research will add a new dimension to understanding of
ancient craft production systems. This research will also provide empirical
evidence for studying non-western economic systems that are less frequently
addressed in the discussion of ancient economy, thereby contributing to the
comparative study of ancient economies across the pre-industrial world. This
project will provide essential research training for the doctoral candidate and
foster closer academic collaboration between several institutes in the U.S. and
China, including the University of Illinois at Chicago, the Field Museum, the
Fujian Museum, the Dehua Ceramic Museum, and Peking University. Results from
this project will form the basis of one Ph.D. dissertation as well as multiple
conference papers and academic publications in both English and Chinese.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Xu and his research team will examine the structure and
dynamics of production networks as a means of understanding the organization of
the large-scale, nonelite production system that feeds into the global trade
networks in the premodern period. The research will take place at Dehua in
southeast China, where dozens of huge dragon kilns formed an industrial district
and mass-produced porcelain products exclusively for export under the Song and
Yuan dynasties (960-1368 CE). The researchers will adopt a GIS-based social
network analysis approach to study the production networks in the porcelain
industry at Dehua. Archaeological information needed to document the inter-kiln
similarities will be collected through a multidisciplinary program, including
systematic surveys of kiln sites, stylistic analysis of kiln furniture, and
compositional analysis (pXRF and LA-ICP-MS) of ceramic products. This project
will serve as a pioneer study of investigating the large-scale porcelain
production on a regional scale. The innovative approaches used in this project
will help build a methodological framework that can be used for other production
centers in the past. Additionally, this project will provide a geochemical
dataset that can help source the widespread porcelains found along the ancient
maritime trade routes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.