* 1929834
* Workshop: How Does Infrastructure Shape Equity and Well-being across the Urban-Rural Gradient?; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; August 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Eduardo Brondizio, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 04/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This project funds a three day conference to be held in August, 2019 in
Philadelphia, PA. The goal is to improve an understanding of the role of equity
and well-being across the urban-rural gradient. The event will develop new
models of knowledge development among researchers, communities, industry,
practitioners, and government to understand interactions and feedback mechanisms
between infrastructure and surrounding environmental, economic, and social
systems. The conference focuses on the Philadelphia metropolitan region to
ground the discussion because it provides a compelling site as one of the most
populous, oldest, and poorest cities in the US. The conference also considers
the scalability of the research frameworks and models to other cities and
regions in the US and globally. This scientific research contribution thus
supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our
national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be insights to improve urban
sustainability which will save lives and economic losses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference assembles 40 individuals including
academics (with interdisciplinary research expertise on sustainability in
Philadelphia and beyond), representatives from local government, nonprofit and
community organizations (environment, regional planning, education). The results
will be disseminated to a broad group of stakeholders through the Delaware
Valley Regional Planning Commission, the Franklin Institute Science Museum,
Planet Philadelphia radio show and podcast, and the publication of a special
issue in the Current Opinions in Environmental
Sustainability&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.