* 1929117
* RII Track-4: Using Zircon (U-Th)/He Thermochronology to Explore a Link Between Mesozoic Tectonism and Nonmarine Sedimentation in the Eastern Tibetan Plateau
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2020
* William Jackson, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 11/30/2020
* USD 55,511.00

The Tibetan Plateau, the largest and highest plateau on Earth, is a product of
the India-Asia continent-continent collision. Because collision is ongoing,
geologic processes can be observed and measured, making the Tibetan Plateau an
ideal natural laboratory for tectonic investigations. While modern observations
and measurements provide details pertaining to active tectonics of the plateau,
studies show that ancient, inherited crustal features are a primary control for
how the plateau is currently developing. In the eastern Tibetan Plateau,
sedimentary and igneous rocks are exposed at the surface that provide a record
of these ancient, pre-India-Asia tectonic events; however, these rocks remain
largely unstudied. Therefore, the goal of this proposal is to investigate the
age and geologic relationships of sedimentary and igneous rocks in the eastern
Tibetan Plateau. This study will utilize field and laboratory methods to
determine the timing and rates of pre-India-Asia geologic processes. By
integrating field data with modern age dating techniques, the ability to
quantify when and how these rocks were exhumed to the Earth’s surface will be
possible. Advancing our knowledge in this region will allow us to better
understand the Tibetan Plateau, as well as older mountain belts and large
plateaus on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern observations and measurements of
Tibetan Plateau provide insights into active tectonic processes during plateau
development. However, to fully incorporate these data a better understanding of
inherited, Mesozoic tectonic fabrics must be established. In the eastern Tibetan
Plateau, the northern Yidun terrane contains Mesozoic sedimentary and igneous
rocks that record contractional deformation and exhumation; thereby, providing
an opportunity to understand the spatial and temporal development of deformation
in the Tibetan Plateau prior to the Cenozoic India-Asia collision. The goal of
this proposal is to investigate a link between the exhumation of the Late
Triassic Ganzi Pluton and development of two nonmarine sedimentary basins that
are in stratigraphic and structural contact with the pluton. To approach this
goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to use bedrock and detrital
zircon (U-Th)/He thermochronology, working in collaboration with the Basin
Analysis and Helium Thermochronology Laboratory (BAHTL) at the University of
Connecticut, directed by Dr. Julie C. Fosdick. The proposed work is designed to
address two main objectives, train the PI in zircon (U-Th)/He techniques and
interpretations, and collect thermochronology data to explore a link between
Mesozoic tectonism and nonmarine sedimentation. Results from this project will
advance our understanding of Mesozoic tectonics in the eastern Tibetan Plateau,
providing initial crustal input parameters for mechanical models. Advancing our
knowledge of geologic processes that develop high-elevation (&gt; 4 km)
mountains and plateaus will help us better integrate large data sets that seek
to understand global-scale natural processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.