* 1929244
* Mechanics of Low Dimensional Materials Based Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Arun Nair, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 354,993.00

Lightweight nanocomposites have tremendous application in many industries due to
their superior mechanical, and unique thermal, electrical and magnetic
properties. For all broad applications possible in industry, the quest for
composites with high strength to weight ratio is desirable. This award supports
fundamental research to further enhance the strength of lightweight
nanocomposites and explore novel manufacturing methods for these composites. In
the automobile industry, this class of composites can be used for door panels,
engine covers and tires, thus improving gas mileage. In the energy and aerospace
sectors, composites with high strength to weight ratio are desirable to make
windmill blades and aircraft components, while in the biomedical area,
lightweight composites are used as implants. On the education side, this award
will train graduate students in engineering who will further advance the field
of lightweight composites. Moreover this award will train K-12 students in STEM
by involving minority and under represented Marshallese American students in
northwest Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge with enhancing
lightweight nanocomposite strength lies with interface mechanics, which plays a
critical role in the design and application of these composites. One-dimensional
materials, which belong to the class of low dimensional materials, are an ideal
candidate to meet this challenge due to their defect free structure and unique
chemical bonding. Using an integrated multiscale computational model and
experiments, this research aims to study the interface and mechanical properties
of one-dimensional materials on metallic surfaces, which will lead to design and
manufacturing of low dimensional materials based nanocomposites. As a step
toward this goal, the research will utilize ab initio and multiscale methods,
which will predict the mechanical and surface properties to determine how the
length, size, orientation, bonding and shape of one-dimensional materials can be
leveraged towards obtaining optimal and desired mechanical and surface
properties. Computational modeling will determine the required design parameters
and will guide the manufacturing of low dimensional materials based
composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.