* 1929816
* Girl Scouts Episodic Volunteer Pilot for BPC
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Rebecca Brown, Girl Scouts of the USA
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The Girl Scouts of the USA (GSUSA) propose to pilot a Girl Scout Episodic
Volunteer program (GSEV) that will engage the National Science Foundation's
(NSF's) Computer and Information Sciences and Engineering (CISE) Directorate's
Principal Investigators (PIs) in meaningful broadening participation in
computing (BPC) activities. An "episodic volunteer" is a volunteer who works for
short or reoccurring periods of time. As episodic volunteers, CISE PIs will work
with local Girl Scout councils and Girl Scout adult volunteer troop leaders to
deliver computational thinking, cybersecurity, and coding activities to Girl
Scouts across the country, helping to build pathways to computationally-enabled
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The curricula for the GSUSA CS and computational thinking
activities has been developed by GSUSA in collaboration with Code.org,
CodeSpark, Cyber Innovation Center, Design Squad Global, the New York Academy of
Sciences, SciStarter, Vidcode, and WGBH/Design Squad Global. This pilot will
identify six local Girl Scout councils to test the Episodic Volunteer Model,
providing opportunities to test the identified sourcing and engagement
strategies. Specifically, the GSEV pilot will &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; 1. Identify
potential CS volunteers; &lt;br/&gt; 2. Develop training so that volunteers can
effectively lead CS-related activities; &lt;br/&gt; 3. Identifying Girl Scout
troops that need CS volunteers and mentors; &lt;br/&gt; 4. Test and refine a
process to easily match and schedule the CS volunteers to work with the Girl
Scout troop or event; and &lt;br/&gt; 5. Support delivery of the CS activities
and badge work with girls. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The six pilot councils will aim
to recruit and engage at least 30 NSF-funded PIs to deliver Girl Scout CS
content in person or virtually, and they will provide at least 20 instances of
computer science program delivery by NSF-funded PIs (2-3 episodic volunteers per
instance), including troop sessions or STEM events. GSUSA will conduct an
evaluation in order to assess outcomes. This project has the potential to scale
and reach 1.6 million Girl Scouts across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.