* 1929304
* RAPID: Quantifying Temporal Changes in Rockfall Magnitude-Frequencies for Well-Characterized Rockslopes Shaken by the 2018 Alaska Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Joseph Wartman, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 55,000.00

Earthquakes cause many hazards during shaking, but some of the hazards linger
long after the seismic event is over. For example, heightened frequency of
landslides and rockfalls commonly occur in the months - and even years -
following an earthquake. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project seeks to
capture perishable data from several rock slopes highly susceptible to rockfall
that were affected by the recent earthquake in Anchorage. By doing this, we may
compare the rate and frequency of rockfall occurrence to pre-earthquake levels
in order to better understand how much rockfall activity increases following
shaking, and how long it takes to return to pre-earthquake levels. This has
implications for post-earthquake recovery and seismic resilience throughout much
of the US and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earthquakes often trigger
significant rockfall activity in steep cliffs. The recent 2018 November 30th
Alaska earthquake caused significant shaking (up to 0.4g) across the Anchorage
region, resulting in numerous rockfalls, landslides, and lateral spreads. The
combination of potentially large volumes, high velocities, long travel
distances, and impact forces make the rockfall hazard significant. Based on
observations from past events in New Zealand, it is believed that rockfall
activity over at least the next several months will exceed "normal" baseline
levels before decreasing. Nevertheless, as is often the case, the previous
research does not have detailed baseline information prior to the event. This
prior research begs three primary scientific questions: what is "baseline"
rockfall activity? How does shaking translate to increased rockfall activity,
magnitude, and frequency particularly in the heterogenous geologic conditions
encountered in the rock slopes surrounding Anchorage? And lastly, how quickly
does rockfall activity and magnitude return to baseline conditions? This project
seeks to collect rockfall activity rates through repeat terrestrial laser
scanning at well-characterized rockfall sites near Anchorage. Change detection
will be performed and the rate of rockfall activity characterized in comparison
to previous epochs and the serial data collected as part of this project. With
existing baseline data not influenced by recent seismic activity, we will
characterize and compare the activity rate following shaking. This investigation
will provide fundamental knowledge about the process that dictates both the
increase and decay in rockfall activity after seismic disturbance. The resulting
knowledge will provide data needed to support and advance modern performance-
and risk-based extreme event design methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.