* 1929138
* RII Track-4: Exploring Ferromagnetism in Two-Dimensional Van Der Waals Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Kai He, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 11/30/2022
* USD 299,204.00

The current silicon-based information technologies start to approach the
physical limit set by the speed and density of electronic transistors. To
continue the trend of Moore's Law, the hope is the emergent quantum materials
because they may shift the information processing paradigm from controlling the
electronic transport to manipulating the spin interaction, thereby eliminating
charge transfer and heat dissipation, leading to higher speed, smaller device,
and better energy efficiency. This transformative technology is known as
"spintronics", which requires the coexistence of magnetic and semiconducting
properties. Recent discovery of intrinsic magnetism in two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductors is considered as a promising candidate system, whose unique
properties are correlated to the electron and spin interactions within the
crystal lattices, which needs to be understood at the atomic length scale. This
project aims to investigate the magnetic spin textures in such 2D materials
using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) whose spatial resolution (&lt;1
angstrom) can effectively identify the ultrasmall magnetic characteristics. This
work will be performed using the world-class TEM facilities at Brookhaven
National Laboratory, where the PI will develop new research expertise and
establish long-term collaborations that can greatly enhance the research
capacity of Clemson University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of two-
dimensional (2D) materials offers an ideal platform to display exotic physical
properties restricted by the quantum confinement, which leads to the
groundbreaking discovery of intrinsic 2D magnetism that may have a
transformative impact on quantum information technologies. To address the
fundamental science questions regarding the charge, spin, and orbital coupling
with the crystal lattice in such material systems, the atomistic
characterization using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is essential. The
goal of this project is to probe the magnetic spin textures in 2D ferromagnetic
crystals and their van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures using TEM-based magnetic
imaging techniques. The work will be performed in partnership with researchers
at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), which is a worldwide leader in the
field of electron microscopy. The PI will employ a unique toolset combining
Lorentz microscopy and electron holography to identify the spin textures and
elucidate their dependence of extrinsic physical parameters and structural
effects in 2D vdW materials with intrinsic magnetic orders. These findings will
provide a mechanistic understanding of electron-spin-lattice correlation
underpinning the intrinsic 2D magnetic properties and show practical
implications for the emerging spintronics applications. This fellowship allows
the PI to establish a long-term collaboration between Clemson University and
BNL, which, in turn, will strengthen the research activities, expertise, and
education for the PI and the whole Clemson community, and thereby enhance the
scientific competitiveness, workforce development, and economic growth of the
State of South Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.