* 1929334
* American Institute of Mathematics Research Conference Center: A Model for Collaboration
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2025
* David Farmer, American Institute of Mathematics
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2025
* USD 13,000,000.00

The American Institute of Mathematics (AIM) advances the frontiers of
mathematical knowledge by fostering collaborations among diverse groups of
researchers. AIM hosts short, mathematically focused programs that complement
the semester- and year-long programs of other NSF institutes. AIM’s long-term
commitment to an inclusive and broad view of the mathematical sciences, combined
with versatile tools and mechanisms to support collaboration, position it as a
national resource with the institutional expertise to support fundamental
advances both in research and in the development of human resource capital.
AIM’s primary scientific programs are week-long focused workshops and small
research groups called Structured Quartet Research Ensembles (SQuaREs).
Approximately 750 mathematicians per year visit AIM for either a workshop or a
SQuaRE. Since 2002, AIM has hosted more than 300 week-long focused workshops in
all areas of the mathematical sciences. With few talks and significant time for
research in groups, workshops are designed to promote collaboration. The SQuaREs
program, introduced in 2007, supports collaborations of 4 to 6 researchers who
meet multiple times for week-long intervals in order to make progress on an
ambitious research agenda. AIM has hosted over 400 SQuaRE meetings since the
program began. To further support the goals of the scientific programs, AIM has
developed a set of web-based tools that enhance collaboration before and after
participants’ time at AIM, and contribute to disseminating progress to a larger
community of interest. During the project period, AIM will host approximately
4,000 mathematical scientists in 96 workshops and 262 SQuaREs that will advance
knowledge in a broad spectrum of mathematical areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that these programs will continue their established record of
productivity, which over the past decade has resulted in an average of 2.7
publications from each workshop and 3.9 from each SQuaRE. Broader scientific
outcomes of AIM’s programs include supporting emerging fields and paving the way
for new connections between fields of mathematics and new applications of the
mathematical sciences to other areas. AIM’s programs are intentionally inclusive
of a diverse group of researchers, with the long-term goal of broadening the
community of those who participate in research. Participant diversity is an
important consideration at every stage of program selection and planning, and
extensive effort is dedicated to creating a culture of full inclusion for all
participants in each program’s research activities. Throughout its history, AIM
has also supported a variety of Special Projects, including Research Experiences
for Undergraduate Faculty (REUF), a program for undergraduate faculty who want
to mentor undergraduate students in research; and the Math Teachers’ Circle
(MTC) Network, a national outreach program connecting K-12 mathematics teachers
with research mathematicians. These projects contribute to the broader impacts
of AIM’s work as an institute, provide opportunities to form partnerships both
within and beyond the mathematics community, and raise public awareness about
the mathematical sciences. Finally, research collaboration tools disseminate the
results of AIM programs and also have significant potential to contribute to the
infrastructure supporting scientific collaboration more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.