* 1929949
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of the Relationship between Processing Conditions and Morphology of Lithium During Electroplating
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Ming Tang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 09/30/2023
* USD 228,607.00

Graphite is currently used as the anode component in most rechargeable lithium-
ion batteries. Replacing graphite with lithium metal holds the promise to
improve the battery capacity by several times while also reducing costs. During
battery charging and discharging, the lithium metal surface is prone to losing
its smooth morphology and forms many sharp protrusions, a phenomenon, known as
dendrite growth. Dendrite growth results in inferior battery life and induces
severe safety concerns, both of which are major barriers to the
commercialization of lithium-metal-based rechargeable batteries. This project
aims to provide fundamental knowledge to guide the advanced manufacturing of
lithium metal anodes with long cycle life and stability. It will focus on
understanding the role of residual stress that accumulates within lithium metal
during battery cycling in triggering lithium dendrite growth, and how its
adverse effect can be eliminated by the design of a novel porous anode
architecture. Integrated characterization, modeling and manufacturing activities
will be carried out to achieve this goal. In addition to having major impacts on
the development of next-generation batteries for electrical vehicles and
electric grids, the mechanistic understanding acquired in the project will also
facilitate the use of other earth-abundant metallic materials in energy storage
devices. The integrated education and outreach component of the project will
benefit a broad range of groups by providing authentic research experiences to
native Americans and community college students, promoting undergraduate
research and graduate education through active student recruitment and
retention, and integrating the latest progress in battery research into
curriculum on mechanics and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
extensive efforts, a complete understanding of the lithium dendrite growth
mechanism has not yet been established. This project builds on the PIs' recent
findings and will investigate stress as a key processing condition for
controlling lithium surface morphology during electroplating, which has
previously received little attention. It will combine in-situ and ex-situ
characterizations, modeling and fabrication studies to: 1) understand how the
stress, current density and plating time collectively control the lithium
morphology; 2) construct a lithium morphology diagram to predict lithium plating
morphology as a function of controllable processing conditions, 3) apply the
acquired knowledge to design lithium anode architecture that enables stable
cycling under high current densities, and 4) explore a potential cost-
competitive method to manufacture high-performance lithium anodes. This research
is expected to provide essential scientific guidance for the manufacturing of
stable lithium metal anode structures for high capacity rechargeable
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.