* 1929412
* Biomechanics of the Nucleus in Confined Migration
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* giuliano scarcelli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 10/31/2022
* USD 321,994.00

When a cell needs to migrate through small spaces, it needs to change its shape
to fit through the opening. During this process, deformation of the nucleus
represents a critical challenge, since the nucleus is the largest and stiffest
part of a cell. A softer nucleus is expected to make this movement through small
spaces easier, because it would allow the cell to deform to a greater extent.
However, the behavior of known factors that regulate changes in the stiffness of
the nucleus is inconsistent with this simple scenario and suggests a more
complex situation that is not yet understood. This project aims to fill this
knowledge gap by probing nuclear mechanics during cellular migration, including
through small spaces, using a novel mechanical testing technique. This technique
does not require contact with the cell nor the use of external labels. Thus, it
can be used to probe the nucleus of migrating cells, which are not physically
accessible. The knowledge gained from this project will support advancements in
understanding of how cancer cells invade healthy tissue and metastasize. This
interdisciplinary project will also provide an opportunity to implement hands-on
educational courses for undergraduate engineering students to design and build
advanced photonic instrumentation for biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell migration in confined microenvironments
is central to many processes, such as tissue development and immune cell
trafficking, and, represents a critical challenge for metastatic spreading. This
project will enable direct measurements of dynamic changes in nuclear mechanical
properties during confined cell migration using Brillouin microscopy. The
validated technique will be used measure nuclear modulus modulation and its
intracellular regulators, first in response to physical cues of the
microenvironment and then during migration through a confined microenvironment.
Thus, this research will unveil the mechanical properties of the nucleus that
are advantageous for migration through small constrictions; specifically, it
will identify nuclear properties that are critical within the metastatic cascade
and characterize how they evolve during metastatic progression. The improved
fundamental knowledge gained with this project may ultimately lead to new
diagnostic and therapeutic targets for metastasis based on phenotyping of
nuclear mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.