* 1929239
* NSFDEB-NERC:  The evolutionary genomics of a major transition in evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Amy Toth, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2023
* USD 536,951.00

Today's life forms are the accumulated result of billions of years of evolution.
Biologists recognize several major transitions in evolution that resulted from
smaller, simpler units (e.g., single cells) getting together to form larger,
more complex forms (e.g., organisms). It is not known whether major transitions
occur gradually or very quickly. The researchers will test this fundamental
question, using the latest genetic tools applied to the major transition from
solitary social living in bees and wasps. By comparing entire genomes (all of
the DNA) of species that show solitary, weakly social, and highly social forms,
the research asks whether major transitions are the result of small, gradual
changes or rapid changes in the genome. The outcomes are therefore of a
fundamental nature, generating basic information on the building blocks of the
natural world. The project will also include involvement of underrepresented
minority trainees, as well as a substantial educational components, with the aim
of inspiring and engaging the public in an understanding of evolution. This will
be accomplished through educational websites, videos, outreach presentations and
lectures, as well as participation in educational programs organized by the
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine whether the major transition from
solitary life to societies in insects evolved via gradual or punctuated
processes, a collaborative team of US and UK researchers will generate
comparable full genome datasets (high quality genomes including chromosomal
maps) on multiple species of bees and wasps. They will then apply rigorous
bioinformatic analyses on the consolidated datasets to test specific predictions
made by the two contrasting hypotheses (gradual versus punctuated). Beyond the
evolution of societies, a broader question is whether the same patterns and
processes underpin other major evolutionary transitions. To test the predictions
in other major transitions (e.g., the transition from single to multi-
cellularity, or asexuality to sexuality) the researchers will draw together a
community of theoreticians and empiricists with a united expertise in the theory
of major transitions and the empirical nature of major transitions in order to
evaluate the extent to which there may be common patterns or processes across
major transitions. Synthesizing this information, they will develop a cross-
disciplinary roadmap for determining the extent to which all major transitions
evolved via common evolutionary routes, allowing them to evaluate the generality
of evolutionary processes in the complexity of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.