* 1929701
* SaTC: TTP: Medium: Collaborative: Deployment-quality and Accessible Solutions for Cryptography Code Development
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Danfeng Yao, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 700,000.00

Vulnerabilities in cryptographic implementations seriously reduce the security
guarantees of algorithms in practice and lead to attacks. An effective fix to
the vulnerable code problem is automatic code checking. However, existing code
verification tools cannot adequately cover cryptographic properties due to
deficiencies in both accuracy, in terms of missed detection and false alarms,
and scalability, in terms of complexity and runtime. The technology in this
transition-to-practice project is to help secure cryptographic implementations,
which are the foundation of many advanced systems. By making relevant research
solutions deployment-grade, this effort can substantially improve the
cryptographic coding practice and benefit software developers in all
professions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's objective is to transition
multiple secure cryptographic coding research solutions to practice and make it
convenient and accessible to automatically screen programs against a wide range
of cryptographic implementation vulnerabilities or misuses. The main technical
enabler is a high precision and high throughput approach based on specialized
program analysis techniques called CryptoGuard. CryptoGuard can detect a wide
range of cryptographic misuses with ultra-low false alarm rates when used on
complex and large-scale Java programs. The project leverages multiple popular
software development and software security platforms, including the Software
Assurance Marketplace, to make these tools effective in production environments.
The systematic benchmark and measurement work is designed to advance the science
of security and substantially raises the standard and quality of cryptographic
code screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.