* 1929371
* I-Corps: A  Controlled Cavitation Technology (CCT) Biofouling Removal Device
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Sathya Gangadharan, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce the
annual water quality monitoring operating cost of $213MM by an estimated $50MM
per year. Water quality monitoring systems (WQMS) are crucial equipment to
collect the water resource data and to protect the water environment which is
essential to sustain human life. Currently, over 6,000 WQMS are deployed all
over the country. These systems require frequent maintenance with service
intervals of about three weeks on average. This adds significant expenses to the
overall operating budget of the water management districts. Our controlled
cavitation technology (CCT) system would be able to integrate with the current
WQMS to solve the biofouling problems by expanding the maintenance period to
three months. Through the successful customer discovery of this I-Corps project
a new annual $18MM market will be opened in the US for the CCT biofouling
removal product for WQMS. The CCT device can reduce maintenance costs of WQMS
and thereby reduce the overall operating budget. Furthermore, it will support
and increase effectiveness of water resource environment management by
presenting an opportunity to deploy about 20% more WQMS with the saved budget
and reducing the corrupted data due to the biofouling growth.

This I-Corps project will focus on a CCT biofouling removal device for our first
target customers narrowly defined as WQMS operators. CCT is an innovative
solution for removal of biofouling growth on underwater surfaces. It can remove
biofouling effectively without damaging the affected surfaces. Also, the removal
of biofouling can be done effectively without contacting the target surface.
This technology is applicable for removal of biofilm on underwater optic sensor
surfaces. Furthermore, CCT is an environmentally friendly technology because it
does not use chemicals for biofouling removal. CCT will prevent the growth of
biofouling before it starts to affect the sensor. This technology lends itself
into a technically and a commercially feasible state-of-the-art solution
compared to the existing "brush type" cleaning devices. Furthermore, other
commercial opportunities for this technology include the removal of biofouling
in marine (hull cleaning) and medical (surgical tools) applications.
Intellectual property (IP) is being addressed through a patent application.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.