* 1929206
* RII Track-4: Optimizing the Chemistry of Heterointerfaces in Photovoltaics: A Combination of Electronic Structure Calculations and Machine Learning Approach
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Samrat Choudhury, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 11/30/2021
* USD 152,050.00

Material properties are often linked to the atomic structure and chemistry of
its internal interfaces. Among the internal interfaces, heterointerfaces are
boundaries separating two materials with different atomic structure and
chemistry. The atomic structure and chemistry of these heterointerfaces are
complex and cannot be easily predicted from the individual materials that form
the heterointerface. This complexity increases exponentially in multi-component
heterointerfaces as it involves a vast number of chemical possibilities at the
interface. Thus, designing the chemistry of a novel multi-component
heterointerface with a targeted material property is a challenging task. This
research project aims to enhance our current capability to determine the
chemistry of a multi-component heterointerface with a targeted electronic
property for photovoltaic applications using a combination of electronic
structure calculations and machine learning approach. Machine learning tools can
substantially reduce the time needed to identify the chemistry of a
heterointerface that meets a desired electronic property need by efficiently
extracting hidden chemistry-property relationships, a key factor toward
accelerated discovery of novel heterointerface. The proposed project addresses
the important federal government mandate of Materials Genome Initiative, the
objective of which was to substantially reduce the time and cost to discover,
manufacture, and deploy advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multicomponent
heterointerfaces have long intrigued materials scientists and physicists, in
part, because of the sheer complexity of their atomic and electronic structure
and chemistry. Such complexity can make designing a novel multi-component
heterointerface with a targeted material property a non-trivial task. This is
because navigating the vast combinatorial chemical and configurational
possibilities between multiple elements at the interface is simply too large.
This research project aims to design the chemical composition of a
heterointerface for photovoltaic application with a targeted electronic property
using a combination of electronic structure calculations and machine learning
approach. More specially, the PI plans (a) to develop an in-depth understanding
of the underlying physics that determines the electronic and atomic structure of
the heterointerface using electronic structure calculations; and (b) to apply
machine learning tools to explore hidden chemistry-property relationships of the
interface, to predict the chemistry of the heterointerface for a desired
electronic property. The proposed approach is a departure from the traditional
time-consuming and expensive Edisonian trial-and-error approach of synthesis-
testing experimental cycles; thus, it can substantially accelerate materials
discovery. The PI anticipates that upon completion of this project a generic
computational template to investigate structure-chemistry-property relationship
of highly complex multi-component heterointerfaces will be generated. Finally,
machine learning will be an integral part of future materials discovery. The
knowledge gained from this project will help train student(s) on machine
learning tools and their utility in materials research, increasing their
exposure early in their careers to this growing and influential materials
science field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.