* 1929013
* I-Corps: Synthetic Matrix Solutions for Neurodegenerative Disease Platforms
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
neural cell culture assays, thus furthering the research and development of
treatments for neurodegenerative diseases. To enable the development of new
therapies, there is a need for better functional control of long-term,
physiologically relevant in vitro models that are translatable to the clinic and
ultimately increase treatment efficacy and mitigate patient risk. While many
components are necessary for a physiologically relevant model, one key area of
concern is the substrate upon which neural cells are grown. In vitro cell
culture platforms using substrates such as matrigel and recombinant human
laminin can result in aggregation and delamination of cultured neurons within a
week. The synthetic polymer substrate we are developing is designed to promote
neural cell attachment and reduce delamination, enabling long-term culture and
functional analysis of the cells. Furthermore, a defined substrate formulation
is desirable for maintaining cell culture consistency that is expected to yield
more homogenous neural cell populations, which is an advantage over animal-
derived substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will focus on the
commercial potential of novel synthetic polymers upon which neural progenitor
cells (NPCs) can grow, expand, and differentiate into neural cell lineages. The
proposed product is expected to enable enhanced neural cell attachment, while
maintaining viability and functionality for long-term cell culture applications.
The synthetic substrate is a poly(ethylene) glycol (PEG)-based polymer that can
be mechanically modulated to alter its physical properties. Additionally,
bioactive modifications that mimic the native cellular microenvironment can be
incorporated to enhance functionality. A key feature of this polymer is that
chemical and mechanical properties are preserved across different synthesis
protocols, significantly reducing the risk of batch-to-batch variability, which
is a major concern with commercially available natural substrates such as
matrigel. The synthetic polymer system has previously been used to enhance the
attachment of other stem cell-derived cultures such as endothelial cells and
preliminary data suggest that it will support stem cell-derived NPC
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.