* 1929167
* RII Track-4: Penetrating the Inner Lives of Leaves to Breed Water-Wise Crops Using Math, 3D Imaging, and Experiments
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Christopher Muir, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 133,971.00

There is a need to grow more food with less land and fewer inputs to meet the
demands of a growing population while simultaneously protecting the environment.
Leveraging traits in the wild relatives of crop species could help breed
sustainable crop varieties that produce more food with fewer resources. Leaf
anatomy has a major effect on photosynthesis by determining rates of carbon gain
and water loss. The aim of this project is to figure out if the leaf anatomy of
wild relatives can improve the water-use efficiency of crops. To achieve this
goal, the PI will integrate existing mathematical representations of carbon and
water movement within leaves, parameterize models with 3D images of leaves from
wild tomato species, and test model predictions using customized equipment for
measuring photosynthesis. The mathematical tools and data collected on wild
tomatoes will improve our nation's ability to grow food
sustainably.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wild relatives of crop species are an
underutilized reservoir of traits that could make agriculture more sustainable.
The internal anatomy of leaves influences the rate of carbon gain and water loss
during photosynthesis. It is not clear how crop water-use efficiency could be
improved by harnessing natural variation in leaf anatomy among crop-wild
relatives. This project aims to leverage recent advances in modeling, imaging,
and measuring of leaf interiors in order to discover how and why crop-wild
relatives of tomato (Solanum spp.) use water more wisely than their domesticated
cousins. The goals of this project are to 1) model gas exchange (H2O and CO2
fluxes) in the leaf interior to understand how anatomy affects water-use
efficiency; 2) image 3D leaf interiors using microCT to accurately quantify key
traits identified by modeling; and 3) measure gas exchange parameters in wild
tomatoes to validate modeling. With collaborators at the University of
California, Davis, these objectives will be achieved by analyzing a spatially-
explicit model of CO2 and water transport within the leaf, parameterizing the
model using 3D images of wild tomato leaf interiors, and testing model
predictions using a custom gas exchange system for artificial gas mixtures. This
work will reveal both the opportunities and potential challenges of improving
crop sustainability by introducing leaf anatomical variation from wild
relatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.