* 1929529
* I-Corps: Positron Emission Tomography Helmet
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Julie Brefczynski-Lewis, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
patient outcomes by bringing whole brain imaging directly to the patient for
safe, fast, and better tolerated diagnostics. Compared to existing brain imaging
technologies, the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) helmet brain imager
overcomes limitations related to radioactive dose, portability, motion tolerance
and cost. The lower dose required by the device permits screening or
longitudinal monitoring of patients in various cases, such as brain injury,
Alzheimer's, epilepsy, stroke rehabilitation, Parkinson's disease, addition and
other neurological and mental health disorders. The portable nature allows
bedside imaging directly in patient rooms, as well as onsite imaging in military
and athletic settings, including immediately after head injuries. The device's
motion tolerance helps address hospital inefficiency and extra cost from
rescanning patients due to movement artifacts, and the discomfort of remaining
still, especially for elderly and injured patients. The low cost and small
footprint compared to standard PET/CT systems, results in a device with utility
beyond just large medical facilities, as it can be used in smaller rural
clinics, sporting/military medical facilities, and in research studies of
previously difficult to study brain functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
Project will help bring the Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Helmet brain
imager into use by clinics, sporting/ army medical centers, and research
institutions. The instrument is a ring of detectors that can be placed around
the head of a patient to non-invasively provide information of activity in
different brain regions. This device requires only 10-25% of the typical
clinical PET radiation dose due to the close proximity of the detectors to the
patient's head, and published data show high efficiency and sensitivity of the
detectors using industry standard testing. Moreover, the PET Helmet system can
be transported to the desired location of imaging scanner, and a current
research project involves testing the imager bedside for human patients with
traumatic brain injury. The device moves with the head of the patient allowing
for motion tolerance as well as upright imaging, and we have demonstrated
appropriate task-related brain imaging during an upright walking task in human
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.