* 1929265
* GOALI: Flow driven segregation at the particle level
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Richard Lueptow, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 09/30/2024
* USD 342,357.00

Granular flows are common in industry. Billions of tons of ores, grains,
powders, and plastic resin are handled each year in the US. When particles
differ in size or density, flowing granular materials tend to segregate, or de-
mix, which can cause severe problems in particle and powder processing in
industries where a uniform mixture is usually desired. Although the
understanding of segregation and mixing in granular flows has advanced over the
last two decades based on an array of experimental, computational, and
theoretical approaches, current models of segregation at the particle level are
simplistic and empirical. The objective of this GOALI project is to develop a
particle-level model based on fundamental physics that can accurately predict
segregation from the size and density of the specific particles that are
flowing. This particle-level model can then be implemented in large-scale models
of granular flows that are used to predict granular flow and segregation in a
wide range of particle handling processes. The results of this research, which
will be carried out in collaboration with researchers from Procter and Gamble
and Dow, will provide practical approaches to enhance mixing (or segregation) of
granular materials, which can be utilized to improve and enhance industrial
processes in diverse applications ranging from chemicals to pharmaceuticals to
foodstuffs to consumer products. The research team will engage students at
graduate and undergraduate levels, especially those from underrepresented
groups, and provide them with opportunities for research training in
collaboration with their industrial counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until
recently, processing approaches to prevent segregation of granular materials
have been ad hoc, often resulting in operating conditions that are inefficient.
An advection-diffusion-segregation model with a shear rate-based segregation
flux model developed by the research team has made it possible to rationally
design systems to overcome many of these problems. However, the key particle-
based parameter for the segregation flux model is not well understood, not
easily predicted for particles of varying size or density, and not based on
first principles. This project focuses on developing a predictive framework for
particle-level segregation to: (1) Understand the fundamental physical
mechanisms of segregation at the particle level; and (2) Develop a predictive
segregation model that includes the effects of both particle size and density.
Discrete element method (DEM) simulations will be used in which the flow and
segregation conditions can be manipulated, sometimes in ways that are not
possible experimentally, along with theoretical modeling to connect macroscale
continuum models with segregation forces on individual particles. This project
moves beyond previous research by considering segregation flux for combined size
and density, a much more difficult problem than either one alone. The approaches
and tools developed in the project will play an important role in the design of
particle processing systems to enhance mixing and prevent segregation of
granular materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.