* 1929450
* HRRBAA: Paleontological reconnaissance of a potential early Miocene catarrhine site in the Turkana Basin
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Craig Feibel, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2021
* USD 35,000.00

The Miocene (~23-5 million years ago) is a period of primate evolution critical
to understanding the roots and diversification of the group that includes
ourselves and our close ape relatives. Though many primates are known from this
time period, their paleobiology and evolutionary relationships are not well
understood. This project will investigate the extent of paleontological and
geological data from a potentially early Miocene site - Napenagila South - in
West Turkana, Kenya. The site was unexpectedly discovered in 2018 when primate
teeth and an abundance of fauna were found. Preliminary observations of the
teeth suggest that they may belong to a previously unknown extinct ape species.
Systematic data collection and analysis will be used to confirm preliminary
geological observations, and the researchers will excavate the area where the
primate teeth were found. Training, mentorship, and research opportunities in
the field and laboratory will be extended to students, including individuals
from groups underrepresented in STEM. The project also will foster and expand
international collaborations with Kenyan researchers and students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will conduct fieldwork at Napenagila South
and perform subsequent lab analyses in order to determine the extent of the
sediments and conduct a detailed assessment of the site's geological context,
obtain additional samples to more precisely constrain the site's dates, and
collect and conduct analyses of primate and other mammalian fossils. Local
stratigraphic sequences will be measured, described, and sampled in detail.
Laboratory characterization of the sediments, along with separation of mineral
phases for isotopic dating, will be undertaken at Rutgers University. Field
protocols for the collection of faunal fossil specimens have already been
developed by the PIs and will be employed at Napenagila South. Field data will
be entered into the national fossil database and added to the archive
established and maintained by the Turkana Basin Institute. This grant is jointly
supported by the Biological Anthropology and Sedimentary Geology &amp;
Paleobiology programs at NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.