* 1929899
* Conference - Nano-Micromaterials for Circular economy and Sustainability in the East Asia Pacific
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Sudipta Seal, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 07/31/2020
* USD 48,546.00

The conference in nano-micromaterials of circular economy and sustainability, to
be held at National University of Singapore, Singapore from Aug 29th to Sep 1st,
2019, will bring United States researchers and students together in a
collaborative and learning environment. This will stimulate increased joint
interactions and research collaborations between Americans and Asian researchers
in the emerging circular economy field. The conference will be beneficial to the
U.S. economy as well as to the regional and global economies, addressing the
biological and environmental implications of nanoscale materials. Addressing the
complex and critical issues surrounding the responsible development of nano-
micromaterials is important for both society and the environment. Technological
advancement has often resulted in the simultaneous emergence of adverse effects
for either human health, the ecosystem or both. It is envisioned that this
conference will provide an opportunity to discuss important research activities
relating to the circular economy and sustainability in nanoscience and
technology. Specifically, the conference will be a unique forum for leaders in
government policy and scientific researchers to interface and dialogue with
respect to the practical merits of this emerging field. It is expected that
several hundred materials scientists and engineers, industrial partners,
students, government officials, social and physical scientists, and
toxicologists would attend this conference. This composition of participants
will enable the promotion of dynamic discussion and facilitate the exchange of
new ideas. The conference would support a minimum of twenty to thirty research
students including females and those underrepresented within STEM fields. Hence,
the conference will provide networking and educational opportunities for
scientists and engineers at various career stages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Circular Economy (CE) has gained a steady momentum and
popularity and has established three material pillars as its foundation. They
are (i) regeneration of resources, (ii) maximize resources within the lifetime,
and (iii) usage of nano-micro materials waste as a resource. In parallel, the
materials engineering and nanotechnology research has started embracing the use
of artificial intelligence and big data as new tools. Therefore, a new platform
is to be established in the emerging areas of artificial intelligence- and data
science- driving education and research, as well as repositioning the
manufacturing sector to utilize the opportunities made available in cyber
physical space (called the fourth industrial revolution). Hence, combining the
tools and methodologies of nano-micromaterials with Circular Economy would
provide a platform for furthering the capacities for recycle, redesign,
remanufacture, reduce, and recover, as well as enable improved lifecycle
engineering and assessment of sustainable nano materials. The current emphasis
and focus within the U.S. on circular economy will enable this scientific
meeting to propel the development of nano-micromaterials for circular economy
towards achieving sustainable systems. The main topics which will be discussed
are namely: regeneration of resources in sustainable nano-biotechnology,
sustainable waste management, biological interactions of regenerated nanoscale
materials, resource lifetime extension through nanotechnology, innovation and
green economy, and nano-waste impact, will be focus areas. A specialized
conference on circular economy and sustainable nano-micro materials, involving
the best intellectuals in this area, will enable a more responsible approach to
the development of this technology to be outlined for U.S.
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.