* 1929934
* Evolution of a developmental gene regulatory network during a life history switch in Heliocidaris
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Gregory Wray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Multicellular organisms exhibit an astonishing diversity of life history
strategies, including a wide range of lifespan, time to first reproduction,
lifetime fecundity, and maternal investment. Life history traits often evolve
independently of adult morphology and are a major influence on how organisms
interact with each other and adapt to their environment. A particularly striking
life history change in animals is accelerated embryonic development, which is
favored under a variety of conditions including high predation and limited
resources. A mature body of theory provides insights into why such changes in
life histories evolve, but far less is known about how. The central objective of
this project is to identify the genetic and molecular basis for changes in
specific traits during a substantive shift in life history. The study system is
a group of sea urchin species that are very closely related yet highly divergent
in terms of life history traits, including striking differences in fecundity,
larval form, and rate of early development. This project uses cutting-edge
technologies, including epigenetic assays, single-cell sequencing, and genome
editing to identify changes in gene function that contributed to a suite of life
history traits. These studies will provide basic insights into how life
histories and developmental mechanisms evolve. Understanding how alterations in
molecular mechanisms contribute to traits and to adaptation is fundamental
science that has important applications in medicine, agriculture, and
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life history traits are a major component of
biological diversity and constitute a fundamental set of adaptations in
multicellular organisms, but their developmental and genetic basis remains
poorly understood, particularly in relation to morphology and physiology. This
project seeks to identify changes in the genome and in developmental mechanisms
that produced a dramatic life history transformation within the sea urchin genus
Heliocidaris, namely from planktotrophy (small eggs, high fecundity, feeding
larvae) and lecithotrophy (large eggs, low fecundity, nonfeeding larvae). This
genus is well suited to addressing the motivating questions because it contains
species with dramatically divergent life histories despite very close
phylogenetic relationships, and because the ancestral developmental gene
regulatory network (GRN) of sea urchins has been characterized in detail. The
goals of the project are to learn how critical molecular mechanisms of early
development were altered during the course of evolution so as to accelerate
premetamorphic the lecithotroph, and how they did so without perturbing other
traits. These goals will be achieved by comprehensively characterizing
regulatory states during development to identify candidate regulatory molecules
and interactions that have been conserved or altered during the origin of
lecithotrophy; experimentally perturbing candidate proteins (nodes in the GRN)
to learn about their developmental function, likely interactors, and
contributions to the origin of lecithotrophy; and identifying and perturbing
candidate gene regulatory elements that may mediate altered interactions (edges
in the GRN) to understand their molecular function and contributions to the
origin of lecithotrophy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.