* 1929263
* Single Crystal Growth by Solid State Reaction Synthesis: Informatics Driven Microstructural Analysis and Design
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Helen Chan, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 636,868.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This research explores the synthesis, structure, and
properties of a new class of ceramics, i.e. compounds composed of metallic and
non-metallic elements. Ceramic single crystal materials, where the atomic
arrangement is the same throughout the bulk sample, are desirable because of
their unique properties. Unfortunately, they are usually difficult to fabricate,
requiring specialized equipment and very high temperatures. This project
explores a novel solid-state method for growing a single crystal ceramic,
starting from a mixture of two different ceramic compositions. The potential
exists for the discovery of ceramic crystals with new and interesting properties
for next generation structural and electronic applications. Furthermore, the
reverse process, i.e., changing from a single material to two distinct materials
can be exploited to create composite materials that are microscopic mixtures of
either different ceramics, or a metal and a ceramic. The scale and
interconnectivity of these mixtures can be tailored to modify the overall
physical properties. Students are undergoing training in advanced techniques
encompassing both experimental and computational materials science. They will
typically find employment in high tech industries or government/industrial
laboratories. Associated outreach activities are directed towards encouraging
K-12 students to pursue careers in science and engineering, with a particular
emphasis on underrepresented groups. These efforts include the creation of
bilingual educational modules, as well as participation in programs such as: 1)
Materials Camps for high school students and teachers, 2) CHOICES (Charting
Horizons and Opportunities In Careers in Engineering and Science), which is
aimed at middle school girls, and 3) STAR (Students That Are Ready), which
targets economically and academically disadvantaged and/or at-risk 8th to 12th
grade students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Entropy-stabilized
oxides are complex ceramics that are stable only above a certain critical
temperature. To date, this material class has received little prior attention
from the research community. Recently a new type of transformation was observed
whereby bulk single crystal growth was induced by solid state synthesis,
starting with a two-phase, polycrystalline precursor. Conversely, the eutectoid-
like transformation of these materials when annealed below the critical
temperature yields novel two-phase morphologies. The project combines experiment
and an informatics-based modelling approach to seek a fundamental understanding
of the transformation mechanisms. In particular, the research aims to identify
the materials' parameters that together with the initial microstructure, define
the morphological and textural evolution of the resultant structure. Graduate
students and undergraduates are being trained in state-of-the art high
temperature materials synthesis and characterization techniques, as well as
modelling of nucleation and growth processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.