* 1929465
* Conference on Equitable Resilience (ER): A Necessary and Under-investigated Aspect of Sustainable Urban Systems (SUS); Cambridge, Massachusetts; Summer 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Miho Mazereeuw, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 10/31/2019
* USD 49,998.00

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Norman B. Leventhal Center for
Advanced Urbanism (LCAU) will host a Summer 2019 conference on Equitable
Resilience. Equitable Resilience makes an important contribution to Sustainable
Urban Systems by linking research on urban response to environmental stresses
with research on the social distribution of those stresses and responses.
Important examples include coastal city response to sea level rise, urban
flooding beyond the 100-year floodplain, and planned relocation from hazardous
areas. The conference aims to go beyond documenting linkages between resilience
and equity, toward conceptual and analytical frameworks for re-designing those
linkages. The workshops bring together scholars from urban design, urban
planning, and building technology, along with urban environmental scientists. It
has four panels: 1) Urban ecology, society, and resilient design; 2) Equitable
access to urban information, technology, and resources 3) Equitable processes of
urban relocation; and 4) Convergence between equitable resilience and
sustainable urban systems. In each case, the workshops employ a network-of-
networks approach for international knowledge dissemination and exchange, and
makes that knowledge available through multiple scientific and educational
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 Summer conference will integrate
research on urban resilience, equity and sustainability. The workshops employ an
international network-of-networks methodology to engage scientists, planners,
and designers associated with MIT labs and centers to wider research networks.
The workshops consist of two substantive and two integrative panels. The first
integrative panel on urban ecology, social science, and design examines multiple
levers for coordinating conceptual, analytical, and normative domains of
equitable resilience through chains of modeled and non-modeled inquiry. The
first substantive panel assesses strategies for reducing widening gaps in social
access to urban resilience data, technologies, and resources using statistical
cluster analysis of participants? urban databases as well as innovative social
media apps, mapping, and hacking methods. The second substantive panel addresses
downstream impacts of environmental hazards by extending Nansen Principles on
climate-amplified displacement to equitable strategies for voluntary
resettlement from high hazard areas. The final integrative panel revisits the
workshops' hypotheses regarding the value of Equitable Resilience research,
planning, and design for Sustainable Urban Systems. Each panel invites leading
peer reviewers to critically assess the work presented and promising directions.
The network-of-networks methodology helps ensure wider critical review and
reception of the workshop process, outputs, and
proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.