* 1929145
* RII Track-4: Establishing Baseline Critical Zone Conditions in Mississippi Prior to the Onset of Paleocene-Eocene Hyperthermals
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Brian Platt, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 174,430.00

Predicting impacts of future global climate change on terrestrial ecosystems
often relies on ancient climate data from the geologic record. Such data are
particularly useful for providing information over long time spans that are not
possible to obtain from historical records. The best ancient analogs for the
current rates of rising global temperatures and atmospheric greenhouse gas
concentrations are warming episodes known as hyperthermals, a number of which
occurred between 55 and 52 million years ago. Accurately reconstructing the
impacts and magnitude of ancient climate change during hyperthermals, however,
requires knowledge of the "normal" background conditions before the climate
extremes occurred. The goal of this research is to provide crucial information
about background conditions in ancient soil ecosystems from geological cores
that sample pre-hyperthermal intervals in Mississippi. At the same time, the
principle investigator will receive training on processing geologic core samples
at a world-class core laboratory that will enable him to continue this important
research at his home institution. In addition to advancing climate and soil
science, this research will contribute to domestic prosperity by training
students to perform the skills that are in demand by US employers who rely on
geological coring associated with well drilling (oil &amp; gas and groundwater
industries).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fellowship will enable the PI and a
graduate assistant to make two extended visits to the Continental Scientific
Drilling Coordination Office (CSDCO), a world-class, NSF-funded geological core
lab. Existing core from Mississippi will be transported to the CSDCO and used
for training, while generating multiple datasets that will satisfy the research
objectives of 1) characterizing early Paleocene paleosols and 2) associated
facies, and 3) improving chronostratigraphic control within these sediments.
This research seeks to establish baseline physical, chemical, and biological
aspects of Earth's critical zone prior to the hyperthermals that are commonly
used as analogs for projected climate change. This will enable more precise
evaluation of the magnitude of climate-driven changes in terrestrial systems.
Training will be overseen by the CSDCO director, who will ensure that the
following training objectives are met: 1) gain knowledge of proper archival
storage techniques for core, 2) learn efficient, standardized workflows for
sampling core, 3) become proficient at 14 new methods of core analysis and
associated data interpretation, 4) become familiar with logistics of
independently arranging contractual services to drill future core samples to
sustain the PI's post-fellowship research program. The PI's newly learned skills
will be easily transferrable to his research lab at the University of
Mississippi. Furthermore, his enhanced research-based perspective on climate
change will enable him to provide recommendations for national carbon emission
policy to mitigate harmful impacts of future increases in atmospheric CO2
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.