* 1929118
* EAGER: Feasibility Study of Epitaxial Oxide Resistive Field Effect Transistor (EOR-FET)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Ethan Ahn, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2020
* USD 99,853.00

The need to accelerate computing speed while maintaining the same or similar
level of power consumption is one of the oldest and most challenging problems in
microelectronics. In this EAGER project, an exploratory idea of using epitaxial
perovskite oxide heterostructure is investigated as a novel platform for high
performance, energy-efficient computing. The approaches developed in this
proposal are creative and original because although there have been many
research and development efforts on the new logic devices, there is minimal work
on how oxide thin films can lead the way to better computing. Thus, if
successful, this research will lead researchers to rethink the role of oxides in
computing devices and ultimately contribute to tackling today's most significant
computing challenge. In this project, an innovative device solution is
introduced by synergistically combining multiple disciplines in advanced
materials. The primary educational goal of this project is to directly integrate
the state-of-the-art research outcome into the curriculum of UTSA, which is a
research-intensive, Hispanic-serving institution. An educational barrier that
has existed as a great challenge in training underrepresented minority students
with project-based research is expected to be overcome by developing the virtual
laboratory environment. The specific research objective of this proposal is to
determine the best ways of constructing the electrostrictive field-effect
transistor (FET) device structure and understand the main factors that
contribute to its superior device performance in terms of speed, power, and
reliability. Based on preliminary data, the central hypothesis is that the
epitaxial oxide heterostructure, prepared by the advanced oxide-MBE (molecular
beam epitaxy) technique, will achieve maximum strain transfer from the top
piezoelectric gate oxide layer to the bottom memristive channel layer, thereby
leading to successful demonstration of the electrostrictive FET. To test
feasibility of such a novel device structure, both the theoretical and
experimental approaches will be adopted to investigate each oxide layer as key
components of the high-speed, low-power logic device. This research will enhance
a fundamental understanding of how a piezoelectric material can be best matched
with a channel material for maximum electrostrictive FET device performance. The
proposed work is of great intellectual significance because ultimately, it will
provide a right insight on how this innovative technology will be positioned as
the next-generation logic as benchmarked with other existing or emerging device
candidates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.