* 1929270
* 3rd Summer School on Cognitive Robotics: Proposed Summer School
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Heather Culbertson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 11/30/2019
* USD 11,232.00

This award provides partial support for a summer school that will provide an
intensive and hands-on education experience to graduate students on the topic of
cognitive robotics. The summer school will bring together students and experts
in both robotics and artificial intelligence, providing the attendees with a
strong introduction to both fields and knowledge of how they can be combined
through Cognitive Robotics. Students attending the summer school will gain
insight into planning, reasoning with risk and uncertainty, robust execution,
perception, manipulation, and robot learning. The interdisciplinary nature of
the summer school will expose graduate students to research and methodologies
combining robotics and cognitive systems, educating and creating the next
generation of researchers in this field. It is anticipated that the summer
school will have a broad impact on the research community through facilitating
new research collaborations in the field by bringing diverse researchers
together to share ideas and knowledge. The travel and participation scholarships
funded through this award will serve to ensure a broad participation that
maximizes community impact. The content will be streamed live as well as
archived online making it possible for a much larger number of students from
academia and industry to benefit from the summer
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer school will be held July 17-21, 2019 at
the University of Southern California in Los Angeles, California. The summer
school will be a combination of invited talks and tutorials that are designed to
introduce researchers and students to issues in planning and executing robot
behavior from experts in both robotics and artificial intelligence. Daily hands-
on labs will provide students with experience with robotic hardware and software
tools for developing robot behaviors. The summer school concludes with a grand
challenge combining and testing what the students have learned during the week
through a hands-on task with robot hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.