* 1929269
* IIS: RI: Travel Proposal: Student Travel Support for the 2019 Association for Computational Linguistics Student Research Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Hanna Hajishirzi, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 11/30/2019
* USD 19,980.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing. This
is one of the primary application areas for researchers in machine learning and
artificial intelligence. The proceedings of the ACL's annual meeting provide the
foundation of the field; it is the most cited and most respected publication in
computational linguistics. Thus, it is also the most important gathering of
researchers in computational linguistics and natural language processing, and
represents one of the most important opportunities for young researchers to
understand the field, build professional connections, and gain exposure. ACL has
a twenty-year history of supporting these formative activities by holding a
student research workshop. The workshops have proven popular: attracting dozens
of submissions from highly qualified applicants.

The student research workshop will be a part of the 2019 meeting of the ACL held
from July 28th to Aug 2nd, 2019. The workshop will solicit submissions in two
categories: (1) *thesis proposals* for advanced students who have decided on a
thesis topic and wish to receive feedback and (2) *research papers* describing
completed work or work in progress with significant preliminary results. Each
accepted paper will be assigned an established research mentor who will meet
with the student during the conference to provide individual feedback. Both
paper types will be presented in the poster session of the main conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.