* 1929489
* Dynamic Homeostatic Plasticity within Cerebellar Circuitry
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2020,05/31/2024
* Victor Han, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The mechanisms that underlie the ability to acquire new knowledge about the
external world, to remember it, and to use the information to behave
appropriately and adaptively is a long-standing interest of humankind.
Experience-dependent plasticity of the synaptic connections between neurons is
generally accepted as the cellular mechanism with which a neural circuitry
acquires and stores new information, commonly known as learning and memory. This
project studies the homeostatic mechanisms that regulate the positive feedback
nature of synaptic plasticity, that is, the mechanisms that bound activity
levels within an appropriate dynamic range to preserve the ability of plasticity
near saturation of activity as well as near absence of activity. How such
complex homeostatic tasks are accomplished in the brain is poorly understood.
Here, these homeostatic mechanisms are studied in the cerebellum of the mormyrid
fish, whose cerebellar circuitry as well as its outputs and inputs are well
defined and accessible for detailed examination. Using a combination of
electrophysiological, imaging, and pharmacological approaches, the investigators
characterize changes in the input/output relationships of cerebellar Purkinje
cells during long-term potentiation and long-term depression of synaptic input
to these cells, and begin to elucidate the underlying mechanisms. The results
will have broad implications for understanding of the neural substrates of
learning and memory. The project also involves outreach to Seattle area
elementary and middle schools, to teach about behavioral plasticity of electric
fish.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Synaptic plasticity is generally accepted as the
cellular mechanism with which a neural circuitry acquires and stores new
information, commonly known as learning and memory. The most studied forms of
plasticity include Hebbian long-term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD).
Hebbian plasticity operates in a positive loop, leading to runaway neuronal
activity and requiring additional compensatory processes to stabilize the neural
circuitry. Many forms of homeostatic plasticity have been suggested as providing
such compensatory role. However, unlike Hebbian synaptic plasticity, the
demonstrated forms of homeostatic plasticity require very different time courses
to be induced (hours to days versus seconds to minutes). Furthermore, modeling
studies suggest that the slow evolution of homeostatic plasticity observed in
experiments is insufficient to prevent instabilities of Hebbian plasticity. This
project examines rapid, compensatory synaptic processes that could potentially
prevent the instabilities associated with the positive feedback nature of
Hebbian plasticity. Using dual whole-cell recording in slice reparations of the
mormyrid cerebellum, the investigator has found that the strength of a Purkinje
cells output synapses onto their target cells is up- and downregulated following
LTD and LTP at the same cell’s input synapses, respectively. Here, a combination
of in-vitro electrophysiological, imaging, and pharmacological approaches extend
these observations to examine the characteristics and mechanisms underlying this
bidirectional regulation of a cell’s output transmission following Hebbian
plasticity at its input synapses. Establishment of this form of rapid, dynamic
homeostatic plasticity and its underlying mechanisms will yield valuable
insights into elementary processes of synaptic
plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.