* 1929114
* NSF-BSF:  Defining the relationship between DNA replication kinetics and macromolecular protein assembly at the centromere
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kerry Bloom, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 900,000.00

The inheritance of genetic information requires that DNA be replicated and
packaged into a form with molecular "adaptors" or "handles" that allow the DNA
to be efficiently segregated into daughter cells. However, little is known about
the relationship between these two steps of inheritance. This project will lay
the foundation of scientific principles governing the coordination of DNA
replication and these early steps of its subsequent segregation during cell
division. This work will also contribute new understandings of how these DNA
metabolic processes occur in real-time within a living cell. The project will
result in the interdisciplinary education of graduate students in Israel and the
US, cross-training them to critically evaluate experimental techniques in cell
biology, mathematics, statistics, and thermodynamics. To further broaden the
impact of the project, the Principal Investigator and members of the research
groups will contribute to several outreach events to convey the complexity and
elegance of DNA inheritance to the general public. PI Bloom will mentor in the
Kenan Fellows Program for Teacher leadership, a well-established STEM teacher
leadership program in North Carolina. To facilitate broader participation of
underrepresented groups in science, the PI will mentor in the Science and Math
Achievement and Resourcefulness Track (SMART) program sponsored by the NC-Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (NC-LSAMP) in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Centromeres are essential for kinetochore assembly and
chromosome segregation during the eukaryotic cell division. At each cell cycle,
the complex of centromere DNA and kinetochore proteins must be disassembled to
allow DNA replication and then reassembled to allow microtubule attachment and
chromosome segregation. Despite extensive studies, little is known regarding the
interplay between replisome progression through centromeric regions and the
assembly of functional kinetochores at these sites. This project will combine
genetics, cell biology, live-cell microscopy, and computational methods to study
the relationship between DNA replication, centromere establishment, kinetochore
assembly, and chromosome segregation during mitosis. Specifically, to
investigate the importance of DNA configurations to centromere assembly,
computer simulations and recently developed live-cell imaging approaches for
monitoring replication fork progression through active and inactive centromeric
regions will be used. This integrative approach, applied to a variety of mutant
strains and conditions, will enable the project to shed new light on different
aspects of centromeric DNA replication, genome stability, chromosome segregation
and cell division. This will provide critical insight into how transcription of
centromeric regions affects kinetochore assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.