* 1929555
* Testing a Flipped Classroom Model to Support Engaged Student Learning in Introductory Statistics
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2020,02/28/2023
* Dale Bowman, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 02/28/2023
* USD 297,822.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high quality STEM education. It
intends do so by improving student engagement and learning in statistics.
Understanding statistics is an important part of STEM literacy, and such
understanding can be useful in making decisions. The project will focus on
improving an introductory statistical literacy course that meets the
University’s general education requirement in mathematics. As a result, the
course enrolls about 1000 students per year. The project expects that student
engagement and learning in this course will be improved by providing online
lectures, with classtime reserved for doing problems and activities. This
approach is often called a “flipped” classroom. Since the introductory
statistics course is usually taught through in-class lecture alone, the project
can compare performance of students in course sections that use the flipped
classroom versus sections that use the traditional lecture classroom. As a
result, it has the potential to increase understanding about how students learn
statistics and about the impact of learning in flipped classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives include: (a) to determine whether
the flipped classroom model differently impacts students; and (b) if such
differences occur, to provide quantitative and qualitative measures of those
differences. The project team will use a data-driven, evidence-based mixed
methods approach to evaluate the effectiveness of the flipped classroom model.
It will also address research questions, including: To what extent and in what
ways does the flipped classroom model contribute to students’ understanding and
performance in elementary statistics? Results from research and formative
evaluation will be used to continuously examine the effectiveness of the flipped
classroom model on student learning and attitudes. The project will use this
information to modify and refine the course components to increase course
effectiveness. Summative evaluation and feedback will be based on classroom data
and student attitudinal instruments. These results will guide development of the
final model of an effective flipped introductory statistics course, which will
be disseminated so that other institutions can replicate or adapt it. The
project will consider impacts on groups of students, including students from
groups typically underrepresented in STEM disciplines and first-generation
students. This project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education Program: Education and Human Resources, which supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.