* 1929565
* Tailoring multivalent nanoparticle adhesion for efficient and superselective targeting of cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Jun Allard, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,965.00

The ability to target imaging agents or drugs specifically to diseases has been
a major medical goal for decades. Targeting is attractive because it would
direct more of the agent to the disease site, which improves potency, while also
reducing concentrations in normal tissues, which prevents detrimental side
effects. Nanoparticle carriers have received considerable attention for
targeting applications due to numerous attributes including high-loading
capacity, protection of the agent, facile attachment of targeting molecules, and
favorable pharmacokinetics. Another advantage of nanoparticles is that they are
large enough to serve as a scaffold for forming multiple bonds with target
cells, which is referred to as multivalent adhesion. It is well known that
multivalent adhesion can enhance binding strength, but little is known about how
this effect can be controlled. A major reason that a high level of control is
necessary is because disease biomarkers are often present on both normal and
diseased cells, but at different levels. Ideally the nanoparticle would display
a switch-like change in binding such that there was no adhesion to normal cells
and maximal adhesion to diseased cells to maximize targeting selectivity.
However, achieving this type of behavior has remained elusive. Thus, entirely
new strategies and technologies are needed that go beyond basic adhesion
concepts, and instead enable adhesion to be tailored in a dynamic manner. If
successful, molecular targeting of diseases inside the body would dramatically
change diagnostic and treatment paradigms, enabling early detection and
personalized medical practices. Concepts underlying this work will be conveyed
in educational outreach programs focused toward K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students to spur interest in biomedical engineering. The educational
plan involves: (1) developing new course content, (2) mentoring student
researchers at various education levels, and (3) developing K-12 outreach
programs to encourage young students to pursue science and medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this proposal is to
develop a versatile and robust computational design platform for controlling
multivalent nanoparticle binding and achieving super selective adhesion. This
will be accomplished by significantly advancing the novel experimental and
computational simulation methods developed by the research team in previous
work. The researchers will use vascular inflammation and the target molecule
ICAM-1 as a model system. ICAM-1 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the
ICAM1 gene. This gene encodes a cell surface glycoprotein which is typically
expressed on endothelial cells and cells of the immune system. The PIs will
first add new simulation capabilities, including the phase of initial attachment
from free solution and extension of the methods to nanorods. The PIs will then
focus on experimentally testing new molecular bond properties. Finally, the PIs
will adapt the simulation to live cells and design and test prospective affinity
molecule-nanoparticle formulations that can exhibit super selective targeting
behavior. This complex behavior is currently unprecedented, and thus will
require the new tools to understand. At the conclusion of the work, the
simulation will be positioned to serve as a predictive tool for designing
nanocarriers that possess unique and powerful adhesive properties. Concepts
underlying this work will be conveyed in educational outreach programs focused
toward K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students to spur interest in biomedical
engineering. The educational plan involves: (1) developing new course content,
(2) mentoring student researchers at various education levels, and (3)
developing K-12 outreach programs to encourage young students to pursue science
and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.