* 1929355
* Pollen:  A model system for computational and experimental study of plant biomechanics at the cellular scale
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Anders Carlsson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 08/31/2023
* USD 954,779.00

The ability to sense and respond to mechanical force is critical for the proper
function of cells, tissues, and organisms in all kingdoms of life. The emerging
field of mechanobiology seeks to understand the molecular and cellular
mechanisms underlying these responses. This project investigates the
mechanobiology of plants, which involves the dynamic integration of internal and
external mechanical stimuli throughout growth and development. The overarching
goal of this research is to develop the Arabidopsis thaliana pollen grain into a
useful system for the study of plant mechanobiology. As pollen is particularly
susceptible to heat and humidity, understanding how pollen grains respond to
water stresses may help improve food security in a changing climate. Podcasting
as well as existing structures for elementary school curriculum development at
Washington University will be used to recruit, mentor, and retain a diverse
global community of motivated plant biologists and to encourage an appreciation
for plant biology in the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
advance our knowledge of cell mechanobiology by investigating three key
components of the Arabidopsis pollen grain during the processes of hydration,
germination and tube growth: mechanosensitive ion channels, the cell wall, and
the plasma membrane. All three aims integrate computational approaches (kinetic
model equations, finite element modeling, and computational fluid dynamics) with
experimental approaches (molecular genetics, live-imaging, plant physiology, and
electrophysiology). Three hypotheses will be tested: 1) Mechanosensitive ion
channels serve as osmotic safety valves that tune hydrostatic pressure during
pollen hydration, germination and tube growth; 2) Local differences in the
structure and composition of the pollen grain cell wall dictate the mechanics of
hydration and germination; and 3) The pollen plasma membrane area and the number
of active mechanosensitive channels in it change during hydration, and these
changes affect pollen grain mechanics. The work will involve the training of
undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the Cellular Dynamics and Function program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physiological Mechanisms and
Biomechanics program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.