* 1929170
* RII Track-4: PermaSense: Investigating Permafrost Landscapes in Transition Using Multidimensional Remote Sensing, Data Fusion, and Machine Learning Techniques
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Benjamin Jones, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 11/30/2023
* USD 295,256.00

Permafrost underlies around 25% of the Northern Hemisphere terrestrial
landscape. Its degradation is impacting northern landscapes and societies. With
an increase in the number of remote sensing platforms since the early 2000s, the
ability to detect and measure permafrost-region disturbances over large areas
has become more feasible. This research, a project we call PermaSense, will
provide funding to increase the research capacity of a non-tenure track Research
Assistant Faculty member and an early career post-doctoral researcher through
extended visits, training, and collaboration at the University of Connecticut
(UConn) Department of Natural Resources &amp; the Environment (DNRE). PermaSense
will allow the PI and postdoc to build upon their permafrost-region field and
remote sensing research program by acquiring new data fusion and machine
learning techniques. PermaSense products are directly relevant to the State of
Alaska and the nation. The skills and knowledge transfer gained during this
project will increase the capacity of permafrost research and remote sensing at
the University of Alaska Fairbanks. The research addresses several of the
Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee (IARPC) performance elements
related to permafrost, terrestrial ecosystems, coastal resilience, and
environmental intelligence as specified in the FY2017-2021 Arctic Research
Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permafrost is defined as ground that remains at or
below 0 degrees Celsius for at least two consecutive years. Disturbance and
warming of near-surface permafrost may lead to widespread terrain instability in
ice-rich permafrost regions, impacting ecosystems, hydrology, infrastructure,
society, and soil-carbon dynamics. Remote sensing is an important resource for
observing, documenting, and better understanding landscape change from local to
pan-Arctic scales. However, no one remote sensing tool is particularly suited
for detecting and observing the suite of landscape change scenarios associated
with transitioning permafrost. PermaSense will investigate myriad land surface
changes occurring in permafrost regions using multidimensional remote sensing,
data fusion, and machine learning techniques. PermaSense will enhance
methodological developments and adaptations to unseal faster, deeper and more
accurately analyze large volumes of multidimensional remote-sensing data to
address the guiding research question: How extensive is contemporary permafrost
degradation in the Arctic and Subarctic? We will conduct an analysis of
multidimensional remote sensing observations at four representative permafrost-
region study areas that capture the variability in the lateral extent of
permafrost. The inherent differences in ecology, climate, landscape history, and
their role in transitioning permafrost regions will be tested using common
approaches across all sites as well as value-added products available for
particular regions. PermaSense will develop an online resource and toolset that
will provide spatially and temporally scalable information on permafrost region
disturbances and a tool for local planning activities, the scientific community,
and regional decision-makers tasked with responding to permafrost regions in
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.