* 1929195
* RII Track-4: Electrochemical Modulation of Permeability and Selectivity of Conductive MXene Membranes
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Majid Beidaghi, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 11/30/2023
* USD 183,801.00

The development of efficient membrane-based water desalination and purification
technologies is essential for addressing the global challenges of water scarcity
and pollution. An ideal separation membrane should show high permeance
(transport of desired species) and high selectivity (rejection of undesired
species), two properties that are often inversely correlated. In processes such
as water desalination and removal of heavy metals from water, charged ions are
separated from water by size exclusion or electrostatic interactions with a
membrane. Two-dimensional (2D) materials are crystalline materials consisting of
one or few layers of atoms and have attracted much interest in recent years for
the fabrication of efficient membranes. Nanoporous or lamellar membranes based
on 2D materials can potentially separate ionic species from water at higher
rates and more efficiently compared to current membranes. The main goal of this
project is to understand the effects of applied electrochemical potential on the
separation performance of conductive membranes based on 2D transition metal
carbides (MXenes). To achieve this goal, the PI will partner with researchers at
Northeastern University to fabricate nanoporous and lamellar MXene membranes and
study their separation properties. In addition, this project will provide
opportunities to train graduate students in advanced membrane materials
synthesis and characterization methods and will establish a long-term
collaboration between Auburn University and Northeastern University. The PI will
also integrate the result of this research into a recently developed course
focused on applications of 2D materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electroactive
membranes based on 2D MXenes can potentially separate metal ions and other
charged species from water at higher rates and efficiencies compared to current
membranes. This project will provide a scientific framework for designing
electroactive nanoporous and lamellar membranes based on conductive 2D MXenes.
Single-layer flakes of two different MXenes, Ti3C2 and Ti2C, will be synthesized
and used for the fabrication of the membranes. Experimental measurement setups
and procedures used in this project will enable accurate measurements of
membrane properties to understand the effects of applied electrochemical
potentials on the permeability and selectivity of the fabricated membranes. We
hypothesize that by enhancing the charge exclusion mechanism of MXene membranes
through an external electrochemical potential, membranes with larger
nanochannels or nanopores but similar or better rejection properties can be
designed. The research team will investigate the influence of the magnitude and
sign of the applied potential on the selectivity of membranes towards various
cations and anions in water. While this project is specifically focused on
MXenes as membrane materials, its research plan addresses fundamental questions
about the interactions of ions and charged membranes, and the results of the
proposed research may apply to membranes fabricated using other 2D materials.
The research results and conclusions will be disseminated through publications
and presentations to both scientific and public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.