* 1929299
* 2019 Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference: Discovering Chemical Processes and Mechanisms in a Changing Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Mak Saito, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 39,120.00

Every two years, the Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference brings
together leading members of the scientific community, graduate students,
postdocs, and early career scientists to discuss new, cutting-edge research
projects in marine chemistry within an informal setting. The National Science
Foundation, along with the Gordon Research Conference, will co-sponsor the
participation of at least 35 graduate students/postdocs/early career scientists
and 50 invited speakers/discussion leaders/chairs to the 2019 Chemical
Oceanography Gordon Research Conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2019, the
Chemical Oceanography Gordon Research Conference will be held July 14-19, 2019
at Holderness School in Holderness, New Hampshire. The theme for the conference
will be "Discovering Chemical Processes and Mechanisms in a Changing Ocean? and
aims to refocus our attention on the fundamentals by discovering chemical
processes and mechanisms in a changing ocean". The primary goal of the
conference is to provide a forum that brings together scientists that are
leading contributors in the field of marine chemistry along with graduate
students and postdocs to exchange ideas on new, innovative research.
Presentations and discussions at the 2019 Gordon Conference will center around
the following session topics: (1) Biogeochemistry at Environmental Interfaces;
(2) Biogeochemical Signatures and Processes; (3) Reaction Rates in the Oceans;
(4) Trace Metal Biogeochemistry and Marine Bioinorganic Chemistry; (5)
Connecting Biochemical Processes to Global Biogeochemistry; (6) Complex Chemical
Characterizations and Novel Instrumentation Applications; (7) The
Biogeochemistry and Geochemistry of Sedimentary Environments; (8) Late-Breaking
Topics; and (9) Chemical Signatures across Space and Time. The Chemical
Oceanography Gordon Research Conference has become recognized as an important
venue to exchange ideas in the interdisciplinary field of marine chemistry and
to forge new scientific alliances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.