* 1929983
* Building an Academic Community of Engineering Scholars to Increase Persistence and Transfer into Four-year Engineering and Computer Science Degree Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Shyam Kurup, College of Lake County
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 996,848.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention,
graduation, and transfer of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need. The project will support students at the College of
Lake County, which is a community college as well as a Hispanic Serving
Institution. Over its five-year duration, this project will provide up to three-
year scholarships to 125 students who are pursuing associate of science degrees
and who intend to transfer and complete a bachelor's degree in engineering or
computer science. Five additional university-level scholarships per year will be
awarded to students as they transfer. The project aims to increase student
persistence by linking scholarships with effective support activities, including
academic advising programs, tutoring and study sessions, makerspace activities,
internships, and enrolling Scholars as cohorts in special sections of Calculus,
Engineering Graphics, and Introduction to Engineering courses. Central to these
activities is the introduction of the Baxter Innovation Lab (Makerspace/Fab Lab)
as the engineering and computer science cultural hub. Because the College of
Lake County has a high population of underrepresented students, this project has
the potential to broaden participation in the engineering and computer science
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. There are two specific aims: 1) study the
effectiveness of enhanced community building at the College of Lake County; and
2) explore the impact of experiential learning and internships by examining how
both affect self-efficacy and sense of belonging. Considerable research has been
conducted about self-efficacy and student success. However, little data are
available about how a makerspace environment and/or a community college context
affect self-efficacy and student success. This project has the potential to help
fill some of these research gaps. The project will conduct educational
assessment and program evaluation to identify key interventions that promote
student success and to provide information that can be used to improve STEM
education at other institutions. Results from this work will be broadly
disseminated to a variety of audiences through digital outlets, presentations at
national conferences, and publications in peer-reviewed and trade journals. This
project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.