* 1929846
* 2019 Physics and Chemistry of Microfluidics Gordon Research Conference: Microfluidics for Studying Complex Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Cullen Buie, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2020
* USD 10,425.00

The tenth Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on the Physics and Chemistry of
Microfluidics will be held from June 16th through June 21st, 2019 at the Regal
Riverside Hotel in Hong Kong, China. The meeting will involve participants from
all research sectors including academia, industry, and the federal government.
This conference will offer a unique forum and intimate professional setting for
the exchange of new ideas, presentation and discussion of unpublished results,
speculative discussions, and opportunities for new interdisciplinary
collaborations among attendees. This project will fund participation of women,
underrepresented minorities, and early career researchers (graduate students,
postdocs, and early career scientists), in the meeting. Funds will be utilized
to offset registration fees for these participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
meeting provides a unique intellectual experience in which scientific
researchers from many different disciplines come together in an intimate forum
to discuss research and forge partnerships that are critical to the health and
growth of our highly multidisciplinary field. The meeting will have topics that
represent the latest advances in the field of microfluidics and nano-fluidics.
Topics that will be discussed in invited oral and poster sessions include
chemical and pharmaceutical synthesis, quantitative biology and biophysics,
energy and the environment, electro-kinetic separations, complex and multiphase
flows, systems biology, synthetic biology, additive manufacturing, precision
medicine, and organoids on a chip. These topics have broad fundamental and
applied scientific impact. Young scientists, including graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and young faculty, are invited to present their latest work
during several poster sessions at the conference. The poster sessions have been
dynamic and interactive and are an integral part of the research presentations.
A student led Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) will also be held the weekend before
the start of the GRC at the same location. The GRS is a two-day seminar that
brings together graduate students, post-docs, and other early career scientists
with comparable levels of experience to exchange new data and
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.