* 1929172
* RII Track-4: Understanding the Fundamental Thermal Physics in Metal Additive Manufacturing and its Influence on Part Microstructure and Distortion.
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,07/31/2022
* Prahalada Rao, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 148,629.00

The 3D printing of metal parts promises to transform U.S. manufacturing. For
example, metal additive manufacturing (AM) has the potential to reduce time-to-
market for a new jet engine from five years to one year, while simultaneously
increasing fuel efficiency and power by 10%. Poor consistency in part quality,
however, limits the use of AM. As a result, safety-conscious industries (e.g.,
aerospace and biomedical fields) are reluctant to use AM processes to make
mission-critical parts. The root cause for flaw formation in metal AM is the
uneven temperature distribution inside the part during printing. To ensure a
steady temperature distribution inside the part, practitioners currently use
trial-and-error studies that require experimenting with different process
settings and part designs – an expensive and time-consuming approach. A more
efficient solution involves encapsulating the fundamental thermal physics of the
printing process using computer simulation models. These simulation models can
be used to identify and correct problems that can lead to an uneven temperature
distribution in the part before it is built. The PI has advanced a new
mathematical approach to predict the temperature distribution in AM parts that
takes less than one-tenth of the time required by existing techniques and has an
error of less than 10%. Rigorous validation of this concept with experimental
data is the next step to scale this new concept to practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this fellowship is to test the hypothesis
that the instantaneous spatiotemporal distribution of temperature generated in a
metal AM part as it is being deposited layer-upon-layer is predicted by invoking
the novel theory of heat dissipation on planar graphs (spectral graph theory)
with an accuracy comparable to existing finite element techniques but within a
fraction of the computation time (less than 1/10th). To realize this objective,
this fellowship provides the PI access to the Open Architecture Laser Powder Bed
Fusion metal AM system at the Edison Welding Institute (EWI). This system has
eight different sensors and allows the in-situ measurement of thermal signatures
at scales ranging from 5 micrometer to 400 micrometers. Access to this unique
apparatus will allow the PI to measure the instantaneous temperature
distribution in a part and track changes in its shape with unprecedented
precision. Using data obtained from experiments on the open architecture metal
AM system at EWI, the PI will: (1) explain and an quantify the causal factors
governing the temperature distribution in metal AM parts and link it to part
quality; (2) achieve near real-time prediction of the temperature distribution,
which will significantly reduce the experimental tests needed to optimize the
part geometry and process parameters; and (3) establish the digital twin concept
for qualification of metal AM parts by augmenting in-situ sensor data with
physical process models. This work will result in experimentally validated,
physics-based tools to aid rapid optimization of process settings and part
geometry, which in turn will shorten time-to-market for AM parts and reduce
scrap rates by up to 80%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.