* 1929486
* NE Pacific sedimentary geomagnetic network analysis (GNA) to facilitate a better understanding of time, climate, and the geomagnetic field
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Brendan Reilly, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 539,050.00

Chronology and dating of paleo-records is a fundamental challenge that confronts
our understanding of global systems. Radiocarbon is a remarkable tool for
meeting this challenge by allowing determination of precise ages in diverse
environments that are less than around 50,000 years old. However, beyond the
Holocene (last 11,500 years), due to limitations of the method, it is often
impossible to make meaningful comparisons between records where uncertainties of
a thousand years or less are required. Century to millennial variations in the
direction and intensity of the Earth's geomagnetic field, known as paleomagnetic
secular variation (PSV), offer an alternate signal that can be used for detailed
stratigraphic alignment. This project will further the development of
geomagnetic network analysis (GNA), a new approach based on the combining of
multiple PSV records to improve our use of radiocarbon to tell time in the past.
Utilizing a series of Integrated Ocean Drilling Program (IODP) drill cores from
the NE Pacific, the research team will produce critical data that will improve
understanding of Earth's magnetic field and yield high-resolution age models
that will benefit the larger earth science community. The resulting chronology
will improve our understanding of NE Pacific millennial scale climate, while
also serving as a foundation for global paleomagnetic comparisons needed to test
our understanding of secular variation and magnetic field changes. The project
supports two early career investigators, one from an underrepresented group, and
provides student training at the graduate and undergraduate levels. In addition,
a short course will be developed and implemented to train other potential
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved radiocarbon to calendar age corrections and
new data modeling approaches constrain and reduce uncertainties of both dates
and the age models that run between them, making radiocarbon an almost 'one-stop
shop' for high precision, highly accurate, and well constrained chronologies.
Yet, beyond the Holocene, due to a host of both practical and intrinsic
limitations on the number, the precision, and accuracy of those dates, it is
often impossible to make meaningful comparisons between records where millennial
or shorter uncertainties are required, making it difficult to test many Earth
system hypotheses. The paleomagnetic record of geomagnetic change offers several
approaches that may avoid some of these pitfalls. Centennial to millennial
variations in direction and intensity of the geomagnetic field, known as
paleomagnetic secular variation (PSV), offer an environmentally independent
signal that can be used for detailed stratigraphic alignment. Based on the
reasonable assumption that sediments within a limited geographic region have
experienced a common geomagnetic history, one can use the PSV record to align
stratigraphies irrespective of age. These depth-to-depth correlations, referred
to as a geomagnetic network analysis (GNA), allow regional organization of
chronological constraints from multiple sequences to be combined into a single
age-depth profile. As a result, chronological precision and even accuracy can be
improved, while reconstructing the paleomagnetic record of a region through
time. GNA could greatly benefit our chronological understanding at many
locations around the globe but needs to be tested and evaluated. This project
will develop, assess, and quantify many of the aspects of GNA starting with a
series of IODP cores from the NE Pacific that are optimal because of their very
high sedimentation rates. The research team will obtain additional radiocarbon
dates, XRF scanning, CT scanning, and paleomagnetic data (u-channel and
discrete) to facilitate a chronostratigraphic modeling study that will combine
the records using PSV and their independent radiocarbon chronologies into a
single merged depth scale to facilitate a much more detailed understanding of
the depth to age transformation. As a result, this project potentially sets the
stage for the next generation of magnetic stratigraphy. The project will support
two early career researchers and includes student training at the graduate and
undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.