* 1929814
* FW-HTF-P: Anticipating Risks and Benefits of Precision Agriculture (PA) or the Future of Agricultural Work and Workforce: A Multi-Stakeholder Research Agenda
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Sharon Clay, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Precision agriculture comprises a collection of data-based agricultural
technologies and practices that use localized farm data, at the appropriate time
and location to make better farming decisions. Technological transformations,
such as precision agriculture can improve economic productivity and
environmental sustainability but can be disruptive to the future of agricultural
work and the workforce. Some agricultural jobs will be lost since the tasks can
be more efficiently performed by machines and algorithms. However, many jobs
will flourish and augment worker productivity and quality of life. The overall
goal of this planning grant is to comprehensively examine the risks and benefits
of precision agriculture technologies to the farm or operation-level workforce
in the near future (10-15 years). Workforce examined in this project will
include self-employed farmers, farm and livestock operators, hired farm workers
and agriculture support professionals in South Dakota and Vermont. Planning
discussions with stakeholders from the industry, government, academia, workers
and non-profit non-farm organizations will help to create understanding and
appreciation for an inclusive and responsible approach to workforce and
technology development initiatives. The longer-term benefits of this project
include prioritizing, designing, and updating precision agriculture technologies
and workforce development initiatives that can potentially reduce risks (and
augment benefits) for agricultural workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
intellectual merit of this project includes (1) identifying and strategically
linking multi-sectoral stakeholders to enhance understanding of the science of
work and workforce development (e.g. how people learn new skills or augment
skills to new work roles and contexts); (2) help evolve new areas of precision
agriculture technology research (e.g. system designs that focus on data privacy,
trust, and accessibility), and (3) foster development and modifications of
participatory stakeholder approaches (e.g. foresight methods applied to envision
desirable futures of agricultural work) and complex system tools (e.g. network
analysis and topic modelling). The project will convene focus group discussions
to interrogate numerous future implications of PA on the agricultural workforce
and explore risks and benefits from several lenses, including technological,
social, ethical, and governance. Focus group data will be analyzed through topic
modeling and network analysis to identify new and existing multi-sectoral
network connections based on actors and organizations' common interests,
concerns, and visions of agricultural workforce requirements. This project and
the subsequent NSF Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier research
grant will build on the successful precision agriculture research initiatives at
South Dakota State University and transdisciplinary research in Complex Systems
at the University of Vermont to advance new workforce development approaches and
precision agriculture technologies for the purpose of preparing future workforce
under precision agriculture. The ultimate goal of this project is to develop the
necessary research personnel, research infrastructure, and foundational work to
expand the opportunities for studying future technology, future workers, and
future work at the level of a FW-HTF full research
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.