* 1929560
* I-Corps: Structure Based Machine Learning Aided Protein Engineering
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2019
* Andrew Ellington, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project spans chemical
manufacturing, pharmaceutical development, and agricultural biotechnology. This
technology helps protein engineers take a candidate protein and make it more
robust to chemical or environmental perturbations. In one application, this
technology could be used to extend the half-life of pharmaceutical candidates
during development. In another application, it could enable substituting toxic
and wasteful chemistries with suitable enzymatic chemistries. These algorithms
may help drive new green chemistries presently inaccessible because although the
necessary enzymes can perform a desired catalysis, they cannot stay folded long
enough for commercial use. In a third application, the technology can help
improve the shelf life of these critical drugs, thereby expanding the population
they might benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project leverages machine
learning to accelerate protein engineering. Convolutional neural networks have
recently become the preferred artificial intelligence (AI) solution to a number
of computer vision challenges, yet their biological applications remain scarce.
Proteins, strings of folded amino acids that drive most biological processes,
are exponentially being crystallized to solve their three-dimensional structure.
This project combines these two resources by training a 3D convolutional neural
network that characterizes chemical environments unique to each of the 20 amino
acids. The same neural network can then predict the amino acid best fitting a
given environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.