* 1929329
* Collaborative Research - HSI ATE Hub - Diversifying the ATE Program with Hispanic Serving Institutions using Culturally Inclusive Mentoring and ATE Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 08/24/2018,05/31/2021
* Anna Tanguma-Gallegos, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2021
* USD 269,768.00

Community Colleges enroll a higher percentage of Hispanic students than any
other sector of higher education. Moreover, U.S. institutions of higher
education are experiencing a growth trajectory of Hispanic student enrollment,
with more than 2.3 million students currently enrolled. Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs) are essential points of access because they enroll a
majority of all Hispanic college students and nearly half of all HSIs are
community colleges. This project will bridge two NSF initiatives: Mentor-Connect
(M-C) (DUE-1204463 and DUE-1501183) and KickStarter (KS) (HRD-1450661). These
initiatives support community and technical colleges in learning about funding
opportunities in relevant STEM programs at the NSF, and mentor institutional
teams (faculty and administrators) in developing their project ideas, crafting a
proposal, and submitting to the program of interest. To date, these two programs
have collectively served 32 HSIs in nine states, with student enrollments
ranging from 400 to 40,000 and Hispanic enrollment percentages ranging from 27%
to 97%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable Mentor-Connect and
KickStarter to work together to: 1) support three annual cohorts of four teams
from Community College-HSIs (CC-HSIs) with a program that combines the expertise
of the two initiatives; 2) support the cohorts with mentors who are experienced
ATE PIs, and/or with HSI-relevant ATE resources; 3) collect data on the
effectiveness of the bridging strategy and augmentation activities; and 4)
assess the impact as a proof of concept model for the ATE program (or any NSF
program) to become more ethnically and racially
diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.