* 1929209
* RII Track-4: Adaptive Fault Detection and Diagnosis Based on Growing Gaussian Mixture Regressions for High-Performance HVAC Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Liping Wang, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2023
* USD 217,143.00

Environmental impacts, as well as resource consumption, of building operations
are significant throughout the entire life cycle of buildings. Heating
ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems consume about two-thirds of the
total energy used in commercial buildings. Despite national efforts toward
improving performance and sustainability, many existing HVAC systems in
buildings do not run efficiently, due to equipment degradation, sensors being
out of calibration, or improper control operations. Such problems can result in
high maintenance costs, occupant discomfort, and wasted energy. Fault detection
and diagnosis (FDD) for HVAC systems in buildings detect and identify
operational faults based on the analysis of measured system behaviors. FDD
technology is critical to improving building energy efficiency, and reducing or
eliminating wasted energy in buildings caused by operational faults. The major
challenge in current FDD technology is that the training data available to
create diagnostic algorithms do not include all possible operating conditions
that the testing systems experience throughout the life cycle. Given that the
training data for FDDs does not cover all operating conditions, FDD algorithms
for building HVAC systems must evolve along with the changes in building systems
and components. The goal of this project is to enhance the robustness and
efficiency of FDD technology for high-performance HVAC systems. The proposed
research will lead to several broader impacts including research participation
of underrepresented undergraduates, K-12 outreach activities, and sharing the
experimental data and the FDD method for high-performance HVAC systems with
other researchers. The knowledge gained from this research has the potential to
significantly enhance building energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overall research goal is to advance robustness and efficiency of Fault detection
and diagnosis (FDD) technology through an adaptive machine learning-based
approach for high-performance Heating ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC)
systems. This research closes critical knowledge gaps in the FDDs for high-
performance HVAC systems. First, the experimental study on common faults in
high-performance HVAC systems at the Center for High Performance Buildings,
Purdue University will result in a thorough understanding of fault features,
including system behaviors as well as impacts on energy consumption and
environmental conditions. While extensive research has been conducted on the FDD
for conventional HVAC systems, the FDD for high-performance HVAC systems has
rarely been studied. The experimental data pertaining to common faults in high-
performance HVAC systems that will be obtained as a part of this project will,
thus, be an invaluable asset to the FDD research community. Second, this
research will yield an adaptive FDD method based on growing Gaussian mixture
regressions for high-performance HVAC systems in commercial buildings.
Traditional FDD methods learn from training data tested under limited operating
conditions, after which the learning stops. This new FDD method adapts to the
changes in HVAC operating environments, evolves with the changes in building
systems and components, and learns to diagnose new faulty
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.