* 1929900
* First Steps:  The Dynamics and Control of Underwater Walking
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Henry Astley, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 297,267.00

The colonization of land by animals is one of the greatest evolutionary events
in the history of life, but our understanding of the physics of this occurrence
is limited. Long before animals walked on land, the first steps were taken
beneath the water's surface by animals walking on submerged substrates. This
behavior formed the basis for eventual movement on land, but the physics display
a complex mix of fluid forces (drag, buoyancy) and typical walking forces (foot-
substrate interactions, gravity). Understanding of this behavior is limited by
the inability to effectively measure the forces exerted on the substrate. This
project will create a custom-designed force sensing system to record the small
substrate forces that occur during underwater walking, and, combined with
measurements of drag, buoyancy, and other fluid forces, will provide the first
complete picture of the mechanics of this behavior. This will provide crucial
insights into the evolution of walking and how animals adapted to the eventual
transition onto land. In addition to providing valuable training for graduate
students, this project will provide the scientific community with a new tool for
investigating underwater forces and provide insights for the design of
biologically-inspired underwater exploration
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective locomotion was crucial to the initial
invasion of land, and underwater walking was the key behavioral predecessor that
was exapted into terrestrial use during this transition. However, the
biomechanics and control of underwater walking are poorly known, in part due to
the difficulty of measuring small substrate reaction forces. The combination of
both fluid and substrate forces could make typical walking dynamics untenable,
particularly the reduced effective body weight due to buoyant support, and
damping effects from the surrounding fluid (particularly drag and the added mass
effect). This project will investigate the dynamics and control of underwater
walking via direct measurement of substrate reaction forces using a novel
underwater force sensing system, combined with measurements of fluid forces,
across variable substrates and environmental conditions. This will provide
insights into how these forces interact and how animals control these
interactions to produce controlled locomotion, as well as how changes in
environment could affect these dynamics and how underwater walking could be
exapted to a terrestrial setting. Effective understanding of these dynamics
could provide insight into the use of underwater walking in extant species, the
biomechanics of the ancient transitions from underwater to terrestrial walking,
and insight into the control of underwater walking robotic systems for
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.