* 1929943
* Education for a New Sustainable Urban Systems Science: Designing a New Curriculum Integrating Sustainability Science and Urban Science
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jose Lobo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,005.00

Although urban areas are engines of innovation and wealth creation, they face a
variety of complex and intertwined challenges. The challenges include aging and
inadequate infrastructure; health risks from pollution, poor diets, and
sedentary lifestyles; vulnerability to natural disasters and extreme weather
events; and inequities in economic opportunities. Currently, it is widely
recognized that the challenges posed by achieving sustainable socioeconomic
development and those posed by the ongoing process of global urbanization are,
in effect, the same. To develop in a sustainable manner, reduce poverty and
share prosperity globally, solutions will need to be implemented where most
humans now live, mainly in cities. This recognition points to the development of
a new "sustainable urban systems science" to address fundamental research
questions that need to be answered to harness the transformative potential of
urban areas to benefit society at local, national, and global scales. This new
"sustainable urban systems science" requires a corresponding curriculum to
educate its scientists. In response, this project will gather leaders in the
field at a three-day conference to design a new curriculum in sustainable urban
systems science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The "next generation science" for
studying sustainable urban systems should be multidisciplinary in approach and
develop new methods and models. This new science will integrate insights
generated by sustainability science and the newly emerging field of urban
science. It will also produce new understandings about how the present scale and
pace of worldwide urbanization can proceed without negative effects on the
planet's social and physical environments. Importantly, it also calls for the
development of a new approach for training the next generation of urban
sustainability scientists who will develop, advance, refine and communicate the
new science of urban sustainability. The proposed three-day conference, to be
convened by Arizona State University's School of Sustainability Science, will
gather leading sustainability and urban science scholars. The goal of the
conference is to build a curriculum for a new PhD program in sustainable urban
systems science. The conference will have an international perspective and will
involve individuals representing key stakeholders. The proposed curriculum will
be a template, which academic institutions worldwide can modify, localize, and
implement as part of an international effort to develop the educational
infrastructure needed to undergird a global research effort in advancing
sustainable urban systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.