* 1929916
* Linking Sustainable Urban Water Systems in the Great Lakes Basin
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Carol Miller, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 49,967.00

An important feature of this workshop lies in its focus on the Great Lakes
Basin. As a brainstorming effort, it is intended to gather together activities
underway around the Basin that relate to sustainable urban water systems, to
bring fresh perspectives, to spur the development of new solutions, and to build
a network of knowledge and perspective sharing that can both advance practice
and bring cutting-edge current practice to the classroom. The participant group
assembled will include researchers, government and other stakeholder
representatives, and practitioners. The long-term goal will be to drive practice
forward through scientific, engineering, policy, and design research, all
informed by the insights of practice. To do this effectively necessarily means
creating linkages that cross technical, jurisdictional, regulatory and cultural
boundaries. This also means reaching across disciplinary boundaries to develop a
common language and shared set of research objectives. The workshop will take as
its illustrative focus the urban land/water interface and the challenges of
linking aquatic habitat restoration with green infrastructure. Successfully
linking these two systems offers the potential to expand both their efficacy and
range of applicability. Together, these systems not only address specific
environmental challenges, they create urban ecosystems that foster public health
and environmental education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conferees will include
three broad groups, drawn from the Great Lakes Basin and beyond: (1) Academic
researchers in freshwater sciences, engineering, public policy, the humanities,
urban planning, urban design, architecture and landscape architecture; (2)
Local, state and federal government, utility and other stakeholder
representatives; (3) Professional design team members, including designers,
engineers, and ecologists. As one facet of urban water systems sustainability,
returning native ecologies to urban environments serves a profound human need
for association with living systems. Such interventions serve broad social goals
by both moving towards sustainability and by creating tangible symbols of that
goal. To achieve this objective, discussion at this workshop will test a
conceptual model that posits that urban water systems should mimic natural
ecological systems in evolving towards ever greater complexities of cascading
linkages. If successful, this model is anticipated to apply well beyond
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.