* 1929679
* RUI: Partial lizard genomes and new analytical tools provide a novel conceptual framework for understanding biogeographic patterns throughout the deserts of western North America
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Christopher Blair, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2024
* USD 440,973.00

The goal of many evolutionary biologists is to better understand the processes
that lead to the formation of new species. In addition to providing valuable
data regarding how Earth's history has shaped diversity, results can directly
inform conservation and help address biodiversity loss. This study uses genetic
data from lizards distributed throughout the arid regions of western North
America to better understand how and why new species arise. This study also
investigates the prevalence of species unknown to science, and provides formal
descriptions of new species discovered. Results of this project directly inform
conservation while simultaneously providing a more thorough understanding of the
historical processes that led to the evolution of desert species throughout
North America. Importantly, this project introduces evolutionary thinking and
data analysis to historically underrepresented students enrolled in an
undergraduate bioinformatics curriculum. Undergraduates are involved in all
aspects of the project from study design and field work to data analysis and
writing. Additional broader impacts include working with local institutions to
teach genetic concepts to high school students and teachers, facilitation of an
institution-wide bootcamp to enhance networking opportunities, graduate student
supervision, and local research talks given to the public and to the greater
academic community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of research focused on the
phylogeography of taxa inhabiting the arid regions of western North America has
provided invaluable information regarding the propensity for cryptic lineages,
while simultaneously constructing a comprehensive model describing broad
biogeographic patterns observed in co-distributed taxa. However, the majority of
our current knowledge comes from limited genetic information (e.g. mtDNA only)
coupled with the assumption of gene tree/species tree congruence and strictly
bifurcating evolutionary histories. Recent advances in genomic sequencing (e.g.
RADseq, GBS) can now be combined with the multispecies coalescent (MSC) model to
explicitly accommodate gene tree/species tree discordance due to incomplete
lineage sorting (ILS), potentially leading to new insight regarding evolutionary
relationships and biogeographic patterns. Although powerful, the MSC assumes no
gene flow/introgression once species begin to diverge; an assumption that
appears to be violated in a growing number of systems. To date, few empirical
studies have used genomic data to explicitly quantifiy bias in parameter
estimation when ignoring gene flow. This study uses multiple species of
phrynosomatid lizards as models to better understand the role of gene flow
during diversification throughout the North American deserts. In instances where
introgression is suspected, the project quantifies the impact of ignoring gene
flow on parameter estimates such as the species tree topology, divergence times
and effective population sizes. This study also combines genomic data with
morphological and ecological data to reassess species limits, describe new taxa,
and inform conservation. The overarching goal of this study is to use newly
generated genomic data from multiple species to formulate a new conceptual
framework regarding the diversification and historical biogeography of taxa
inhabiting the major deserts of western North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.