* 1929939
* Workshop on Bio-Inspired Adaptation of Urban Infrastructure; Sept. 9-10, 2019; Cleveland, Ohio
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jing Li, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,906.00

Eighty percent of the U.S. population lives in urban areas. As hubs for economic
powerhouses, urban communities generate around 85% of tthe U.S. GDP. Therefore,
the sustainability of urban communities underpins the sustained prosperity of
the Nation. Large urban cities across the U.S. are increasingly faced with the
rapidly decaying infrastructure, critical maintenance and repair needs across
city systems, and a need for modernization. Sustaining the urban infrastructures
and their quality of service to the evolving climatic and socio-economic demands
call for innovative strategies for their adaptations. This workshop will explore
the potential of biological systems, which demonstrate amazing adaptation
strategies to extreme climatic conditions, i.e., extreme cold, extreme hot,
marsh, salinity, and drought, to provide a rich repository of information as
source of inspiration for the smart adaptation of urban infrastructure. The
outcome of the workshop will be to design a research and educational roadmap and
to build a convergent research community to explore the frontier of bio-inspired
adaptation of urban infrastructure systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop
on Bio-Inspired Adaptation for Urban Infrastructure Systems will leverage the
intelligence and adaptation strategies of biological and ecological systems as
sources of inspiration for creating new approaches to design and implementation
of adaptive urban infrastructure systems. The workshop program will focus on
four major thrust areas: adaptation in biological/ecological systems; bio-
inspired adaptive infrastructure systems; bio-inspired adaptive decision and
governance; and education and workforce planning for urban adaptation. The
workshop will be a two-day event providing various opportunities for team-
building, keynote speeches, panels, facilitated group discussions, and poster
sessions. This program will facilitate transdisciplinary exchange among
researchers, practitioners, community leaders, and decision-makers. The workshop
will provide extensive opportunities for dynamic interactions among attendees
who bring together transdisciplinary expertise, with the aim of advancing the
science of the urban sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.