* 1929572
* Collaborative Research: The brood cell microbiome of solitary bees: origin, diversity, function, and vulnerability
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Quinn McFrederick, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 171,574.00

Bees are the single most important pollinators of flowering plants worldwide.
Over 85% of the 325,000 flowering plant species on earth depend on animals for
pollination, and the vast majority of pollination is carried out by bees.
Annually, bees are estimated to contribute $15 billion to US crop production and
$170 billion to global crop production. High-value bee-pollinated crops include
apple and other early spring tree fruits, strawberries, blueberries, cherries,
cranberries, squash and pumpkins, tomatoes, almonds, and many others. The
economic viability of US agricultural production is dependent on stable and
healthy wild and domesticated bee populations. However, bee populations are
threatened by a variety of factors, including habitat loss, pathogen spillover,
invasive plants and animals, and pesticide use, which can disrupt the normal
microbial symbionts essential for bee larval development (the "brood cell"
microbiome). This research project focuses on understanding what role microbes
play in the larval nutrition in a wide variety of bee species. Previous research
has documented a diverse community of bacteria and yeasts in the pollen and
nectar diet of bees. As larvae consume these pollen/nectar provisions they are
ingesting microbes, and our preliminary results indicate that these microbes
form an essential component of the larval diet. This project has the potential
to significantly modify how we view the 120 million-year-old partnership between
bees and flowering plants, and will provide essential information for developing
long-term bee conservation efforts. Project outreach efforts include educational
activities on solitary bees for K-12 students and interactive demonstrations of
bee-microbe-flower interactions for broad audiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project will use cutting-edge methods to (1) document the microbial diversity in
flowers and pollen provisions, (2) determine the nutritional role of microbes in
larval development and health, and (3) understand how alterations in microbial
community impact larval development. To document microbial diversity in both
host-plant flowers and pollen provisions, the research team will use amplicon
sequencing and microbial metagenomics. These methods will document the microbial
species present in pollen provisions as well as the metabolic activities these
microbes perform during pollen maturation. Screening the pollen and nectar of
host-plant species will provide key insights into the source of the brood cell
microbiome. To determine the nutritional role of the microbial community the
research team will use two methods from trophic ecology: compound specific
isotope analysis and neutral lipid fatty acid analysis. These analyses will
permit the research team to track the origin (floral or microbial) of amino
acids and fatty acids in the larval diet of 15 focal bee species. Finally,
through manipulative laboratory experiments the research team will determine how
modifications of the microbial communities impact larval development. Combining
the results of these studies will provide a comprehensive understanding of how
bees and flowering plants interact via their shared microbial partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Systematics and
Biodiversity Sciences Cluster (Division of Environmental Biology) and the
Symbiosis, Defense and Self-recognition Program (Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.