* 1929942
* Conference: Concepts for Advancing Sustainable Urban Systems (SUS) Research Networks: SUSPIRE: Sustainable Urban Systems: Predictive, Interconnected, Resilient and Evolving
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Charles Catlett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 49,866.00

This is a Sustainable Urban Systems (SUS) workshop grant. Organized to address
natural and climate, technological, and societal disruptions that will transform
urban systems, the workshop will bring together a unique, diverse, and expert
group of 140 researchers and stakeholders in the Chicago region to develop
transformative ideas and visions for advancing Sustainable Urban Systems Large-
Scale Research Networks through a convergence approach. Participants, drawn from
academia, industry, foundations, community organizations, government, technology
organizations, and the arts and humanities, will identify new research questions
and methodologies to advance sustainable urban systems that address not only
science and engineering topics, but also social, behavioral, and economic
considerations. Intertwined application areas within an urban system including,
for example, transportation, electricity grids, urban agriculture, and public
health systems, will be considered holistically rather than in isolation.
Conclusions and outcomes from breakout discussions will be compiled and
disseminated to be of value to stakeholders beyond those who participate to the
conference and to the broader sustainable urban systems research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will benefit from hearing local and national
experts in many fields address sustainable urban systems and from engaging
discussions with the diverse set of attendees during breakouts and informal
networking to encourage collaboration outside of this particular effort. Under-
represented groups in terms of gender, race, and socio-economic status will be
especially targeted for inclusion in the workshop. Also, twenty trainees from
workshop planning member organizations will benefit from interactions with
professionals from a diverse range of organizations, disciplines and community
groups. A workshop whitepaper describing promising near-term actions will result
in new collaborations and help workshop attendees achieve their organizations'
objectives. Attendees from universities, planning agencies, companies, and large
NGOs will benefit greatly from a better appreciation for community desires,
concerns and capacity, while community members will have an opportunity to
influence the practices and priorities of these organizations. Finally, the
report to NSF charting a sustainable urban systems research agenda will be
broadly disseminated to interested parties beyond workshop
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.