* 1929078
* RII Track-4: Visualization of Host-Microbe Interactions using CLASI-FISH
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Ying Zhang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 260,997.00

The reef-forming eastern oyster, Crassostrea virginica, is abundant across the
east coast of the United States, where it contributes to the environmental
health of coastal ecosystems through seashore stabilization, water quality
improvement, and habitat provision. The oyster host selectively harbors a
distinct composition of microorganisms (known as the microbiota) from the
surrounding seawater. Despite the potential roles of microbiota in mediating
host health and ecological function, little is known about their mechanism of
interaction. This project will provide new insights into the diversity and
function of oyster microbiota by integrating cutting-edge technologies in
molecular sequencing, computational biology, and microscopic imaging. A new
collaboration will be initiated between an early career faculty and her Ph.D.
student at the University of Rhode Island and a leading expert in microscopy and
microbiota imaging at the Marine Biological Laboratory. The research will
provide new opportunities for the cross-disciplinary training of
underrepresented students at a public institution of the Rhode Island (RI)
jurisdiction. Due to the significant ecological and economic roles of C.
virginica in coastal waters of RI, the research will also provide insights into
population management by enabling future research on the mechanisms underlying
the physiology, immune responses, and conservation of eastern oysters in coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspension-feeding bivalves play critical roles
in the nutrient dynamics, benthic-pelagic coupling, nitrogen cycling, and
biomineralization in estuarine and marine ecosystems. Despite their high
filtration rate, the eastern oyster, Crassostrea virginica, maintains distinct
microbiota from surrounding seawater. However, the mechanisms leading to the
selective nature of the oyster microbiota is largely unknown. The proposed
research aims to address this problem by applying state-of-the-art microscopic
technologies into visualizing the in-situ composition and spatial organization
of oyster-associated microbiota across diverse tissue types. The microscopic
imaging will be integrated with shotgun metagenomic sequencing and metagenome-
based reconstruction of microbial genomes to enable strain-level probe designs
and functional inferences. An early career faculty and her Ph.D. student from
the University of Rhode Island will take extended collaborative visits to
imaging experts at the Marine Biological Laboratory to obtain trainings that
would enable the specific imaging of microbial strains in host tissues. This
proposal represents a first example in which high-throughput sequencing will be
combined with advanced microscopy to analyze the composition, spatial
organization, and function of resident microbiota associated with the eastern
oyster. It will take advantage of the extensive community profiling and
functional analysis performed in the team’s preliminary research, especially the
genome reconstruction of novel, uncultured strains of the oyster microbiota.
Combining microscopic imaging with the mining of metagenomes, the proposed
project will open up new opportunities for the broad investigation of other
host-microbe interactions using similar approaches, especially for non-model
organisms in the estuarine and marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.