* 1929686
* HSCC KickStarter: Providing Hispanic-Serving Community Colleges with Technical Assistance to Improve their Federal Funding Competitiveness
* EDU,EES
* 08/24/2018,01/31/2020
* Caroline VanIngen-Dunn, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 01/31/2020
* USD 640,172.00

The HSCC KickStarter project will provide Hispanic-Serving Community Colleges
(HSCCs) with technical assistance to improve their readiness and competitiveness
for federal grant programs in the science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) fields. HSCCs have large enrollments of Hispanic and low-
income students and are therefore important partners for increasing the
participation of diverse individuals in STEM education programs and careers.
Many HSCCs have not been successful in securing federal grant projects, which is
often attributed to the lack of infrastructure at HSCCs to develop and implement
large federal grants. This project will increase the numbers of HSCCs that
successfully pursue federal grants, particularly from the National Science
Foundation, ultimately increasing recruitment and retention in STEM through
enhancements to these institutions' STEM curricula, strengthening ties to
industry and community partners, and developing robust articulation pathways to
four-year STEM programs. The KickStarter project will provide intensive
technical assistance to 10-15 HSCCs. In addition, all community colleges in the
country will have an opportunity to benefit from access to the tools, materials,
and lessons learned through KickStarter webinars and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KickStarter team will implement an
innovative and comprehensive technical assistance model designed to address the
issues associated with the HSCCs' low level of success in submitting and
securing federal STEM grant proposals. According to the proposers, the issues
most often cited in reviews of declined federal proposals include the lack of
readiness to conceive, justify, and execute complicated projects. The
KickStarter technical assistance model will address these issues by developing a
"Readiness Framework" in collaboration with the HSCCs. The framework will be
based on institutional self-evaluation of student support services, industry
engagement, and technology and curricular alignment. This framework will guide
the development of STEM proposals that demonstrate capacity for project
implementation and align with the institutional mission and STEM education goals
of the HSCC. The KickStarter team has expertise in building community college
partnerships with industry and community organizations, and deep knowledge of
and experience with federal grant programs and grant management. This project
has the potential to become a technical assistance model for other minority-
serving community colleges, such as two-year Historically Black Colleges and
Tribal Colleges.