* 1929150
* Neutron Imaging Interferometry for Non-Destructive Testing
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* JOYONI DEY, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 227,680.00

Interferometry is a family of techniques in which waves are superimposed and
cause a phenomenon of interference, which is used to extract information.
Neutrons show dual particle and wave nature. They can be described as wave
packets and show interference effects like X-rays and visible light. The primary
focus of this project is to analyze and maximize the neutron interferometric
beamline performances with simulations and experiments. The research team will
also establish biomedical applications, which include non-invasive imaging of a
bone-implant interface, to facilitate the manufacture of hip replacement
implants. Within this project, the PI aims to build a novel comprehensive
simulator allowing scatter and phase-shift of neutrons, suitable for realistic
neutron interferometry and verified with experiments. The PI and a graduate
trainee will perform simulations and experiments on Neutron Interferometry
Imaging at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Center for
Neutron Research (NCNR). First, a comprehensive computer simulator of neutron
interferometry will be built by describing the neutron as a particle and a wave
and verified. Second, special phase gratings will be investigated in simulations
to improve Neutron Interferometric Tomography (NIT) performance. Third, a bone-
metal interface will be imaged using NIT. This project will establish a strong
neutron interferometric imaging program at Louisiana State University (LSU).
This project seeks to aid researchers from multiple disciplines (neutron imaging
scientists and non-destructive testing application specialists) and is
synergistic with Louisiana Consortium on Neutron Scattering and LSU Medical
Physics. It will establish a new research program for the PI and generate
project software that will be disseminated on Github. The future projects
generated by this fellowship and collaboration with NIST will train
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdocs at LSU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combined Monte-Carlo and coherent wave simulation exist
for X-ray interferometry but not for neutron interferometry. The primary focus
of this project is to analyze and maximize the neutron interferometric far-field
imaging beamline performances with simulations and experiments. The research
team will also establish biomedical applications such as non-invasive ex-vivo
test-imaging of a bone-implant interface, to facilitate the manufacture of hip
replacement implants. Simulations and experiments on Neutron Interferometry
Imaging will be conducted at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) Center for Neutron Research (NCNR). First, a novel, comprehensive
computer simulator will be built to describe the neutron as a particle, as well
as a wave, and verified. The simulator will include Monte-Carlo based neutron
scattering, coherent wave interference, and vibration effects. The simulations
will be experimentally verified using dual-phase gratings existing in the system
and other high-quality neutron phase gratings that are available on loan from
Louisiana State University (LSU). The simulator will predict the far-field
visibility and differential phase contrast (DPC) sensitivity at the NIST
beamline as well as for two beamlines at Oakridge National Laboratory (ORNL).
This objective advances the ORNL neutron imaging and scattering research, in
synergy with the goals of the Louisiana Consortium of Neutron Scattering.
Second, the conditions for ideal DPC imaging will be investigated in
simulations. Special modulated phase gratings (MPG) will be evaluated to improve
Neutron Interferometric Tomography (NIT) performance. DPC sensitivity will be
investigated as a function of grating pitch or pitches and spatial modulation of
MPG. Third, novel experiments will be conducted to observe a bone-metal
interface ex-vivo with NIT at NIST.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.