* 1929085
* Conference: Exploratory Tensegrity
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* John McCleary, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 03/31/2021
* USD 74,534.00

Vassar College is conducting a 2.5-day conference, as well as pre- and post-
conference activities, that convenes a multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional
(USA and international) team to conceptualize and plan various research,
education and outreach activities in informal learning, focusing on the seminal
concept of tensegrity and its applications in many fields of science and
mathematics. Tensegrity is the characteristic property of a stable three-
dimensional structure consisting of members under tension that are contiguous
and members under compression that are not. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference
will bring together researchers and practitioners in informal learning and
researchers in the various disciplines that embrace tensegrity (mathematics,
engineering, biology, architecture, and art) to explore the potential that
tensegrity has to engage the public in informal settings, especially through
direct engagement in creating such structures. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date there have been no sustained informal
educational projects and research around the topic of tensegrity. However, there
is considerable related work on learning through "making and tinkering" upon
which the participants will adapt and expand. The intended conference outcomes
are to produce prototypes of activities, a research agenda, and lines of
development with the potential to engage the wider public. A key priority of the
gathering is the development of new partnerships between researchers and
creators of tensegrity systems and the informal learning professionals. The
long-term project hypothesis is that children and adults can engage with
tensegrity through tinkering with materials and becoming familiar with a growing
set of basic structures and their applications. The activities will include
evaluation of the conference and a social network analysis of the collaborations
that result.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.