* 1929113
* RII Track-4: High-Throughput Phenotyping and Analysis for the Study of Plant Robustness
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Jennifer Lachowiec, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 183,436.00

Predicting the characteristics, or traits, and behaviors of an individual
organism from its DNA sequence is proving to be a very challenging and complex
problem. One complicating factor is that the connection between DNA and traits
is not consistent, and identical DNA sequences may not produce identical traits
even when the environment is the same. This occurs because certain genes
influence how stable or variable (robust) a trait is, with some genes producing
traits that are more or less variable. Therefore, the identity of the genes that
influence robustness is needed to build models to predict traits from DNA
sequences. This knowledge is crucial to accelerate crop breeding, to meet
growing global demands for food, and provide economic security to American
producers. The current bottleneck in discovering genes that control robustness
in plants is the inefficient process of measuring plant traits. To address this
problem, the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center in St. Louis, Missouri has
built state-of-the-art facilities and developed computer programs to
automatically measure the characteristics of thousands of plants. Through
extensive collaborative visits, the PI and a student trainee will use these
facilities and learn methods for processing this data and how to build low-cost
versions of these automated systems with the intent to bring this infrastructure
to Montana. This support will enable the identification of DNA sequences that
influence robustness and the relationships in robustness among
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting phenotypes from genotypes is
proving to be challenging and complex. One complicating factor is that the
relationship between genotype and phenotype is problematic. While the entire
genome of an organism, rather than single alleles, determines the phenotype and
degree of phenotypic variability, a poor understanding of how robustness is
controlled at the molecular and cellular levels remains. This knowledge gap
exists because to measure robustness for any given trait, a large number of
individuals with the same genetic make-up must be measured. Therefore, the
objective of this fellowship is high-throughput phenotyping at the Donald
Danforth Plant Science Center for the plant Arabidopsis thaliana. In addition,
this fellowship supports the comprehensive training of the PI and a trainee in
high-throughput data collection and analyses. The data and skills gained will
enable testing of the central hypothesis: genetics influences the robustness of
traits in predictable ways. Specifically, the data will support identifying 1)
genes modulating robustness (phenotypic variability) and 2) patterns of
robustness throughout plant development. We expect that with extensive data from
a model species, we will identify patterns that describe robustness for
comparison across plant species, that include crops. These data will facilitate
crop breeding, crucial to the NSF's mission of national security through its
impacts on food and economic security. Furthermore, this fellowship will benefit
Montana State University's research infrastructure through supporting the
development of a low-cost automated phenotyping platform that can be utilized
across crops bred in Montana. Further, hands-on demonstrations of automated
phenotyping for plants will expose rural girls to computer science/engineering,
fields in which women are traditionally
underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.