* 1929298
* Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2022
* M Forest, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,800,000.00

The Statistical and Applied Mathematical Sciences Institute (SAMSI) is a
national institute that merges statistical and mathematical thinking to create
high impact theory and methodology for fundamental scientific and societal
problems. It does so by catalyzing and nurturing collaborations both among its
core disciplines -- statistics, probability, and applied mathematics -- and
between those disciplines and the physical, social, and engineering sciences, as
well as other quantitative disciplines such as computer science and operations
research. SAMSI engages researchers at all career stages, from graduate students
to postdoctoral fellows to senior international leaders, who take away from
SAMSI expanded modes of thought, new vision and energy, and momentum enabling
collaborations initiated there to persist. The spectrum of SAMSI's programs
responds to national needs, impetus from the statistics and mathematics
community, and scientific opportunities with potential high impact. A broad
range of education and outreach activities, focused especially on
undergraduates, faculty in teaching institutions, and under-represented
minorities, builds greater public awareness of the importance and achievements
of the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAMSI is a national institute
that exists to advance science and society by catalyzing and supporting
collaborations among statisticians, applied mathematicians, and researchers in
the natural and social sciences. Its goal is to tackle the most challenging and
far-reaching data-driven problems, as exemplified by its forthcoming programs on
such topics as numerical methods in data science, data science in the social and
behavioral sciences, and combinatorial probability. SAMSI operates by bringing
together researchers at all levels -- students, postdoctoral fellows, and senior
leaders -- into teams that both make substantial progress within SAMSI programs
and form the basis of future collaborations. It stimulates people at all stages
of their careers to think differently about the roles and power of applied
mathematics and statistics in concert with one another. A vibrant education and
outreach program uses SAMSI research to present the importance and achievements
of the mathematical sciences to undergraduates, professors at teaching colleges,
and the general public. SAMSI activities are permeated by efforts to increase
the participation of under-represented minorities in mathematics, statistics,
and other sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.