* 1929210
* RII Track-4: Assessing the Capability of TEMPO Geostationary Satellite Observations of Formaldehyde to Constrain Volatile Organic Compound Emissions from Western U.S. Wildfire Smok
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Lu Hu, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 11/30/2022
* USD 263,334.00

Wildfires emit toxic trace gases and particular matters into the atmosphere,
substantially impacting air quality, particularly in the western U.S. The
project aims to contribute to the temporal observing strategy of a planned
satellite for monitoring volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions from
wildfires in near real-time. This project will potentially lead to better air
quality forecast for many western EPSCoR states like Montana, Idaho, Wyoming,
Nevada, and Utah, and thus would benefit millions of people exposed to wildfire
smoke. The Tropospheric Emissions: Monitoring of Pollution (TEMPO) geostationary
satellite is planned for launch in 2022, providing key tropospheric composition
measurements, including formaldehyde (HCHO) at unprecedentedly high spatial and
temporal resolution. This proposed research will explore how the planned TEMPO
formaldehyde observations could constrain VOC emissions from wildfire smoke in
the western U.S., and to optimize TEMPO observing strategy for episodic wildfire
events. Through the collaborative visit to the Smithsonian Astrophysical
Observatory (SAO), we will develop new research skills in satellite remote
sensing at the University of Montana (UM) that will provide a unique strength to
understand organic emissions from the land surface.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific tasks are designed to incorporate opportunities
to strengthen the collaboration with the SAO and TEMPO science team and build
the capacities of satellite remote sensing research at UM: (a) generating the
synthetic TEMPO HCHO column data, (b) applying a high resolution adjoint-based
inversion using synthetic data over western U.S., and (c) evaluating inversion
results with independent airborne and ground field data for specific fire
events. The results will inform TEMPO temporal observing strategy for
exceptional wildfires and provide a guide for other episodic events such as dust
outbreaks. The synthetic TEMPO data and the inversion results will be evaluated
by independent field campaigns primarily focused on wildfire emissions (WE-CAN,
FIREX-AQ, and Mt. Bachelor Observatory). It is expected that the comparison and
validation will improve our knowledge on the uncertainties of satellite
retrievals, and ultimately the VOC emissions from wildfires. This research will
focus on fires in the western U.S., and results will be informative for other
regions in the U.S. and around the world, and also for other pollution emissions
that evolve at higher temporal resolution. By engaging in the TEMPO's pre-launch
research, the proposed project not only will potentially transform the PI's
career trajectory for the lifespan of the satellite, but also improve the UM's
long-term competitiveness in environmental and ecological research. This project
will bring the next generation of earth observing system to Montana and could
benefit regional science communities and air quality regulators for various
applications in air pollution, wildfire, forestry, ecology, public health, and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.