* 1929122
* RII Track-4: Elucidating Enzyme-Ionic Liquid Interactions to Enable Effective Lignin Valorization
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Jian Shi, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 11/30/2023
* USD 207,562.00

Shifting society's dependence on petroleum-based fuels and chemicals to biomass
derived products is important not only to reduce our carbon usage but also to
increase the robustness of our energy security and economic stability. To that
end, the environmentally benign reuse or upgrading of materials considered
byproducts of industrial and agricultural economies is one of the ultimate goals
of sustainable practices. Lignin, as the most abundant aromatic polymers in
nature, provides structural strength and protection against microbial/enzymatic
degradation of plants. It is available in quantity of over 100 million dry tons
as a waste stream from paper and pulping industry. Despite its great potential
as a feedstock for making a wide range of chemicals, lignin is still an
underutilized substrate. Under the current bio-refinery concept, lignin is
commonly burned to generate steam and electricity. Converting lignin waste
streams to high value-added chemicals and materials is critical for the economic
viability and success of a bio-refinery industry. The successful demonstration
of the proposed work will provide a novel biocatalysis route for valorizing
lignin from relevant waste streams to high value commodity and specialty
chemicals, greatly reducing barriers along the biofuels supply chain. This
project will also integrate outreach and education activities for
underprivileged groups from the Appalachian region in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two key challenges hindering effective lignin
conversion are to improve the contact of the bulky poorly soluble lignin polymer
to the catalyst and the selective/controlled breakdown of inter-unit linkages.
Elucidating the interactions of lignolytic enzyme with ionic liquid (IL) will
allow a more rational approach to synthesize better ILs and the ability to
reengineer better enzymes to optimize their activities in aqueous IL solution.
This EPSCoR Research Fellowship provides a unique opportunity for the PI to
visit and collaborate with the Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory
(EMSL) at the Department of Energy (DOE)'s Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory. The overarching goal is to explore IL-enzyme interfaces through
extended visits to EMSL by accessing the nation's premier scientific user
facilities and build on efforts to develop innovative biocatalysis pathways to
convert lignin to high value chemicals. The research will involve: 1)
mechanistic understanding of lignin solubility, selective lignin
depolymerization and enzyme compatibility with aqueous ILs; 2) exploration of
new IL-lignolytic enzyme pairs via advanced EPR/NMR, bioimaging,
spectrophotometry and computational chemistry capacities at EMSL to probe
interfacial interactions between IL-enzyme-lignin. A better understanding of
such interactions will guide our future research to design new biocompatible
ILs, engineer better enzymes via directed evolution/modifying surface charges,
or explore new membrane/catalyst interfaces, to further improve product yield
and selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.