* 1929154
* Empowering Academically Talented STEM Undergraduates through Early Experiences in Teaching and Mentoring of K-8 Youth
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Paul Denton, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,984.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO). UNO is a metropolitan
university that pursues excellence in teaching, research, and service to provide
an educated workforce and citizenry to the region. Over its five-year duration,
this project will fund four-year scholarships to 24 students who are pursuing a
bachelor's degree in biology, chemistry, environmental studies, geology,
molecular and biomedical biology, bioinformatics, neuroscience, or physics. The
project will provide early and innovative professional development and
leadership opportunities that prepare undergraduates for 21st century employment
in science, using a locally developed mentoring and teaching model combined with
carefully designed course-based undergraduate research experiences. The program
will engage undergraduates in teaching and mentoring of K-8 students in an
after-school program of problem-based learning STEM lessons in the highly
diverse Omaha Public School District. Almost 75% of the students from the Omaha
Public School District are economically disadvantaged. This project will
contribute to an understanding of how to improve STEM learning, not only for
undergraduate students, but for all learners. At the same time, this project
will generate a STEM pipeline from K-8 through college and into the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Specifically, this project aims to strengthen the
STEM workforce by using scholarship funding coupled with a locally developed,
successful mentoring and teaching model and course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs). Though both the strategies of teaching and mentoring models
and the CUREs have been shown to be effective in increasing student retention
and success in the STEM disciplines, the impact on low- income, academically
talented students has not been specifically investigated. This project aims to
determine the combined effect. Furthermore, the project has the potential to
generate a robust STEM pipeline by encouraging K-8 youth to consider science as
a field via their mentorship by undergraduates of similar backgrounds. If such
interventions can help address local STEM learning challenges and enhance the
STEM pipeline, it will represent a vertically integrated project to be embraced
as a national model worthy of replication. The effectiveness of the project will
be evaluated using a convergent typological model inclusive of mixed methods
allowing quantitative and qualitative analyses. Results of this project will be
made available at local, regional, and national meetings as well as by
publication in education and discipline-specific journals. This project is
funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.