* 1929728
* Collaborative Research:Research: Advancing Engineering Education Research through Peer Review Analysis
* ENG,EEC
* 08/30/2018,01/31/2021
* Kacey Beddoes, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 01/31/2021
* USD 51,718.00

Questions about how knowledge is socially constructed and how boundary work
shapes the development of a scientific field are of central importance to the
development and growth of any field. Peer review is a key site of social
construction of knowledge and micropolitics of knowledge production. It serves
as a gateway for new knowledge to become part of a field. As an emerging and
interdisciplinary field, engineering education research presents a valuable, and
timely, opportunity to learn about processes of disciplinary development, and to
better understand the micropolitics of peer review in an emerging and
interdisciplinary field. Moreover, in engineering education research, the
boundaries of the field can have implications for insights that ultimately
influence engineering education practices. As a relatively new field, it has
been noted that engineering education research remains underdeveloped in some
regards, including inclusion of theoretical and methodological approaches from
social science fields. However, little research has been done to identify how
the boundaries of the field are established and maintained. This study is the
first investigation of a large group of engineering education researchers' peer
review experiences and editors' perspectives. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to identify research normativities and
values shaping the emerging field of engineering education research through the
peer review processes. The intervention objective of this project is to develop
and implement materials targeted to engineering education researchers so that
they better understand their field and how it can be advanced in new directions.
In-depth qualitative interviews are being conducted with 40 authors and at least
5 editors of the Journal of Engineering Education. Authors include those who
have had articles published and those who have had articles rejected, as well as
those who fall into both categories. The interviews explore participants' peer
review experiences and beliefs about the field's boundaries. Emergent patterns
in experiences and beliefs will be used to identify theoretical, methodological,
epistemological, and topical normativities that shape the field. These patterns
provide new insights into engineering education research, specifically, its
dominant values, boundaries, and levels of interdisciplinarity, thus also
providing new insights into the social construction of knowledge in an emerging,
interdisciplinary field. Based on findings from the interviews, stakeholder-
specific workshops are being conducted for different groups: current and future
engineering education researchers. These workshops and associated materials are
designed to help the engineering education research community critically reflect
on and advance the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.