* 1929677
* EAGER: Experimental Study of Condensation Enhancement on Durable Slippery Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Xianming Dai, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 170,000.00

Enhancing condensation improves power plant efficiency, water harvesting,
desalination, and refrigeration. An ideal surface for condensation enhancement
must provide large heat transfer areas and rapid droplet removal in durable
operations. Until now, this could not be achieved because of scientific
challenges in both droplet removal and surface durability. First, the passive
liquid repellency on air-independent rough surfaces has not been achieved due to
the large pinning forces on rough surfaces. Second, the surface durability in a
steam environment with continuous droplet shedding cannot be sustained. Most of
existing liquid-repellent surfaces rely on the existence of air lubricant, which
can be displaced in a steam environment or in contact with low surface tension
fluids, leading to the failure of condensate removal. The goal of this EAGER
project is to address those challenges by developing previously unachieved
hydrophilic and slippery rough surfaces. The research outcomes are integrated
with outreach and education, with under-represented students recruited and
trained. The PI also actively approaches the industrial companies in Texas for
broad impact of the research .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experimental study of
condensation enhancement on air-independent slippery rough surfaces leads to a
conceptually different strategy from the air-dependent condensation on
superhydrophobic surfaces. This hydrophilic slippery rough surface gives a large
surface area for condensation and in the meantime keeps a small contact angle
hysteresis for condensate removal. The research objectives include: (1)
experimentally demonstrate that the slippery rough surfaces can significantly
increase the condensation heat transfer coefficient compared with the state-of-
the-art condensing surfaces, and (2) understand the failure mechanism of this
surface in a steam environment with continuous droplet shedding. To improve
surface durability, polymer chains are grafted on the rough substrate to
simultaneously enhance heat transfer areas and droplet removal. This project
leads to the development of durable air-independent slippery rough surfaces for
exceptional condensation enhancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.