* 1929151
* RII Track-4: Quantifying Seismic Resilience of Multi-Functional Floor Isolation Systems through Cyber-Physical Testing
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Philip Harvey, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 11/30/2022
* USD 182,648.00

Damage caused by seismic events to buildings and their contents can impact life
safety and disrupt business operations following an earthquake. The resulting
social and economic losses can be minimized, or even eliminated, by reducing the
seismic forces on building contents through vibration isolation. Floor isolation
systems (FISs), in particular, are a promising retrofit strategy for protecting
vital building contents and enhancing a community's seismic resilience. This
project will establish an experimental testbed and test protocol for FISs,
utilizing the state-of-the-art NSF-funded Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) Experimental Facility at Lehigh University. Through the
tests conducted during extended research visits, the PI and a graduate student
will assess the performance of FISs and advance the understanding of their
underlying physics, while also receiving hands-on training on the unique cyber-
physical testing capabilities at Lehigh called real-time hybrid simulation. The
new techniques and knowledge learned through these visits will transform the way
the PI conducts research at the University of Oklahoma through the integration
of real-time hybrid testing on existing facilities. This will have a lasting
impact on the training of undergraduate and graduate students and researchers at
the PI's home institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A community's resilience to
seismic hazards is defined by its ability to absorb an extreme event and
maintain an acceptable level of functionality following the event. To help
ensure a more resilient community and a safer environment, the proposed research
will rigorously evaluate a design methodology developed in the PI's lab for
multi-functional FISs incorporating building-FIS interactions. This will be
achieved by utilizing a cyber-physical systems based approach, namely real-time
hybrid simulation, leveraging the state-of-the-art facilities at Lehigh
University. The overall aim of these tests is to: (a) extend real-time hybrid
simulation algorithms to seismic isolation systems; (b) experimentally validate
physics-based mathematical models for resilient FISs; (c) advance the
understanding of the underlying nonlinear dynamics of these systems; and (d)
quantify the performance of these systems incorporating multi-scale (building-
FIS) interactions. The cyber-physical tests conducted during the extended
research visits will help to clarify the fundamental limitations of resilient
isolation systems and quantify their achievable performance with respect to
resilience goals. These tests constitute the first ever real-time hybrid
simulation of FISs, in particular, and multi-axial hybrid testing of seismic
isolation devices, in general. This research has the potential to lower the
repair and demolition costs of post-earthquake recovery, including damage to
non-structural elements/contents, save lives, and provide immediate operation
for critical facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.