* 1929447
* ISS: Collaborative Research: Examination of the Multi-physical Properties of Microgravity-synthesized Graphene Aerogels
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Roya Maboudian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

Graphene, a two-dimensional (2D) form of carbon, has generated extreme
excitement since its discovery in 2004, due to its startling electrical,
mechanical, and thermal properties. Yet, difficulties in realizing large-scale
manufacturability of graphene has hindered mass adoption into target
applications such as nanoelectronics, batteries, sensing and composites.
Graphene aerogels, a class of materials made of 2D graphene sheets covalently
crosslinked into a three-dimensional (3D) structure, largely retain many of the
extraordinary properties of their graphene building blocks but are limited in
size only by the container used during synthesis. In this work, graphene-based
hydrogel synthesis in gravity (on Earth) and microgravity (on the International
Space Station, ISS) conditions will be examined. Through experimentation in
microgravity on the ISS, gravity-driven processes such as sedimentation and
buoyancy-driven convection will be hindered, and underlying phenomena
contributing to graphene aerogel assembly (e.g., random Brownian motion) will be
isolated and investigated for the first time. This collaborative program also
aims to reach elementary school students, undergraduate students, graduate
students and the general public to raise awareness of the fields of
nanotechnology and aerospace engineering, as well as careers in academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To extend the knowledge of space-produced aerogel, we will
compare the properties of microgravity-synthesized graphene aerogels to Earth-
synthesized aerogels. The objectives are two-fold: (1) to study the growth
behavior (cross-linking, agglomeration, drying) of graphene aerogels (GA)
synthesis outside the presence of gravity; and (2) to examine and explain the
influence of microgravity-based synthesis on the 3-dimensional (3D)
mesostructure and multi-physical properties (thermal transport, mechanical
behavior, and electrical characteristics) of GAs. Ultimately, this work will
provide the foundation for engineering of graphene aerogels (and other aerogels)
with highly homogenous microstructures and correspondingly superior electrical,
mechanical, and thermal properties to enable a wide variety of Earth and space
applications, such as, ultra-lightweight structural materials, supercapacitor
and battery electrodes, hydrogen storage, and water treatment membranes. In
addition, in-space production of aerogels on the ISS may enable direct use of
materials and devices by ISS researchers and for future space
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.