* 1929199
* Evolution of Pliocene-Pleistocene climate and vegetation in the Tropical Andes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Peter Molnar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 596,870.00

The Pliocene epoch, 5 to 2.5 million years ago, is often cited as the last time
global climate resembled that of the present day. While the concentrations of
atmospheric CO2 were comparable to those of today, Earth's mean temperature was
likely ~3 degrees centigrade warmer, which raises questions about how sensitive
our climate system is to CO2 changes. Additionally, there is considerable debate
about how these warmer temperatures affected the tropics, including
precipitation and vegetation. This project reconstructs environmental changes
occurring in the tropical Andes of Colombia over the past 5 million years to
test the relationships between global climate transitions, tropical
environmental change, and mountain uplift. This initiative enhances Inter-
American collaboration among US and Colombian scientists, fosters the career of
a minority graduate student, an early career faculty, undergraduate research
assistants from low-income families and minority groups, and inspires
underprivileged children in elementary and middle schools through bilingual
activities in collaboration with the CU Museum of Natural
History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project constitutes the first integration of
biomarker-based climate and vegetation records in lake sediment and outcrops by
reconstructing continental climate variability in the tropics since the late
Miocene. Surface temperatures, vegetation, and hydrological changes are
constrained using branched GDGTs, plant waxes, and their stable isotope
composition, in addition to existing and new pollen records preserved in
sediment from the Sabana de Bogota (Colombia): (a) the Funza II (~70 ka to ~3
Ma) sediment core from the extinct Funza Lake; (b) outcrop samples of Late
Miocene-Pleistocene fluvial and lacustrine deposits; and (c) Late Miocene-Early
Pliocene fluvial deposits at low-elevation sites. Additionally, contemporary
soil samples along the wet and dry flanks of the Eastern Cordillera will be used
to produce a modern proxy calibration. This study provides a foundation to
determine whether the tropics were warmer when mid and high-latitude regions
were warm. Such a record will fill a hole in reconstructions of past climate in
the tropics since the Pliocene and will provide a comprehensive climatic
framework to better interpret vegetation changes in the
tropics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.