* 1929873
* Multiaxial Distortional-Hardening Plasticity to Advance Forming Process Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/27/2019,05/31/2022
* Ioannis Korkolis, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 181,731.00

Sheet metal forming processes are among the most flexible and energy-efficient
manufacturing processes, corresponding to approximately 7 percent of the US
Gross Domestic Product. Transformation of the sheet into a useful component
typically occurs in multiple steps, with the part transferred from one forming
die to the next, progressively obtaining a more complex shape. While these
multi-step processes enable the creation of complex components, they also
increase the cost due to the number of dies and presses needed. Also, from a
scientific point of view, the multiple steps cause repeated loading and
unloading of the materials, which is very challenging to model in a
computationally-efficient way. This research aims to create a material model
suitable for repeated loading and unloading, to enable science-based process and
die design, minimize the number of necessary steps, reduce waste and thus
enhance the competitiveness of American manufacturing. Since the automotive
industry is one of the major users of multi-step sheet forming, this research
will also enable the use of modern, difficult-to-form steels and aluminum alloys
in auto-bodies, yielding safer and environmentally friendlier cars. The work
will be performed in collaboration with 2 Korean universities (whose work is
funded by the Korean National Research Foundation), and this collaboration will
allow access to equipment and expertise not otherwise available in the US.
Graduate and undergraduate students and Research Experience for Teachers (RET)
participants and their students will benefit from the industrial focus of this
project, as well as its international dimension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide
industry with a robust and computationally-efficient material model suitable for
severe strain-path changes, including repeated loading and unloading, this
research will: 1) create a unique machine for biaxial tension/compression of
sheets and perform multiaxial plasticity experiments, 2) use this dataset to
evolve the recent (2011) Homogeneous Anisotropic Hardening (HAH) plasticity
model and create the extended-HAH one, to capture the experiments, and 3)
conduct multi-step forming experiments and simulate them with the extended-HAH
model, to further inform its evolution and validate its performance. Two
families of materials, advanced high strength steels and aluminum alloys, will
be investigated in this research, both of which are of interest to various
weight-sensitive applications, but have widely varying responses to severe
strain-path changes. Beyond the specific forming processes studied here, the
creation of a robust and computationally-efficient material model to describe
severe strain-path changes is expected to benefit the modeling of all multi-step
plastic deformation processes in industry, as well as low-cycle fatigue and
cyclic plasticity.