* 1929463
* 2019 Coastal Ocean Dynamics Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2019
* Erika McPhee-Shaw, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 29,850.00

This award supports the participation of U.S. based early career scientists in
the biennial Gordon Research Conference on Coastal Ocean Dynamics and its
associated Gordon Research Seminar. This conference brings together a diverse
group of academic, federal, and international researchers to share the latest
advances and identify new challenges in coastal ocean dynamics. The conference
focuses on novel and recent developments in the application of theory,
observations, and numerical modeling to further understanding coastal ocean
processes and improving our predictive capabilities. It is at the coast that
human activities are most connected with ocean circulation, and ocean modeling
offers great promise for connecting scientific research to societal needs
through such efforts as forecasting for marine operations and maritime safety,
monitoring and prediction of water quality, the transport and dispersal of water
borne pathogens, mapping and characterizing the habitats of marine life, and
downscaling global models of climate variability and climatic change to infer
their impacts in the coastal zone. An important broader impact of the conference
is the establishment and nurturing of relationships between senior researchers,
junior researchers and students for a variety of institutions. Nearly half of
the conference time is allocated to informal interactions among participants, to
provide numerous opportunities to build these relationships and exchange ideas
among people in different age groups, different sub-disciplines of the field, or
from different geographic regions. Funds will be used to expand the demographic,
professional and geographic diversity of participants by supporting attendance
by under-represented and under-resourced groups who stand to benefit from the
intellectual environment and networking opportunities of the Gordon Research
Conference and Gordon Research Seminar formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
provides funding for travel and registration support to U.S. based early-career
professionals and students to attend the Gordon Research Conference on Coastal
Ocean Dynamics which will be held at Southern New Hampshire University in
Manchester, New Hampshire, from June 16-21, 2019. This conference, convened
every two years, brings together a diverse group of academic, federal, and
international researchers to share the latest advances and identify new
challenges in coastal ocean dynamics. Here the term "coastal" refers to
estuarine, littoral zone, continental shelf, and shelf-break regions, including
mesoscale exchange processes with the adjacent deep-ocean or marginal seas. The
topics covered will include: 1) Shelf and Nearshore Sediment Transport Dynamics;
2) Novel Coastal Oceanographic Measurements and Analysis Techniques; 3) Links
Between Biogeochemical Dynamics and Coastal Ocean Physics; 4) Coastal Ocean
Observation and Modelling; 5) Advances in Understanding the Physics of Shallow
and Nearshore Coastal Waters; 6) Progress in Estuarine Physics; 7) Physical
Oceanography and Ocean Derived Energy; 8) Sub-mesoscale Processes and Non-Linear
Internal Waves; and 9) Discussion of Late-Breaking Topics in Coastal Dynamics.
The Coastal Ocean Dynamics GRC will be accompanied by a Gordon Research Seminar
that specifically targets professional development of students and early career
scientists, thereby greatly expanding the broader impact of the GRC itself.
Building on GRC's history of inclusion, the conference will include a special
session (GRC Power Hour) dedicated to supporting the professional growth of
women in our scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.