* 1929188
* RII Track-4: Mechanical Regulation of Intra-Nuclear Mechanics and Gene Transcription
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Gunes Uzer, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 11/30/2022
* USD 213,571.00

All living organisms, from animals to single cells, adapt to environmental
challenges to survive and function. In humans, for example, mechanical signals
generated by exercise is universally recognized to combat obesity, maintain a
healthy musculoskeletal system and improve quality of life. However, at the
cellular level, how these mechanical signals accomplish their function remains
as a critical knowledge gap that precludes us from understanding its underlying
principles. The aim of this project, through using state of the art
technologies, is to address this knowledge gap and promote scientific progress.
Understanding how environmental forces (wind, solar, electrical and mechanical)
regulate cell function is a first critical step in reverse engineering the cell
functions in order to generate next generation of solutions for broad range of
problems from health care to energy sustainability. To increase the positive
long-term impact on environmental and other goals of the nation, tools generated
will be disseminated across many platforms: undergraduate students will be
trained through yearly internships, concepts will be transferred via graduate
classes and new collaborations will be formed between researchers during summer
workshops. The proposed research program will be an excellent platform to
fascinate next generation students and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cellular adaptation to the local mechanical
environment requires orchestration from the moment of reception to distal gene
transcription. Central to this function, the nucleus responds to external
stimuli or its molecular transducers by regulating intra-nuclear organization
that ultimately determines gene expression to control cell function and fate.
While knowledge about individual processes including, mechanoreception, genomic
organization and transcription are exceedingly detailed, efforts to unify this
information into a set of deterministic rules is lacking. The long-term goal of
this research is to generate predictive models of how the chromatin nano-
environment adapts to the cellular macro-environment to control gene expression.
As a first critical step in answering this overarching question, this project
will focus on currently unknown spatial relationships between local nuclear
stiffening and mRNA transcription in living cells. By uniquely combining
deformation microscopy method with the tracking of mRNA transcription at a
single gene locus, this project aims to correlate full-field strain in the live
nucleus with the real-time mRNA transcription in mechanically challenged stem
cells. Correlations between subnuclear mechanics and mRNA transcription will
advance the scientific knowledge on how external mechanical force regulates cell
function. The PI aims to receive training to transfer the deformation microscopy
technique into Boise State University and combine it with live mRNA tracking and
adipogenic MSC differentiation model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.