* 1929187
* RII Track-4: Tailored Flow Boiling Mechanisms Using 3D Printed Multifunctional Wick Structures
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Gisuk Hwang, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 11/30/2023
* USD 243,635.00

Efficient and sustainable electrical power generation is critical to the U.S.
energy supply/security and economy, and it is dominated by thermo-electric
systems as the 83% of the electricity in 2018 has been generated from fossil
fuels and nuclear energy. The efficiency of the electrical power production is
bottlenecked by the performance of a steam generator, i.e., flow boiler, which
is caused by a local premature water dryout from excessive unwanted vapor
blankets. To address this challenge, the proposed research will a
multifunctional wick structure is proposed for effective liquid-vapor
separation, to simultaneously advance current technical limits on heat transfer
coefficient and maximum heat transfer rate per given surface area without
creating significant hydraulic pressure drop. A key success of the propose
research requires advanced manufacturing approach for the proposed
multifunctional wick structure with complex geometries. The PI will conduct the
research working with a collaborator at University of Nebraska, Lincoln (UNL)
using the-state-of-the-art metallic 3D printer with the high resolution at Nano-
Engineering Research Core Facility (NERCF). Also, this fellowship will greatly
strengthen the collaboration between the WSU and UNL. The obtained new knowledge
will be implemented into the education plans, which empower future engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A flow boiling system is crucial to various
energy and thermal management applications. However, as the system demands
miniaturization and high power energy consumption, the level of the heat
dissipation is expected to exceed the maximum cooling power of the conventional
flow boiling system, Critical Heat Flux (CHF). The CHF is caused by the
premature dryout at the flow exit, resulting in catastrophic system burnout,
which is caused by two-phase flow instability. Despite of extensive research,
currently there is no viable solution to mitigate CHF for long flow channel. The
objective of the proposed research is to understand tailored two-phase flow
instability and phase-change heat transfer mechanisms using the synergistic
combination of the developed mechanistic model, 3D printed multifunctional
wicks, i.e., shark-fin-like microporous structures, and in-situ/ex-situ
experimental validations. The proposed research will focus on three research
thrusts: (a) development of mechanistic models, predicting the tailoring CHF and
Heat Transfer Coefficient (HTC) mechanisms, (b) development of the additive
manufacturing with the controlled micropore sizes/geometries, while working with
collaborator at University of Nebraska, Lincoln by using the-state-of-the-art
metallic 3D printer with the high resolution, Lumex Avance-25 at Nano-
Engineering Research Core Facility (NERCF), and (c) in-situ/ex-situ experimental
validations of enhanced CHF and HTC. The research outcomes enable the
developments of efficient, scalable, and robust flow boiling systems including
power plant, electronic cooling, and aerospace
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.