* 1929750
* Collaborative Research: Low-head milldams as hotspots for denitrification and nitrogen consumption: Hydrologic and biogeochemical controls
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Marc Peipoch, Stroud Water Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 108,743.00

Milldam removals have increased in recent years with the highest removal rate in
the mid-Atlantic US. The primary motivation for dam removals has been to improve
fish passage and habitat, enhance safety for recreational users, and reduce
financial liability. Few studies have however studied how dam removals could
influence water quality. Dams tend to back-up and slow down stream water and
raise water levels in the streams and the adjacent soils. This provides an
unintended benefit of enhancing the natural filtering service of streamside
soils and forests for nitrogen, a key pollutant of our nation's waterways. Thus,
dam removals could undermine this valuable filtering service and increase the
cost of cleaning our waterways. This study will investigate the key processes by
which milldams enhance water quality in streams and streamside forests. Results
from this study will be conveyed to watershed managers and natural resource
agencies responsible for water quality management and dam removals. This
knowledge will help them make better and more informed decisions on dam
removals. The study will also provide valuable educational experience for two
graduate and one undergraduate student from the University of Delaware. A local
environmental historian will work with the undergraduate student and document
how milldams influenced stream conditions back in the 1700-1900s through study
of historic photographs, documents, and property
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Milldams reduce stream and groundwater flow
velocities and increase groundwater levels upstream of the dams. High
groundwater levels in riparian zones create hotspots for denitrification and an
increased opportunity for nitrogen (N) removal. Similarly, increased residence
time in streams and deposition of fine sediments and organic matter upstream of
the dam enhances the loss of N via instream denitrification. Low-head milldams
create a zone of hydrologic transition/divergence in riparian soils that
compliments the riverine discontinuum concept proposed for streams. These
hypotheses will be tested for three existing, sequential low-head mill dam sites
on White Clay Creek in Delaware. Groundwater wells and associated chemical
sampling will characterize the groundwater mixing regime. Stream assays and
measurements will help characterize the in-stream processes and changes.
Denitrification, nitrification and mineralization incubations on stream
sediments and riparian soils will quantify N processing and consumption. These
data will be integrated to develop a new, coupled, conceptual model for stream
and riparian processes and mixing regimes upstream of milldams. This will be the
first study to investigate how existing milldams affect riparian groundwater
hydrology and water quality. This research will also provide important insights
into hydrologic and biogeochemical conditions associated with stagnant or pooled
waters or "lentic" river regimes. These conditions certainly existed for the
dammed streams during the colonial and post-colonial era, but also exist today
in modern, disconnected, and urbanized stream networks. If this work shows that
riparian zones and streams near milldams are indeed hotspots and sinks for N
removal, the benefits of dam removal for habitat, safety, and natural flow
regimes will have to be weighed against the potential downside of losing
valuable water quality ecosystem services for N removal. Results from this study
will be presented at scientific meetings, published in refereed journals, and
will also be conveyed to the broader community and stakeholders through Science
Cafes and community charrettes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.