* 1929674
* Collaborative Research: Honeysuckle phylogenomics and the evolution of organ fusion (Lonicera, Caprifoliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Dianella Howarth, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 421,227.00

Plant structures such as flowers and fruits often develop through the fusion of
component parts. For instance, the bell-shaped flower of a morning glory is the
result of the fusion of five petals, while a pineapple results from the fusion
of the developing fruits of multiple individual flowers. Despite organ fusion
being important for generating diversity in plants, the process is understudied
in many plant groups. This project aims to understand the evolution and genetic
regulation of fusion using honeysuckles (genus Lonicera) as a model. Found
mostly in the Northern Hemisphere, honeysuckles include approximately 180
species, many of which exhibit different types of fusion within their flowers
and fruits. Fusion can be observed across pairs of leaves, between small leaf-
like structures associated with the flowers, or among adjacent fruits. This
project will reconstruct the evolutionary history of honeysuckles to determine
how many times -- and precisely how -- fusion has occurred during the evolution
of the group. Researchers will then investigate the genes that control fusion in
multiple species within the group. This project will provide the first
comprehensive evolutionary and genetic analysis of multiple fusion events within
a group of flowering plants. The project will greatly enhance genomic resources
for a widely cultivated group of plants, which also includes honeyberry
(Lonicera caerulea), a crop plant grown for the high antioxidant content of its
fruit. Fifteen undergraduates, a post-doctoral researcher and a graduate student
will be trained in diverse laboratory analyses and gain experience working in a
field setting. The botanical images produced from this research will form the
foundation for developing an art exhibit, Plant Communication and the Art of
Fusion, which will be displayed in the Art Gallery at The College of New Jersey
and at the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research combines phylogenomic, morphological, and evolutionary-
developmental approaches to test hypotheses on the evolution of fusion in
Lonicera and the genes that help regulate organ fusion. The researchers will
reconstruct a robust phylogeny for at least 130 of the 180 species of Lonicera
using a target-enrichment next-generation sequencing strategy. Researchers will
then document and reconstruct the evolutionary patterns of leaf, bracteole, and
ovary fusion throughout Lonicera, with an emphasis on ontogenetic changes in a
set of 22 focal species. Fused structures will be imaged and quantified to
determine the extent of fusion in each species. Finally, this project will
examine the phylogenetic history and expression of NAM-like fusion genes across
Lonicera to identify correlations between changes in morphology and changes in
gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.