* 1929390
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2019 ACM SIGCOMM Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Timothy Wood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 06/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

The 2019 SIGCOMM conference will take place from August 19 to August 23, 2019 in
Beijing, China. This award provides funds to assist 20 US-based graduate
students attend this conference. Participation in conferences such as SIGCOMM
forms a central part of the graduate school experience as it provides students
with an opportunity to interact with senior researchers from academia and
industry and exposes them to leading-edge research in the field. ACM SIGCOMM
stands unique in its emphasis on interactions between networking researchers at
an international level. Attending SIGCOMM presents an excellent opportunity for
US graduate students to connect with a thriving international research
community. In 2014-2015, SIGCOMM added additional programming to enrich the
student experience. A mentorship program has run in the past five years
assigning junior students with more senior mentors at the conference. In 2015,
the introduction of `preview sessions' gave students a chance to get briefed on
topics prior to attending main session talks. The response to both has been
extremely positive. Attending SIGCOMM will expose students to new ideas in
emerging research areas and allow them to interact with other researchers
thereby broadening their intellectual horizons. Support from this award enables
students to attend the main conference and associated workshops at SIGCOMM 2019.
The travel grant co-chairs are committed to the participation of women and
under-represented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attending SIGCOMM integrates
research and education of students through exposure to a premier technical
meeting in computer networks and communications. Students will have the
opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior
researchers in the field both in the main conference and the associated
workshops. The proposed student participation will have a positive impact on the
quality of their research. Women and other minorities are strongly encouraged to
participate. The SIGCOMM conference has developed into a top-tier international
conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to students to expand their
breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical
perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.