* 1929319
* RUI:  NSF-BSF:  PurSUiT:The Indo-Pacific zooxanthellate octocorals: an integrated approach to species delimitation, phylogenetics and biogeography
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Catherine McFadden, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 839,060.00

Coral reefs provide food, livelihoods and coastal protection for more than 500
million people worldwide. Yet these ecosystems are among those most threatened,
with some studies predicting that coral reefs may not survive into the next
century. Efforts to understand the ways in which coral reef communities are
changing are impeded by a lack of basic knowledge of the vast majority of the
invertebrate animals that contribute to their structure and function.
Additionally, changing ocean conditions appear to be shifting the dynamics
between stony corals and octocorals in ways that will fundamentally alter the
structure and function of reefs, as evidenced by Caribbean reef communities that
are increasingly dominated by non-reef-building octocorals. Relative to the
well-studied stony corals, however, little is currently known about the basic
ecology of most octocorals, including how many and which species co-occur or how
their populations vary over space and time, information that is necessary to
determine which species may be imperiled by climate change and which may instead
be benefitting. This lack of basic information is due in large part to the
difficulty of distinguishing and correctly identifying octocoral species,
coupled with a dearth of easily accessible resources to facilitate their
identification. This project will address this fundamental problem by (1)
combining molecular genetic analyses with high-resolution microscopy to
discriminate species of octocorals collected from throughout the Indo-Pacific;
(2) examining and re-describing historical specimens housed in major museum
collections to facilitate the correct assignment of names to those species; and
(3) compiling the information within a publicly accessible web portal that will
allow users worldwide to generate species checklists and interactive keys for
identifying reef-dwelling octocorals. The project represents a collaboration
between researchers from the U.S. and Israel. Project participants include a
post-doc, Israeli graduate students, undergraduates and high school students
from underserved communities in the greater Los Angeles
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Delimitation and validation of shallow-water,
zooxanthellate soft corals (families Alcyoniidae, Nephtheidae and Xeniidae) from
across the Indo-Pacific (IP) will facilitate the identification of species in
future studies of coral reef ecology and biodiversity, leading to increased
understanding of the dynamics of coral reef communities in an era of severe
deterioration due to global ocean change. DNA barcoding, target-enriched
sequence capture of ultraconserved elements and exons, and documentation of
morphological characters using high-resolution scanning electron microscopy will
be integrated to delimit species among ~5000 specimens of soft corals currently
available in museums as well as new collections from across the Indo-Pacific.
Simultaneously, all available type material will be documented with modern
imaging, re-described as necessary, and sequenced to facilitate assignment of
correct (or new) binomens to species. Georeferenced, expert-validated specimen
data will be compiled within a publicly available, searchable database with the
capability to generate regional species checklists and interactive taxonomic
keys. Recognition of species boundaries across the IP will enable the
identification of geographic regions with high species richness, high endemicity
or phylogenetically unique lineages that may merit special protection.
Reconstruction of fully resolved phylogenies for the IP soft coral species will
allow the testing of hypotheses about their biogeographic distribution and rates
and timing of diversification in comparison to the ecologically similar
scleractinian corals, contributing in general to our understanding of
macroevolutionary processes in the IP as well as informing conservation and
management strategies for reef biota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.