* 1929393
* LTER National Coordination Office:  Facilitating Collaboration, Accelerating Synthesis
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2025
* Martha Downs, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,786,899.00

Long-term research plays a key role in the development of fundamental ecological
understanding. Twenty-eight Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites are
distributed in habitats across the nation and in the tropical Pacific. Research
at each site provides important system-specific knowledge whereas integrating
across sites fosters the discovery of wide-spread patterns of ecosystem
functioning and general ecological theory. This project expands on the
coordination, communication, training, and synthetic research activities across
the network of Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites that were initiated
while first supported as the LTER National Communications Office. The Office
facilitates connections among LTER sites across multiple dimensions, including
hypothesis development, experimental design, measurement protocols, data
management, collaboration, communications training, education at all levels, and
outreach. The office supports shared governance and collaborative relationships
within the LTER network and strong ties with partner networks that are valuable
for expanding the reach and implications of LTER research. LTER sites train a
large fraction of the nation's ecologists in interdisciplinary team science and
an important subset of activities focuses on developing and sharing best
practices for inclusion and assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LTER Network
Office maintains and improves upon most of the activities of the current LNCO,
but with some re-organization and re-prioritization based on lessons learned
during the first 4 years of operation. The office remains cost-efficient through
affiliation with NCEAS, the National Center for Ecological Analysis and
Synthesis, and by supporting virtual meetings for synthesis research and
committee activities whenever appropriate. To engage the long-term research
community, the team continues to develop the LTER network website, newsletters,
and social media platforms. New tools to facilitate collaboration include a
redesigned centralized personnel database, collaboration platform, and
cumulative catalogue of LTER products. A central facet of the project is support
for multiple synthesis working groups selected by a rigorous panel process and
appropriately inclusive of terrestrial, coastal and marine scientists and
perspectives. Working groups are provided training and support in open data
practices and team science. Engaging partner networks such as the International
LTER network (ILTER), Critical Zone Observatories (CZO), and the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) is also a high priority for the
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.