* 1929318
* Phylogeny, historical biogeography, and floral ecological-evolutionary-developmental studies in Mariposa lilies and relatives (Calochortus, Liliaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Susan Strickler, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 902,777.00

Mariposa lilies and relatives (Calochortus, family Liliaceae) are a genus of
roughly 80 species of bulbous herbs. Most Calochortus species are found in
California but the group can also be found in other parts of western North
America and Central America. Calochortus species occur in diverse habitats and
have repeatedly evolved four striking floral syndromes (mariposas, cat's ears,
star tulips, fairy lanterns) marked by differences in flower shape, color,
hairiness, and whether flowers are nodding or erect. Most species are
individually restricted to narrow geographic areas, and 25% are associated with
serpentine soils. This project will examine the forces that have shaped both
differences in flower appearance of this charismatic group and driven their
geographic spread across the western US. The researchers will test theories for
how different habitats may favor the different four floral syndromes, and
evaluate whether the same or different genes or genetic pathways underlie the
development of similar floral syndromes. The study will provide unique insights
into the evolution of biological diversity by integrating ecology, evolution,
genomics, development, and biogeography. Two post-doctoral researchers, two
graduate students, and three undergraduates will be trained in diverse molecular
biology, developmental and evolutionary techniques. Results from the study will
be disseminated to the public via popular articles, outreach to K-12 teachers
and students, and by developing teaching materials for a college-level
laboratory study on floral evolution and California biogeography. Public
displays on Calochortus diversity will be exhibited at the Rancho Santa Ana
Botanical Garden and Cornell Botanic Gardens. A field course will provide
college students with hands-on experience involving natural history collections,
bioinformatics, and comparative biology. A multimedia presentation will be
developed and shown on public TV, with excerpts posted on YouTube. All data will
be made available publicly, including a database and dedicated website for the
extensive genomic resources that will be developed.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop Calochortus as a model for macro- and microevolutionary
studies by: (1) sequencing &gt;350 low-copy nuclear loci and whole plastid
genomes to derive fully resolved, strongly supported phylogenies; (2)
reconstructing trait evolution, climatic niche shifts, and historical
biogeography, including investigating the implications of an apparent ring
species complex in the Bay Area clade; (3) testing geographic-speciation theory
by determining whether sister taxa show a significant tendency to have
abutting/nearby ranges; and (4) conducting floral ecological-evolutionary-
developmental studies that examine the genetic, developmental, and ecological
bases for the cat's-ear and fairy-lantern floral syndromes. Researchers will use
analyses of selection on candidate genes, gene expression and evolution of
genetic networks, functional gene analysis through CRISPR genome editing and
comparative studies of developmental allometry, climatic niches, and genomic
data to better understand the mechanisms driving the recurrent evolution of
floral traits in specific environmental contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.