* 1929478
* Collaborative Research: Research: Characterizing Engineering Student Mental Wellness and Its Role in Predicting Engineering Attrition
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Andrew Danowitz, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 174,080.00

Both the need for increasing retention rates among engineers, and the
correlation between mental wellness and general student success are well
documented. However, there has been no comprehensive study exploring the
relationships between mental wellness and engineering student success or
retention. This studyss contribution is significant because analyzing how mental
wellness issues affect students? persistence in engineering and cataloguing a
list of mental wellness resources offered by engineering departments allows
programs to identify and support at-risk students, increasing their ability to
successfully retain and graduate a diverse class of engineers. The outcomes of
this project are: 1) characterizations of mental wellness of various engineering
student populations, including how prevalence of conditions changes throughout
the program and any inequities across demographic groups; 2) characterizations
of the relationships between Outcome 1 and intention to persist in engineering;
3) characterization of students? awareness of mental wellness resources
available to them; 4) a list of needs or gaps in mental wellness resources for
engineering students; 5) a model of engineering student success and retention
that accounts for mental wellness, and 6) stakeholder-specific materials and
trainings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to study how
student mental wellness factors into persistence for engineering students from
all backgrounds. The specific research aims are: 1) to characterize the mental
wellness of engineering students and its relationship to persistence, and 2) to
characterize institutional practices and services related to mental wellness.
The first aim is being accomplished through a mixed-methods, longitudinal study
consisting of surveys and interviews with engineering students at both large
research-oriented and smaller teaching-oriented engineering schools, and
Minority Serving Institutions around the country. The survey is a compilation of
validated instruments, and qualitative interviews will be used to explore in-
depth themes that emerge from the survey. The second research aim is being
accomplished through a survey with participating institutions to collect
information on how and to what extent mental wellness resources and materials
are incorporated into the engineering program. The education aim is to develop
research-based, actionable resources for administrators, counselors, faculty,
advisors, and students. This is being accomplished through the development of
materials and interactive trainings disseminated to different groups of
stakeholders. Each set of materials or trainings targets a specific group of
stakeholders and is designed with guidance from mental health professionals.
This study is significant because it is the first in-depth study of the
relationship between mental wellness and retention specifically for engineering
students. Educational materials created enhance intellectual infrastructure
locally and nationally by providing the first research-based interventions of
this kind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.