* 1929248
* Collaborative Research: The role of habitat transitions in parallel marine fish radiations
* BIO,DEB
* 02/20/2019,04/30/2020
* Ricardo Betancur, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2020
* USD 82,683.00

Fish diversity spans high-performance swimmers such as tunas, barracudas, and
swordfish that spend their entire life cruising the open ocean in search of food
(pelagic species) to sluggish, sedentary forms such as flounders or seahorses
that live buried in the bottom or attached to vegetation (benthic species). Much
variation in body form and habit can be explained by adaptation to the habitats
where these fishes live. But the effects of ecological habitat on processes
leading to diversification over evolutionary time remain poorly explored. This
project will focus on two groups of closely related species that harbor a huge
diversity of benthic and pelagic forms (about 2000 species) to disentangle the
effects of habitat transitions on rates of speciation and extinction.
Understanding the factors that promote diversification in form and habit is
important for the long-term conservation of marine biodiversity. Innovative
image data analysis necessary to synthesize morphological variation among these
fishes also will be applied to develop a fish species identification app for
smartphones (FishSnap) that will be freely available to the public, expandable
in the future to include all fishes. Educational opportunities will be available
for undergraduate and graduate students and outreach activities in partnership
with the National Museum of Natural History in Washington DC will result in a
new public exhibit on fish biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies in
fish phylogenetics are resolving long-lasting uncertainties about the
relationships among the most species-rich marine fish groups, and opening up
unprecedented opportunities to infer mechanisms that explain their extraordinary
diversity. This project takes advantage of newly discovered affinities among
fishes that revealed two independent clades with benthic and pelagic forms to
investigate connections between genomic and morphological features in relation
to their ecological habitat. The researchers will collect and compare a genome-
scale DNA sequence data set of protein-coding genes to infer a phylogenetic tree
for about 800 species of these two groups. This tree will be time-calibrated on
the basis of carefully selected fossil data to provide a dated evolutionary
framework for comparative studies. The project will also assemble a large
phenotypic (digital image) dataset of curated specimens for morphometric
analysis. Using state-of-the art comparative methodologies, this project will
shed light on the effect of habitat shifts along the benthic-pelagic axis on the
rate of morphological and lineage diversification. The integration of well-
resolved molecular phylogenies, the fossil record, trait and ecological data,
and comparative methodologies will provide new insights to understand the causes
of marine biodiversity.