* 1929099
* RII Track-4: Real-Time Radiation Dosimetry Using Flash Memory
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2023
* Biswajit Ray, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 11/30/2023
* USD 233,345.00

Throughout the world, radiation exposure has been on the rise due to the
increased use of nuclear power, medical procedures, nuclear weapons and natural
disasters affecting power plants such as in Fukushima, Japan. Increased exposure
to radiation has both short- and long-term detrimental effects on the human body
and rapid diagnosis (triage) of an absorbed dose of radiation is critical for
survivability. Thus, it is critical to have a fast, cost-effective and field-
deployable personal dosimetry solution without the overhead of additional
hardware or processing equipment. The project will develop a handheld, real-time
radiation dosimetry solution using commercially available flash memory chips.
Since memory chips are widely used in many embedded systems (e.g., smartphones)
and wearable devices (e.g., fitness belts), this projectâ€™s concept could provide
a paradigm shift in radiation dosimetry through distributed smart devices, which
will be very useful for health monitoring, remote sensing, military
applications, nuclear-reactor safety and space applications. In addition, the
project has a strong educational component that includes the training of
underrepresented students, the involvement of undergraduate students in research
and the incorporation of the project's research findings into
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a
novel cost-effective radiation-dosimeter technology using the bit error rate of
commercial flash memory. The dosimetry solution will provide real-time read-out
of absorbed dose value, which is ideal for rapid diagnosis applications to
minimize health risk for those who work closer to radiation environment. The
technology can also facilitate a wireless sensor network (e.g., through
smartphones), and transmit data to a central facility to provide better
situational awareness over a larger area. The project takes advantage of the
instrumentation and expertise at Oak Ridge National Laboratory to demonstrate
the validity of a flash memory-based dosimetry concept through a series of
radiation-exposure experiments. Both modeling and experimentation will be
performed to determine the range of operation of the proposed dosimeter and to
enhance its accuracy, sensitivity and selectivity. In addition, we propose novel
measurement techniques in order to understand and quantify the (i) dose-
enhancement effect when ionizing radiation goes through the back end of the line
metal layers of a chip, (ii) directionality effects of the incident radiation
beam on the memory and (iii) ionization vs. displacement damage effect in the
flash-memory array. Thus, this research advances our knowledge on the radiation-
matter interaction and the radiation-related reliability physics of
semiconductor devices. The research will also enable a wireless, passive, in-
situ, real-time radiation-dosimetry solution that can be customized for a wide
range of applications including personnel dosimetry, safety, space and
commercial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.