* 1929155
* RII Track-4: Building the Next Generation Meteo-Hydrological Model for Hawaii
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Yinphan Tsang, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 11/30/2023
* USD 197,913.00

Water resources are essential provisioning services in Hawaii. Because of its
unique location and geology, water issues in Hawaii are tightly connected with
climate and geology. In view of increasing climate variability and extreme
weather events such as flooding and drought, a meteo-hydrological model is
needed to advance our understanding of the water cycle and better predict and
manage future availability of water resources. This fellowship will establish
collaboration between the university and national research laboratory to address
water issues that contribute to both economic (e.g., resources and food
production) and security (e.g., flood and drought prediction and assessment) in
the state. This proposal will support an early-career female minority faculty on
tenure-track to establish a new research direction in meteo-hydrological
modeling, and will support a female Ph.D. student for training integral to her
dissertation project at the UHM. The established meteo-hydrological model will
become a new skill set and tool for PI Tsang to collaborate with researchers
within and outside of the university and tackle statewide food, water, and
energy issues. Both university and the state of Hawaii will benefit from having
a large scale meteo-hydrological model and the capacity to tackle the statewide
economic, agricultural, environmental challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
EPSCoR RII Track-4 fellowship will support training opportunities for PI Tsang
in meteo-hydrological modeling skills and initiate a new and long-term
collaboration between the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM) and the National
Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), at Boulder, CO. This project will expand
PI Tsang's current research by allowing her to incorporate advanced atmospheric
model information to study complex hydrological systems in Hawaii. By working
with the experienced Weather Research and Forecasting Model Hydrological
modeling system (WRF-Hydro) development team at NCAR, PI Tsang will be able to
establish a next-generation hydrological model for the state of Hawaii. During
the fellowship, this collaboration aims to 1) incorporate finer resolution
meteorological data to the model and 2) improve the representation of
groundwater contribution to baseflow in the model. This model, WRF-Hydro-Hawaii,
will have the capacity to couple weather information from climate models to
provide higher spatial and temporal resolution in describing the hydrological
responses, such as streamflow and flood forecasting, in Hawaii. The WRF-Hydro-
Hawaii model will also be configured to run on the High Performance Computing
(HPC) cluster at UHM. PI Tsang's research group will continue the model
development, contribute improved modules to the WRF-Hydro modeling community,
and apply WRF-Hydro-Hawaii beyond flood forecasting to include water
availability for food production and issues on natural resources and
environmental management. The newly developed modules of refined rainfall-
pattern representation and groundwater-surface water interaction will contribute
to the improvement of WRF-Hydro that applies to other tropical islands and
continental systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.