* 1929136
* RII Track-4: Evolutionary Genomics of Multispecies Ecological Interactions
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Peter Zee, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 106,184.00

Ecological communities are comprised of different species populations that
interact with one another. A central goal of the field of community ecology is
to understand the outcomes of these various species interactions. Given that
organismal traits govern the interactions between species, an understanding of
how traits evolve in a community context is critical for a clearer picture of
the dynamics of ecological communities. The aim of this research to understand
the evolution of these traits in multispecies communities, and to determine if
and how evolution differs in pairwise vs. more diverse species combinations.
Experimental evolution is a powerful tool for the study of evolution in the
laboratory. By subjecting organisms with rapid generation times to selection
pressures, investigators can observe evolutionary changes at both the phenotypic
and genotypic level in real time. In this project, the PI will experimentally
evolve predator-prey interactions between roundworms and two species of bacteria
to quantify changes in their interactions. With collaborators at New York
University, the PI will gain training in methods to produce and analyze genomic
DNA sequence data of evolving populations of the predatory roundworms, allowing
for linkages between genetic and community-level changes. Findings will further
our understanding of how genetic evolution proceeds in ecological communities
and contribute to our understanding of the forces structuring biodiversity
across scales of organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species interactions are a
ubiquitous feature of ecological communities. As such, understanding the
outcomes of these interactions provides important information for the
maintenance of biodiversity. Since the outcomes of the interactions are often
mediated by organismal traits, understanding how these traits, and thus
interactions, evolve over time will be key to understanding biodiversity
dynamics over time. Linking the underlying genetic variation to these community
level phenotypes (i.e., species interactions) is the goal of this proposal. This
project will use an experimental ecological module with the model organisms
Caenorhabditis elegans (nematode), Myxococcus xanthus (bacteria), and
Escherichia coli (bacteria) to study evolving communities. With these
genetically tractable species, this project will simultaneously measure both
phenotypic (ecological) and the underlying genomic changes in the DNA.
Activities of this fellowship include the training of the PI in genetic and
genomic analyses of Caenorhabditis nematodes, top predators in the experimental
system, to link phenotypic changes in model communities to the underlying
genetic changes. With collaborators at the host institution (New York
University), genomic sequence data from populations of C. elegans nematodes
evolved in different ecological settings will be generated and analyzed to
determine how patterns of genomic evolution vary across these scenarios. Results
from this research will provide insight into whether and how the genomic targets
of selection are qualitatively different in pairwise vs. multispecies community
interactions. The proposed research will contribute to understanding the
linkages between evolutionary genetics, community ecology, and the scales of
biological organization (i.e., genomics and
communities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.