* 1929688
* Identifying Genomic Signatures of Evolutionary and Cultural Change in Native Americans
* SBE,BCS
* 01/16/2019,05/31/2022
* Deborah Bolnick, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2022
* USD 59,909.00

This project investigates how Native American genetic diversity changed over
time and across space in response to sociocultural and demographic shifts over
the last 1000 years. During this period, Native American populations in the
continental US were affected by expanding trade networks, a growing reliance on
agriculture, increasingly permanent settlements, and population growth. After AD
1492, European contact led to significant cultural changes as well as disease
epidemics, demographic collapse, population restructuring, and genetic exchange
with new tribes and non-native peoples. These developments are well documented,
but it is not known how they influenced the genetic makeup of Native American
populations. By characterizing genetic diversity, this project will help
elucidate the genetic structure and evolutionary history of Native North
Americans, improve our understanding of how sociocultural, demographic, and
evolutionary change influences the human genome, and fill a critical need for
genome-wide data from the indigenous inhabitants of the continental US, who have
been underrepresented in scientific research and public genetic databases. The
project provides research experience and training for undergraduates, graduate
students, a postdoctoral researcher, and a K-12 public school science teacher.
Educational modules are also being developed for high school and college science
courses and for the Summer Internship for Native Americans in Genomics (SING).
This project therefore advances scientific knowledge, expands the participation
of underrepresented groups in science, improves science education, and increases
public engagement with science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
is evaluating temporal and spatial patterns of genetic diversity in the
Midwestern US using existing datasets from the region and new genetic data being
collected from three burial populations in the Ohio River Basin. The three major
goals are: (1) characterize genomic diversity across time and space in the Ohio
River Basin, (2) reconstruct the maternal population history of the Midwestern
US using spatially and temporally diverse samples from the Ohio River Basin and
the Illinois River Valley, and (3) evaluate whether sociocultural and
evolutionary changes between 1000 and 1700 AD altered the genomic structure of
an ancient population in the Ohio River Basin. To achieve these goals, genomic
data will be collected using newly developed target capture and next-generation
sequencing technologies. An extensive set of genomic markers (genome-wide SNPs,
mitochondrial DNA sequences, and 23 Y chromosome STRs) will be analyzed, which
will make it possible to test hypotheses about how post-1000 AD migration,
genetic drift, and selection altered the genetic structure of Native Americans.
Mitochondrial data from seven other eastern North American sites will be
analyzed to develop models of regional interaction.