* 1929918
* 2019 Graduate Climate Conference; Woods Hole, Massachusetts; November 7-10, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Raffaele Ferrari, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This award supports the 13th Graduate Climate Conference (GCC), held 7-10
November 2019 at the Marine Biological Laboratory of the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute. The conference has been held annually and alternates
between Woods Hole and the Pack Forest Center of the University of Washington.

The GCC is an interdisciplinary climate conference organized by and for graduate
students. It provides a discussion forum for students conducting research on
climate in a variety of disciplines including atmospheric dynamics, ocean
dynamics, ocean biology and chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, climate dynamics,
paleoclimate, and human dimensions of climate variability and change. The
meeting is intended to help students familiarize themselves with the breadth of
climate science, gain exposure to the enormous range of tools available to
address climate-related questions, and understand how their research fits into
the broader landscape of current climate science. The conference seeks to better
prepare graduate students for scientific inquiry in a field that increasingly
demands interdisciplinary approaches. Funds provided here support travel and
subsistence for 80 students chosen through a competitive process which places
emphasis on selecting a cross-section of applicants that reflects the diversity
of the next generation of scientists

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.