* 1929086
* RII Track 4: Non-Reciprocal Spin-Wave Engineering in Chiral Magnets
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,10/31/2021
* Emrah Turgut, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 10/31/2021
* USD 117,399.00

Waves are in many parts of our lives, from communication to computation, and are
a subject of intense research. In particular, micro and millimeter waves have
been paid great attention for next-generation technologies, e.g., 5G/millimeter-
wave wireless network, due to the ever-increasing demand in mobile data by the
explosion of mobile users and IoT. However, the fabrication of reconfigurable
high-frequency devices and components has been a challenge due to the lack of
appropriate materials. Recent developments in chiral and magnetic meta-materials
that facilitate asymmetric spin-wave propagation are promising for creating
microwave circulators and diodes based on spin waves. These spin waves are
highly configurable because the magnetic interactions in chiral magnets and
asymmetric magnetic multilayers can be tailored, and these materials are highly
sensitive to external magnetic fields and laser pulses for further manipulation.
The demonstration of such configurable, power-efficient, and versatile microwave
components will pave the way towards new high-frequency communication devices,
which can be used in various applications, including entertainment, security,
and remote patient treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joined effort between
Oklahoma State University and Nanoscale Spin Dynamics group at NIST, Boulder,
will accelerate materials discovery and device characterization for superior and
reconfigurable microwave components that can operate from a few GHz up to THz
frequencies. The proposed research will advance the fundamental understanding of
non-reciprocal spin-wave propagation in chiral magnetic materials, which is
caused by asymmetric exchange interaction in them due to the broken inversion
symmetry. These spin-waves are non-trivial compared to light or other waves, but
they can be highly tractable by tailoring magnetic interactions, applying
external electric and magnetic fields, or exciting with ultrashort pulses.
Control of magnetic interactions will be achieved by engineering interfaces of
magnetic material and adjacent metal layers to minimize magnon scattering but
maintain high non-reciprocity. Numerical micromagnetic simulations will be used
to optimize device performance and to better understand spin-wave propagation in
complex heterostructures. For this purpose, the team will (i) grow and
synthesize low-damping chiral magnetic materials and thin films, (ii) precisely
characterize their structural and magnetic properties, and (iii) fabricate micro
and nanoscale devices for the development of device concepts. Broadband
ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy, magnetometry, Brillouin light scattering
spectroscopy, magnetotransport, and heterodyne magneto-optical microwave
microscopy are the techniques to be employed in this
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.