* 1929127
* RII Track-4: Investigating Solar Wind-Magnetosphere Coupling
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Piyush Mehta, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 11/30/2023
* USD 273,734.00

The Sun drives almost all of the (neutral and charged particle) fluctuations in
near Earth space or geospace. The energy from the Sun carried by solar wind is
transferred to the geospace at the edge of the Earth's magnetic field or
magnetosphere through an interaction process called magnetic reconnection. The
geospace fluctuations caused by this energy transfer can adversely impact
critical national infrastructure (e.g. satellites, power grids, etc.) and
endanger the astronauts. However, we do not yet completely understand how the
different solar wind conditions affect the amount of energy transferred into the
magnetosphere. The fellowship will combine the magnetospheric expertise at the
Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) with the data science/machine learning
expertise of the PI at West Virginia University (WVU) to develop a new model for
the geospace/magnetosphere that will help to improve our understanding of this
energy transfer process. The project will provide a unique training opportunity
for the PI and a graduate student at WVU through visits to LANL and foster long-
term collaboration partnerships that will improve research and education in the
state of West Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geospace environment is a
highly complex system made up of regions that are closely coupled together. The
regions undergo significant variations caused by energy input from the solar
wind. The energy transfer occurs primarily through a process known as magnetic
reconnection which fuels almost all of the physical and dynamical geospace
processes. Understanding the solar wind-magnetosphere coupling is crucial to
modeling and predicting the geospace variations that can threaten safety,
infrastructure, and property on Earth, in the air, and in space. The goal of the
proposed project is to gain new insights into the physics of solar wind-
magnetosphere coupling. Simulation studies can provide invaluable insights into
the process; however, the impact of existing models is limited by their
considerable computational cost. The project will combine the magnetospheric
expertise at LANL and PI's expertise in Physics-Informed Machine Learning to
develop a reduced order model (ROM) that embeds the physics of the full physical
model but significantly reduces the computational cost. The ROM will permit, for
the first time, a comprehensive sensitivity and uncertainty analyses to identify
the dominant solar wind drivers. Combined with systematic and comprehensive
model-data comparisons, the ROM will reveal the paramount processes and may even
discover overlooked or missing elements in the solar wind-magnetosphere
coupling. The project will provide one graduate student valuable training and
help develop a long-term partnership between WVU and LANL that will enhance
research and education in the state of West Virginia and make it more
competitive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.