* 1929476
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Abrupt Change in Climate and Ecosystems: Where are the Tipping Points?
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* John Williams, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The capability to bring computer science and technology as well as large and
complex data sets to bear on interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary science is
emerging. It is therefore critically important to establish and enable
transnational frameworks so that data-driven scientific knowledge can transcend
disciplines and geographical borders, ultimately increasing the scientific
underpinnings of policy and action. International collaboration within global
environmental change research fields holds the potential to establish
international foundations for federated data integration and analysis systems
with shared services, bring together best practices from the public and private
sectors, foster open data and open science stewardship among the science
communities including related areas such as publishing, and encourage data and
cloud providers and others to adopt common standards and practices for the
benefit of all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a coalition of 29 funding
agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum Call for proposals on
Science-driven e-Infrastructure Innovation (SEI) for the Enhancement of
Transnational, Interdisciplinary and Transdisciplinary Data Use in Environmental
Change. SEI is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects
that bring together environmental, social and economic scientists with data
scientists, computational scientists, and e-infrastructure and cyber-
infrastructure developers and providers to solve one or more of the
methodological, technological and/or procedural challenges currently facing
inter-disciplinary and transdisciplinary environmental change research that
involves working with large, diverse and multi-source transnational data. The
SEI call will intimately link research thinking and technological innovation
toward accelerating the full-path of discovery-driven data use and open science
and enable a broader scientific community to benefit from the identified new and
potentially disruptive demonstrators or pilots toward
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The historical record indicates that abrupt and
unexpected change is the norm, not the exception and that these changes have
direct consequences for many species and civilizations. Long&amp;#8208;term
records from natural and historical archives have been essential to identifying
these tipping elements, because past abrupt changes have occurred rapidly but
infrequently, making them impossible to observe with instrumental records. The
key limitations to addressing and communicating this major challenge in
sustainability research is data access and incompatibility. Inaccessible or
"dark" data, unstructured data, the lack of e-infrastructure to integrate
multinational and multidisciplinary databases and datasets, are fundamental
limit our understanding of abrupt change. This project, run by a diverse,
international consortium of ecologists, climate scientists and informaticists
will seek to build e-infrastructure that enables efficient cross-resource data
access between trans-disciplinary and transnational data resources; and create
an analysis package that allows users to detect, map and investigate abrupt
change in Earth systems. The project will focus on determining the tipping
elements in Earth's climate and ecosystems and to understand what drove rapid
desertification in subtropical North Africa 6,000 years ago. In addition, the
project will seek to model the FAIR data principles: 1) Findable: exposing dark
data and developing tools for data discovery. 2) Accessible: transferring dark
data to open-access platforms. 3) Interoperable: building cyberinfrastructure
that enables cross-access. And 4) reusable: generating data synthesis products
that identify essential metadata as a model for future data generators, while
working with stakeholders to facilitate the development of community endorsed
data standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.