* 1929727
* CAREER: Characterizing Gendered Socialization of Newcomer Engineers to Promote Inclusive Practices and Retention of a Diverse Workforce
* ENG,EEC
* 08/30/2018,07/31/2023
* Kacey Beddoes, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2023
* USD 504,220.00

There is a pressing need to understand the high rates of attrition from
engineering careers, particularly within the first five to ten years of
employment. According to the scientific literature, no existing research has
systematically examined the gendered organizational socialization experiences of
newcomer men and women engineers. Accordingly, this project examines gendered
organizational socialization of newcomer engineers. It begins the long-term work
of developing processes of acculturation to the engineering profession that are
compatible with intersecting non-normative identities, by creating an
empirically-supported and engineering-specific model of gendered socialization.
The integrated education and research plan is likely to yield a dramatic impact
on the field of engineering education by prioritizing the importance of
underutilized gender theories, enrolling men in gender research and systems
change, and addressing the gap in research on engineering workplaces.
Ultimately, this project facilitates greater equality in the socialization of
newcomer engineers to decrease attrition from engineering careers and broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to develop a theoretical model of
gendered socialization in civil engineering workplaces and to create research-
based interventions for more inclusive socialization. Mixed-methods data will be
collected longitudinally over four years, through twice-monthly Individual
Socialization Logs (a new instrument developed during the course of this
project) and twice-yearly in-depth interviews with thirty diverse newcomer
engineers from around the country. Expected project outcomes include
identification and characterization of facets of organizational socialization
(e.g., practices, processes, relationships and social networks) that are
gendered, including how they are gendered intersectionally (i.e., varying across
other types of identity, such as race). The research findings and the model
created from them are being utilized to create professional formation materials
for graduating civil engineering students and civil engineering professionals.
Materials are also being implemented nationally and locally in capstone design
courses and workshops for engineering companies. Further, this project
contributes, simultaneously, to the fields of engineering education, engineering
studies, organizational studies, and gender studies.