* 1929379
* Conference on Plant Synthetic Biology Conference to be held in San Jose CA;  August 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Andrew Hanson, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The Plant Synthetic Biology (SynBio) Satellite Meeting, convened by the American
Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB), aims to raise community consciousness of
what SynBio is and what it can do in key areas of economic and intellectual
pursuit. These include crop productivity, specialty chemicals, biosensors, and
microbe-plant interactions. The conference is structured to maximize engagement
and information sharing among an estimated 185 participants at all career stages
from academic, industry, and government research teams and promote public
sector?industry exchanges. The impact will be especially great on early-career
plant scientists, all of whom will spend their careers in the SynBio era and
many of whom will pursue careers in SynBio research and development.
Accordingly, up to 34 early career researchers will be supported by this award,
with a special emphasis on broadening participation. The Plant SynBio Satellite
Meeting will leverage its association with the annual American Society of Plant
Biology 2019 meeting, which typically attracts more than 1,300 scientists from
40 countries and which will be held at the same site (San Jose, CA) just prior
in August 2019. The two conferences will be integrated via a shared plenary
symposium on SynBio, further extending the impact of this award to the broader
plant science community that ASPB serves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synthetic biology
(SynBio) is a transformative combination of DNA technologies, engineering
principles, and computational tools that makes it possible to design new life
processes and to repurpose existing, natural ones to generate new knowledge,
devices, and products. SynBio is already transforming plant science in fields
ranging from biosynthetic pathways to the interactions between plants and
microorganisms. As both a conceptual and an operational revolution, SynBio
promises to be even more creatively disruptive than the molecular biology
revolution that began in the 1970s. This is because SynBio (i) opens access to
the vast "design space" that plants and other organisms have that is not
represented in the natural world, and (ii) industrializes biology by augmenting
step-by-step work with computationally guided, automated, and standardized
engineering procedures. SynBio-based companies are burgeoning, as are the career
pathways that they create; however, plant scientists at all career stages are
only just starting to appreciate the extent to which SynBio will impact training
needs and the design and execution of experiments. The Plant SynBio Satellite
Meeting, convened by the American Society of Plant Biologists, aims to raise
community consciousness of what SynBio is and what it can do in key areas of
economic and intellectual pursuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.