* 1929917
* A Conference Organizing Urban Transects for a Sustainable Transformation of Economic Partnerships across the Lower Great Lakes (OUTSTEP-LGL)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Christian Renschler, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This project consists of a conference of research scholars and stakeholders that
will address the need for sustainable development of urban systems in the Lower
Great Lakes (LGL) region, comprised of the U.S. portion of the watersheds of
Lakes Erie and Ontario. The urban areas in this region, intersected by rural
areas, share a common environmental settling and history of natural resource
exploitation, followed by industrialization, then de-industrialization and
little to no population growth. Environmental variability and the need to
prepare for and adapt to its impacts pose a new challenge to the urban systems
essential to the region's sustainable development. The region is not anticipated
to be as severely impacted by environmental change as other parts of the U.S.
and might become a corridor of relative stability possible resulting in in-
migration and increased economic activities while renewing pressure on natural
resources, thus challenging sustainability. The region's urban and rural systems
require a holistic assessment of current and future sustainability stressors.
The intellectual merit of the project lies in the creation of a network to
develop scholarly research and interdisciplinary communication with stakeholders
to provide the foundation for a sustainable and resilient strategy on urban
systems. The broader social impact of the project will be realized through the
resulting coordination and collaboration in the realm of sustainability that
will enhance the region's essential infrastructure and quality of life, help
safeguard public health, and contribute to economic competitiveness.

Against the backdrop of a growing appreciation among scholars and stakeholders
of the sustainability challenges arising from the differential environmental
variability, the scientific focus of the project will be on the development of
new insights and approaches to supporting new sustainable development modes of
urban systems. The objective in organizing and hosting a three day OUTSTEP-LGL
conference is to provide a scientific foundation for a sustainability strategy
on urban systems for the LGL region by bringing together sustainability and
resilience scholars from across academic disciplines and stakeholders. The
'PEOPLES' Resilience Framework will provide the organizing principle of the
conference. A session will be devoted to each of the seven dimensions of
systems' functionality: 1) Population and Demographics, 2) Ecosystem Services,
3) Organized Governmental Services, 4) Physical Infrastructure and Lifelines, 5)
Lifestyle and Community Competence, 6) Economic Services, and 7) Socio-Cultural
Services. The conference is expected to initiate a region-wide research and
community engagement effort, plans for the sustainable development of urban and
rural systems, and thus advance research in the field of urban sustainable
systems, adding to the curriculum of participating faculty and benefit the
regions' citizens through its sustainability enhancement of urban systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.