* 1929920
* Conference: Research Network for Sustainable Urban Infrastructure - Summer 2019.   To Be Held At Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Kimberly Kurtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Functioning, resilient, sustainable infrastructure systems are essential to the
U.S. economy. Americans depend on electricity, roads and other transport
systems, food and fuel deliveries, safe drinking water, and effective waste
management. Communication services need to work, everywhere and all the time.
All these infrastructure services need to be delivered at low cost with broad
accessibility. New technologies and economic development are shifting the
requirements and expectations for these infrastructures, even while costs
continue to rise. Engineers, scientists, and stakeholders with diverse skills
and perspectives will come together in a two-day workshop to examine new
approaches for improving the efficiency, sustainability, and resilience of the
infrastructure systems of U.S. cities and regions. The workshop will develop
scientific collaborations to advance the understanding of infrastructures in
urban systems. Participants will seek opportunities for integrated systems that
can work together efficiently and that support the communities that they serve.
Researchers and practitioners with expertise spanning low-income neighborhood
innovations, new technologies, and emerging engineering and science will work
together to develop a foundation for new educational programs, research, and
real projects that can be tested and replicated across the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two-day conference will be held in the summer of 2019
to develop new perspectives for addressing persistent, complex, and emerging
problems in urban infrastructure sustainability. The conference will catalyze
new industry, government, and NGO collaborations with academia. A diversity of
participants will bring a range of expertise and experience for deep framing of
the challenges of infrastructure systems. Conference participants will reach
beyond their current work to articulate and create new efforts in urban
sustainability, partnering with practitioners to improve urban outcomes. The
conference will be held on the campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology in
Atlanta, Georgia. Several research frameworks and practical approaches are
emerging that can provide insights into how the components of urban systems the
infrastructures, and the communities, the dynamics at smaller scales and at
larger scales, and in different geographical circumstances interact, and how
they change over time. This conference brings together diverse experts to
connect approaches for understanding urban systems, that include infrastructure
ecology, biologically inspired design, complex systems, and mega-scale
computational capability with practitioner approaches that include corporate
sustainability initiatives, community-based equity and justice, and new
technology platforms for economic transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.