* 1929271
* Collaborative Research: Virus Assembly in Extreme Environments: A Structural and Genetic Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Marc Morais, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2022
* USD 426,600.00

This project will investigate the structure of Sulfolobus spindle-shaped virus 1
(SSV1), a virus from volcanic hot springs. The uniquely-shaped SSV1 thrives in
acidic hot springs at above 175 &amp;#730;F (80 &amp;#730;C). Determining a
high-resolution SSV1 structure will contribute to understanding how proteins
interact at high temperatures. Discovering the genetic determinants of the SSV1
structure will provide insight into the stability not only SSV1, but all
proteins. The research will also provide insight into virus evolution, and how
life could have survived the extreme conditions present on early earth and/or on
extra-terrestrial planets. The project will also provide research experiences to
approximately 65 undergraduates working on SSV1 mutants. The project will
communicate science to the public in collaboration with the Oregon Museum of
Science and Industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address three
open questions regarding the structure of SSV1: How does the virus form its
unique spindle-shaped structure? What is the structure of the SSV1 tail that
binds to the host cell? What are the critical amino acids in the capsid
proteins? To answer these questions, this research will use a combination of
cutting-edge cryo-electron microscopy techniques and genetic screens and
selections. The research will evaluate two competing models for the SSV1
structure and could provide a new structural paradigm for virus structure. This
research will provide a strong foundation for community outreach to educate and
excite the public, and inspire the next generation of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.