* 1929143
* RII Track 4: Form Finding and Optimization of the Structural Foundations of Mega-Flora
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Bret Lingwall, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 242,123.00

Foundation design has stagnated, stuck in technologies developed decades ago.
Shallow and deep foundations are energy intensive and disruptive to install,
inefficient in their form and shape. Infrastructure modernization critically
depends on design and fabrication of systems with robust functionality at a
minimum of energy and materials investments. The solution to this lethargy lays
in the foundations of Mega-Flora, large trees. These natural foundation systems
have been optimized for a minimum of materials while providing resistance to
enormous loads. However, there is little understanding to the role large roots
play in structural stability. A new generation of foundation systems can be
inspired by nature, but the first step to is to study the form and shape of
natural foundations. The work of this award includes mapping the form, shape and
mechanics of the roots of large trees. This understanding will lead to new
design paradigms. A fundamental understanding of the principles underlying the
foundations of mega-flora will significantly improve our ability to design
foundations that require less resources, better resist hazards, and improve life
safety. Society benefits via resilient infrastructure constructed at less cost.
Better knowledge of tree roots will aid foresters in conservation of America's
priceless Sequoia, Redwood, and Aspen
treasures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the unique shape and form of the
foundation systems of mega-flora that nature seeks is important for biomimetic
engineering of new structural foundations. A new generation of anthropogenic
foundation systems can be inspired by these natural systems, but the first step
to revitalizing of foundation engineering is to study the topology and
morphology of natural foundations. We hypothesize that shape analysis and form-
finding optimization techniques can be used identify the predominant forms and
shapes of the root topologies that nature seeks to optimize structural
stability. These optimized shapes and forms can then be used to inspire a new
generation of biomimetic foundations. A global database of 1st order roots is
coupled with in-situ mapping roots as inputs to Shape Analysis. Form Finding is
then used to identify optimal form and shape. This project greatly advances
knowledge and understanding across different fields with synergy between
engineering and ecology via a fellowship at Princeton University's Form-Finding
Laboratory. The research effort will result in: (1) physical model data; (2)
application of geophysics to new problems, (3) new applications of shape
analysis, and (4) the first use of form-finding techniques for buried systems.
The behavior of foundations inspired by these shapes and mechanics will lead to
new design methods. To perform the research, new methods for geotechnical
analyses will be derived in the form-finding paradigm. Validation of novel in-
situ imaging of buried roots is transferable to other problems of ecology and
geology, as is adaptation of shape analysis for 1st order root structure
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.