* 1929522
* Collaborative Research: Novel trophic interactions determined by phytochemistry, pathogen infection, and parasitoids
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 521,059.00

In a rapidly changing environment, the value of understanding the complexity of
species interactions cannot be overstated. This includes the formation of
associations between parasites and novel hosts. This research investigates the
interaction between a virus that infects butterflies on both their native food
plant, or 'hostplant', and a recently adopted exotic hostplant. This newly
discovered virus has unknown consequences for populations of butterflies.
However, prior research suggests that the chemistry of the hostplants may have
therapeutic effects. How does the outcome of viral infection on individuals and
populations of Baltimore checkerspot butterflies depend on the choice of a
native or exotic hostplant? The researchers also will study parasitic wasps that
attack the caterpillars. Parasitic wasps may alter the entire set of
interactions between the butterflies, hostplants and the virus. By understanding
disease dynamics within human-altered environments, detrimental impacts on
species can be mitigated. This project includes a museum exhibit on the
diversity of viruses, a symposium on insect-virus ecology, and the inclusion of
undergraduate and graduate student research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;All consumers
use a subset of the organic resources in their environment. Understanding which
resources are used by a particular consumer, and the limitations of those
resources, are issues that are both foundational to the ecological sciences and
important for understanding rapid global environmental change. Herbivorous
insects are central to general theory to understand dietary niche breadth. The
relevant resources (hostplants) are discrete and experimentally tractable, and
herbivorous insects are key to terrestrial ecosystem function. A relatively
understudied element of dietary breadth is the process of host expansion, when
new hostplants are adopted into the diet of an insect herbivore. This project
takes advantage of a recently formed interaction between the Baltimore
checkerspot butterfly (Euphydryas phaeton, Nymphalidae) and the exotic narrow-
leaved plantain (Plantago lanceolata, Plantaginaceae) to develop mathematical
models for macroparasite population dynamics on a novel plant species.
Predictions will be tested using laboratory and mesocosm experiments that
include infection with butterfly 'enemies', a naturally-occurring pathogenic
virus and parasitoid wasp, both of which attack caterpillars of the butterfly.
The overarching question of this project is: Can we predict persistence of the
butterfly populations from the interactions with enemies on native and exotic
hostplants? While addressing this larger question, the study will improve our
empirical understanding of virus and parasite ecology by investigating dose
dependent effects of the pathogen, virus transmission, and caterpillar survival
mediated by hostplant chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.