* 1929866
* Collaborative Research: Anomalous Plasma Cooling in the Topside Ionosphere During Solar Eclipses
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Marc Hairston, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 08/31/2023
* USD 155,543.00

Previous observations during the 2017 solar eclipse in the weakly ionized
portion of the upper atmosphere (the ionosphere) revealed a surprising result.
Rather than the expected smooth response to the Moon's shadow, the electron and
ion temperatures observed by two satellites traversing the topside ionosphere at
850 km in altitude showed complex and sporadic jumps between regions of cooler
plasma and regions where the temperatures were nominal. This project will
investigate these unexpected plasma temperature modulations by conducting a
thorough analysis of the plasma observations (temperatures, density, flows) for
this and other past eclipse events. This will provide important information
about how the ionosphere responds to the transient changes in the illumination
drivers. Knowledge of these responses is important since solar illumination is a
key driver of fundamental processes of ionization and structuring. Radio
propagation through the ionosphere depends on how much ionization and
structuring occurs, and solar eclipses provide a controlled and quantifiable way
to learn more about both positive and adverse effects of the ionosphere on
global networks that use radio frequencies, for example the Global Navigation
Satellite System. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide detailed
characterization of the ionospheric plasma anomalies during solar eclipses using
Defense Meteorological Satellite Program measurements of the plasma density,
electron and ion temperatures, and plasma transport. It will also provide
identification and characterization of mutual relationship between the irregular
solar source regions and consequential ionospheric transient modulation.
Finally, the project will identify the physical mechanisms, controlling
parameters, and limiting cases of the anomalous flows and temperatures. The
ultimate goal of this work is to obtain a better understanding of how short-term
changes in the illumination of the dayside ionosphere can produce non-uniform
responses in the ionospheric density, temperature, and
drifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will contribute to the development of
a highly-skilled workforce by supporting a graduate student at Boston
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.