* 1929176
* RII Track-4: Applied Symplectic Topology
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Samuel Lisi, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 11/30/2023
* USD 190,024.00

Topology is the branch of mathematics that, broadly speaking, studies the shape
of space. This notion of "shape" can be very abstract: symplectic topology is
the study of the "shape" of energy surfaces of physical systems with
conservation of energy. An important question in statistics is to determine the
"shape" of data. Classical tools include, for instance, linear regression to
find the line of best fit -- but what if the data doesn't have such a simple
shape? Recent developments have brought powerful tools and ideas from abstract
topology to bear on problems in statistics. This fellowship will develop a new
collaboration between the University of Mississippi and the TGDA@OSU
interdepartmental research group on applied topology at the Ohio State
University in order to adapt these methods to problems in symplectic topology,
thus opening up a new field of study: probabilistic symplectic topology. The
methods developed will be among the first probabilistic tools used in symplectic
topology and will open a new vista of questions to consider. This project will
expand the PI's ability to collaborate with colleagues in engineering and the
sciences, strengthen the UM's research program in topology and dynamics, and
enhance graduate and undergraduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to combine the techniques and ideas of applied topology with
problems of symplectic topology. One of the key problems in symplectic topology
concerns the existence of periodic orbits of a Hamiltonian system within a given
range of actions and indices, or to be more precise, from filtered chain
complexes. From this are constructed a large number of symplectic invariants
such as symplectic capacities. The PI will investigate the potential to
construct and compute new symplectic invariants using the tools of applied
topology, such as persistent homology. The PI will also study the distribution
of symplectic capacities for a (suitably defined) random convex domain in
4-space, both numerically by using the computational methods of applied
topology, and theoretically, using the techniques developed by Kahle to study
random complexes. This will open up many questions in the new area of
probabilistic symplectic topology. Furthermore, a development of the framework
of discretized symplectic topology will enable the effective computation of
invariants, allowing for applications in the study of concrete dynamical
systems. This project, through the PI and his graduate student's exposure to the
techniques of applied topology, will additionally bring a new area of expertise
to Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.