* 1929112
* RII Track--4: Controlling Point-Defect Energetics in Complex Oxides Via Interfacial Strain
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Dilpuneet Aidhy, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 10/31/2022
* USD 202,866.00

What silicon was to the 20th century, quantum materials are to the 21st. A
million times faster computers than today's most powerful supercomputers, or,
electricity transported across the national grid at no loss, is the sort of
future that will be realized by the power of quantum materials. Realizing this
vision requires developing new materials and understanding key materials
features that give rise to such incredible properties. Interfacial oxide
materials, i.e., those formed by joining of two different oxide materials, are
one of such promising materials. An example of an interfacial oxide material is
an interface between LaNiO3 and SrTiO3. Because these two materials have
different distances between their atoms, when joined to form an interface, their
atomic bonds are strained that can lead to creation of defects, i.e., loss of
specific oxygen atoms. Creation of these defects has been proposed to be a key
underlying reason of such exciting properties. In this project, we focus on
understanding the critical correlation between strain and oxygen defects such
that the defects could be controlled, at will. This work will advance Wyoming's
vision of computational sciences, develop basic understanding of designing
quantum materials, and contribute to "The Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum
Revolution" which is one of the next ten big NSF ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interface structure formed by joining two different complex oxides (chemical
formula ABO3) contains an interfacial strain which leads to formation of oxygen
vacancies at the interface. These vacancies are considered to be one of key
reasons inducing many novel electronic properties. The overarching goal of the
proposal is to develop a fundamental understanding of the correlation between
interfacial strain and oxygen vacancies in LaNiO3 grown on SrTiO3. This
correlation will allow control over the stability (i.e., location and
concentration) of vacancies via strain, at will. In-situ X-ray Photon
Correlation Spectroscopy (XPCS) experiments at Advanced Photon Source (APS) in
Argonne National Laboratory and density functional theory calculations will be
used to elucidate the thermodynamics and kinetics of phase transitions in LaNiOx
phases, which appears to be induced via the ordering and disordering of the
oxygen vacancies. This understanding will advance the science of gaining control
over the metal-insulator transition temperature in
LaNiO3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.