* 1929805
* I-Corps: High Efficiency Transduction to Improve Manufacture of Cell Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Shuichi Takayama, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
gene and cell therapies which hold potential to make life-altering improvements
in healthcare for a broad spectrum of diseases, including cancers, blood
disorders, and genetic diseases. If successful, this project can help to expand
the population that has access to these treatments, both by reducing the cost of
production and by enabling new therapies that are currently infeasible due to
the low efficiency of existing cell engineering processes. The team will seek to
learn new ideas and methodologies for engaging participants and stakeholders in
the cell therapy community. This includes contract manufacturing organizations,
clinicians/physicians, regulatory representatives, pharmaceutical companies, and
patient advocates, among others. In addition to cell and gene therapies, the
team will connect with researchers using gene modification in basic biology and
drug discovery applications. If successful on all fronts, this project has
potential to aid the discovery and delivery of many new therapies for
untreatable diseases.

This I-Corps project addresses an inefficiency in the cell engineering process.
In cell therapies, patient cells are reprogrammed with a genetic sequence to
alter the cell behavior. This can involve teaching immune cells to clear cancer,
or reprogramming bone marrow cells to produce missing clotting factor proteins
to cure congenital disease. Although these treatments have demonstrated
tremendous potential, many of the treatments suffer from the low efficiency of
gene transfer. In some cases, the low efficiency may prevent the treatment from
being effective. The state of the art uses lentivirus to introduce genes into
cells, typically using 20-50 viral particles per cell. However, it has been
clearly shown that a great portion of the virus vector is wasted, due largely to
mass transport limitations. This project proposes to provide a reagent to
decrease the quantity of lentivirus used in cell transductions by 10-fold and
improve transduction efficiency with minimal disruption of current transduction
protocols. This process co-localizes cells with virus to reduce diffusion
distances, while maintaining a mild, aqueous environment and retaining a large
reservoir of cell culture nutrients.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.