* 1929453
* MRI: Acquisition of NanoFrazor for Nanofabrication of Advanced Nanomaterials with Ultimate Resolution and Flexibility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Elisa Riedo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2021
* USD 50.00

Progress in nanotechnology depends on the capability to fabricate, position and
interconnect nanoscale structures. The success of nanotechnology for a wide
range of applications relies on the existence of suitable nanolithography and
nanopatterning approaches. The limitations of conventional fabrication methods
in terms of resolution, 3D patterning, and lack of flexibility for soft and
novel materials have motivated the development of new methods. This Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a NanoFrazor
--a unique tool for rapid-fabrication of nanostructures and nanodevices with
extreme resolution and high versatility. Fundamental research using this
technology for 3D patterning with sub-10 nm resolution and high writing speeds
has the potential to bring transformative applications in nanoelectronics,
nanomagnetism, nanophotonics, catalysis and biomedicine. The NanoFrazor will be
broadly accessible to researchers at City University of New York (CUNY) and
Columbia and will serve to catalyze new interdisciplinary research
collaborations. Housed in CUNY's Advanced Science Research Center, it will
provide research and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students, many of whom are from underrepresented or low-income families, and
hands-on activities for the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NanoFrazor is a unique tool developed for researchers who need access to
topographical and chemical patterning of arbitrary nanoscale geometries of non-
conventional materials including polymers, 1D materials such as nanotubes, 2D
materials, and biomolecules such as proteins. Even 3D nanopatterns can be
fabricated in a single step, with the unmatched precision of 1 nm. Further
features include mask-less patterning and marker-free overlay/stitching, in-situ
simultaneous writing and imaging for closed loop lithography, high speed (mm/s),
and large areas (104 cm2). The NanoFrazor is primarily designed for
topographical patterning of resists that evaporate when they are heated by the
hot nanotip. However, this MRI project will implement in the NanoFrazor other
types of thermal lithographic methods extending its capabilities. For example,
this award will enable the recent thermochemical nanolithography (TCNL) method,
which utilizes local heat to change the chemistry of surfaces, to be implemented
in the NanoFrazor to advance potentially transformative fundamental research on
(i) nanopatterning polymers to create complex patterns and gradients of proteins
for stem cells differentiation and neuroscience studies, (ii) controlled
nanoscale doping of 2D materials for electronics and optics applications, (iii)
magnetic domains patterning for spintronics studies, and (iv) nanopatterning
nanotubes for single molecule sensing applications.