* 1929409
* Creating STEM Opportunities for High-Achieving Rural Alabama Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Carmen Burkhalter, University of North Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/2024
* USD 647,613.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will provide scholarships to
academically promising, low-income students drawn from the Alabama rural
catchment region. By engaging local high schools, families, and support systems,
this program will develop a pathway for rural students in the region to enroll
in STEM programs at the University of North Alabama. Scholars will be provided
with a tailored yet diverse breadth of academic and co-curricular opportunities
to promote retention, graduation, and success in the STEM workforce. The goal of
the program will be for at least 90% of S-STEM scholarship recipients to enter a
STEM-related career and/or pursue graduate STEM studies. Graduates of the
program will support the growing economic and industrial needs of the region as
STEM job growth is expected to increase by over 20% in north Alabama by 2026.
The program has the potential to provide innovative best practices that may be
used to increase STEM retention, graduation, and workforce development at other
institutions that serve rural students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S-STEM Scholars
program will strive to graduate at least 75% of its Scholars in eight semesters
and increase the University of North Alabama's four-year graduation rate by
sixteen percentage points. To achieve these goals, Scholars will be offered a
well-coordinated blend of academic and co-curricular activities, including
college orientation, faculty mentoring and institutional advising, community
engagement, career and entrepreneurial opportunities, University support
services, and institutional engagement. To determine the effectiveness of
program activities on the recruitment, retention, and graduation of STEM
students from rural backgrounds, as well as changes in perceptions related to
college, belonging, and careers, the current program project will compare S-STEM
Scholars (the treatment group) with non-Scholars (control group). The program
will use a matched sample approach to identify non-Scholars who share as many
characteristics with the treatment group as possible. The differences between
the treatment and control groups will be analyzed using a between-subjects and
within-subjects design. Specifically, this study will examine if the additional
activities offered to Scholars, and the levels of participation by Scholars,
result in significant differences in outcomes. The project will use a mixed-
method design that will involve collecting, analyzing, and integrating
quantitative data from survey questions and qualitative data from focus groups.
By using different methods and techniques, it will allow for corroboration of
the robustness of the findings and their generalizability to other institutions
that serve rural students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.