* 1929139
* ISS: Collaborative Research: Interfacial bioprocessing of pharmaceuticals via the Ring-Sheared  Drop (RSD) module aboard ISS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Juan Lopez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 279,733.00

This project will support experiments using a device called the Ring-Sheared
Drop module aboard the International Space Station (ISS) to study the dynamics
of proteins at the surfaces of liquid drops. In the microgravity environment on
the ISS, the drop can be held in place with only minimal contact with solid
walls. This configuration allows flows at the surface of the drop and inside the
drop to be examined without effects from surrounding walls, which is impossible
to do on Earth. In the Ring-Sheard Drop module, flows at the surface of a drop
can be measured without complications from chemical, sorption, and electrostatic
interactions with solid walls. The project will focus on flows of concentrated
protein solutions, both in the Ring-Sheared Drop module and in supporting
experiments on Earth. The goal of the project is to understand and control
protein aggregation at free surfaces, especially when the concentration of
protein is high. Protein aggregation at free surfaces is an Achilles' heel in
pharmaceutical manufacturing that degrades product quality and process yield.
Thus, the experimental results and accompanying numerical simulations will
enable the development and testing of predictive models that will be useful for
improving pharmaceutical manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
mechanistic models to predict flow behavior of concentrated protein solutions
under conditions of practical interest requires accurate non-Newtonian
constitutive equations for both the interfacial and bulk flows and coupling the
interfacial and bulk stresses. The coupled problem is intrinsically nonlinear,
requiring robust and accurate numerical techniques to interrogate dynamics and
accurate experimental data for validating model predictions. The project will
support experiments to measure interfacial and bulk fluid velocities for
concentrated protein systems. Data from experiments on the ISS using the RSD and
experiments on Earth using a knife-edge surface viscometer will examine the
rheological response of an adsorbed interfacial protein layer when the bulk
phase remains Newtonian and the rheological response of the interface and bulk
fluid when both phases are non-Newtonian. The role of protein aggregation and
fibril formation on interfacial and bulk rheology will be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.