* 1929019
* RII Track-4: Novel Electrochemistry in Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Perovskite Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Yuanyuan Zhou, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2020
* USD 94,050.00

Fundamental understandings of new semiconductor materials are key to the
development of future functional electronics for various smart applications.
Hybrid organic-inorganic halide perovskites (HOIP) have recently emerged as a
new family of semiconductor materials with exceptional promise for various
functional electronics such as solar cells and light-emitting devices. However,
the fundamental solid-state electrochemistry of HOIPs has been less understood,
which retards the progress of perovskite technologies. This project addresses
this challenge by combining the unique expertise and capacity from Brown
University and National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Through the collaborative
activities, a novel research platform for exploring the HOIP electrochemistry
will be established, which will lead to decisive answers to many long-standing
mysteries in the perovskite field and thus have great impacts on the development
of clean-energy technologies. Furthermore, this project will contribute to
significant enhancement in the PI's research capacity and overall research
infrastructure in Rhode Island. It will also provide opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students at Brown University and other institutes in
Rhode Island to explore more science subjects in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to elucidate the key
electrochemistry phenomena in hybrid organic-inorganic halide perovskite (HOIP)
materials and their correlation to the performance of perovskite solar cells
(PSCs). Attainment of this goal will be of vital importance for understanding
many exceptional behaviors (e.g. giant switchable photovoltaic effects,
photocurrent hysteresis) that have been observed in HOIPs. It will also have
strong implication for extending the applications of HOIPs to new electronics
and iontronics. A new research platform for clarifying the intrinsic
electrochemical properties of HOIPs will be established by combining classical
electrochemistry methods (based on Tubandt cell) and advanced materials-
characterization approaches. This will contribute to the determination of exact
migrating ion types, ion-migration tolerance mechanisms, and ion reactivity of
HOIPs with other related device contact materials. Further, the effect of
microstructures on the electrochemistry of HOIPs will be investigated, which
will be correlated to the performance of PSCs. Based on all these fundamental
understandings, engineered microstructures of HOIPs will be synthesized for
controlled electrochemical behavior and enhanced PSC performance. The
established methodology based on this research will have far-reaching impacts on
understanding the broad family of mixed ion-electronic semiconductors and their
device applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.