* 1929571
* CRII: CPS: Towards Optimal Information Gathering in Unknown Stochastic Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Zak Kassas, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Society is steadily moving toward a world in which autonomous vehicles roam the
streets side-by-side with human-driven vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles are
integrated into the national airspace. These autonomous systems will be tasked
with missions such as search, rescue, surveillance, reconnaissance, mapping,
farming, fire fighting, and transportation. Future autonomous systems will
operate in unfamiliar areas with minimal or no human interaction for prolonged
periods of time. The luxury of building prior detailed maps of these
environments could be (1) prohibitive (e.g., disaster areas), (2) impractical
(e.g., signal landscapes and congested downtowns), or (3) economically not
viable (e.g., hospital buildings and national forests). With no human-in-the-
loop before or during operation, one expects future autonomous systems to (1)
possess full situational awareness and (2) gather sufficient information about
their environment. These two tasks need to seamlessly integrate into the overall
mission of the autonomous system. Current autonomous systems are far from
possessing these capabilities, and the current analytical tools are insufficient
to deal with this emerging class of problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a coherent analytical foundation and a suite of algorithms and
tools for autonomous systems deployed in unknown, dynamic stochastic
environments to optimally gather sufficient information to successfully
accomplish their mission. The research specifically considers autonomous systems
with limited sensing, computation, actuation, and communication capabilities.
This research will study a new class of information optimization measures, which
possess desirable convexity properties (enabling real-time execution) and
separability properties (enabling near-lossless distributed implementation among
agents). This research aims to establish fundamental relationships between
performance and computational complexity in the presence of varying degrees of
environmental uncertainty. These relationships will enable principled navigation
of these complex trade-offs, leading to autonomous identification and adoption
of the optimal information gathering strategy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has a vertically-integrated education plan spanning K-12, undergraduate,
and graduate students. The project will also train in-service and pre-service
K-12 teachers to apply Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) - a set of
science standards that integrate rigorous content and application, reflecting
how STEM is practiced in the real world. This research has far-reaching impact -
it will evolve autonomous systems from sensing the environment to making sense
of the environment, bringing new capabilities in environments where direct human
control is physically or economically not possible.