* 1929284
* Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2025
* Brendan Hassett, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 14,004,243.00

The Institute for Computational and Experimental Research in Mathematics (ICERM)
is a national institute whose mission is to catalyze fundamental research in the
mathematical sciences. Its focus is the fruitful interplay between mathematics
and computers, developed through computation and experimentation. ICERM pursues
this mission by supporting theoretical advances related to computation and by
addressing mathematical problems posed by the use of the computer. Mathematics
influences an ever-widening range of scientific and industrial enterprises -
including cryptography, data analysis, fluid dynamics, image processing, and
industrial design - and computation is at the heart of this interaction. The
institute has a special focus on training the next generation in computational
skills, preparing them for a variety of scientific careers. ICERM works to
increase the participation of members of groups underrepresented in mathematics.
To support these goals, it provides a sophisticated research infrastructure
including access to high-performance computing and state-of-the-art software
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICERM convenes leading scientists from academia
and industry, together with students and early-career researchers, in programs
that generate new mathematics and that accelerate the development of technology
arising from new mathematics. The institute pursues its goals through semester-
long programs, with support for postdoctoral fellows and graduate students;
week-long workshops disseminating the latest research and catalyzing new
collaborations; and team-based research programs exposing graduate and
undergraduate students to experimental methodologies and computer-aided tools.
Its independent Scientific Advisory Board chooses topics based on proposals from
the scientific community; the resulting programs are open to students and
researchers from across the country and around the world. ICERM supports data-
driven explorations in both pure and applied areas of mathematics through a
culture of open exchange of ideas and an environment rich in computational
tools. The institute also hosts numerous outreach activities and public events
showing the beauty and social impact of mathematical research and computational
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.