* 1929777
* CAREER: Regulator-Gating (ReGa): A New On-Chip Power Delivery Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Selcuk Kose, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 01/31/2020
* USD 87,945.00

With continuous advancements in the semiconductor industry, transistors with
smaller than 20 nm feature size have enabled the integration of multi-billion
transistors on a single die. A large proportion of the circuit blocks is either
inactive or in a reduced-power state at any given time to satisfy the power and
thermal constraints. This utilization wall has urged the semiconductor community
to compromise the chip area and the speed of the circuit to reduce the overall
power consumption. Despite the significant amount of research and growing
necessity for a holistic power optimization technique, existing efforts to
minimize power dissipation are typically not coherent and are disjointed into
two pieces: i) the dynamic and static power loss at the load circuits is
minimized or ii) the power loss during power-conversion is minimized. As a
result, more than 32% of the overall power is dissipated during high-to-low
voltage conversion before even reaching the load circuits in modern mobile
platforms. Neither the preliminary works of the PI nor the previous studies
present a holistic approach for the design and management of distributed on-chip
power delivery and are of limited use to attain high overall voltage conversion
efficiency and thermal-aware design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of
this project is to revisit and fundamentally tailor the design and management of
on-chip power delivery infrastructure. As compared to the conventional schemes
where the power network is designed targeting the full utilization of the
overall chip area, the proposed research will provide an adaptive power delivery
infrastructure that is tailored to provide high voltage conversion efficiency
during both fully-utilized and under-utilized modes of operation. Novel voltage
regulation techniques and support circuits, physical design of power delivery
networks, and power management schemes will be proposed. Specific emphasis will
be placed on parallel voltage regulation and delivery where the allocation,
size, and type of individual regulators are optimized synergistically
considering various possible tradeoffs. Regulator-gating will be used
specifically to: i) force individual voltage regulators to operate in their most
power-efficient region, ii) spread the concentrated heat that causes local
hotspots, and iii) turn on the voltage regulators close to the active circuits
to reduce noise. The research component of this project has broad implications
across all sub-areas of semiconductor-related research as power efficiency has
become the primary bottleneck. The education component of this project will
provide guidelines on how different teaching techniques can be integrated in
undergraduate and graduate level courses to enhance the engineering education.
The PI will promote the participation of women and underrepresented minorities
in STEM fields and build strong ties with a local historically black college to
increase the enrollment of underrepresented minorities at the University of
South Florida's Electrical Engineering Department.