* 1929928
* Smart City Digital Twin Convergence Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Patricia Culligan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,213.00

Cities around the world are increasingly integrating socio-technical
advancements to transform their urban systems toward smart cities. As the world
continues to urbanize, convergent science, engineering and policy for urban
systems is needed to ensure such transformative developments are, in fact,
creating sustainable urban systems that benefit the citizens and societies at
large. This requires both: (1) convergence of a variety of involved academic
disciplines and practitioner expertise from city stakeholders; and (2)
convergence of cyber-enabled technology systems at the human-infrastructure
interface, creating a new system that can be referred to as a Smart City Digital
Twin. With a vision of advancing understanding, development, and application of
Smart City Digital Twins, this Smart City Digital Twin Convergence Conference
aims to bring together experts from academia, industry, municipalities, and
nonprofit organizations from large metropolitan areas in the United States to
develop a convergent socio-technological framework for delivering smarter
services through Smart City Digital Twins. The proposed Convergence Conference
on Smart City Digital Twins also intends to create a community of thought
leaders in this emerging area of inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This convergence
conference will explore basic research occurring at the intersection of
infrastructure systems, human systems, and technology systems. Smart City
Digital Twins represent a new critical infrastructure transforming city
operations and management. Existing knowledge on the requirements for single
infrastructure Smart City Digital Twins will be shared as emerging testbeds in
the areas of energy, built environment, water, and transportation are under
development at Georgia Tech, Stanford University, Columbia University and the
University of Illinois (Chicago). This sharing of knowledge will provide
fundamental insights on multi-infrastructure interdependencies, as well as how
human- infrastructure interactions can be sensed, analyzed, controlled, and
visualized using cyber-infrastructure enabled technology such as Internet of
Things (IoT). New knowledge will be created by engagement of interdisciplinary
academic experts, industry practitioners, and government officials in workshop-
style facilitated discussions to (1) develop a framework for comparing Smart
City Digital Twin efforts and their stages of evolution and (2) chart a roadmap
for future Smart City Digital Twin efforts that advance urban sustainability,
resilience, and social well-being. Taken together, these convergence conference
activities will provide a critical coalescing force as the new discipline of
Smart City Digital Twins emerges. Smart City Digital Twinning efforts have the
potential to transform the livability, sustainability, and resilience of cities,
creating new business opportunities for companies of all sizes, new forms of
citizen engagement by communities, creative forms of pedagogical practices, and
new approaches to city operations and management by
governments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.