* 1929082
* WORKSHOP: Student Innovation Challenge at User Interface Software and Technology 2019
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Elena Glassman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2022
* USD 15,900.00

This is funding to support a Student Innovation Contest (workshop) to be held at
the 2019 ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST 2019).
Cosponsored by the ACM Special Interest Group on Computer-Human Interaction
(SIGCHI) and the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques (SIGGRAPH), the UIST conferences are the premier forum for
innovations in human-computer interfaces. The conferences bring together people
from diverse areas including graphical and web user interfaces, tangible and
ubiquitous computing, virtual and augmented reality, multimedia, new input and
output devices, and CSCW. Researchers and developers, from both academia and
industry, meet to exchange ideas and present reports on new hardware and/or
software advances related to these areas. UIST 2019 will be held in New Orleans,
Louisiana on October 20 -23. More information about this year's conference is
available online at http://uist.acm.org/uist2019/. The Student Innovation
Contest is intended to serve as a catalyst to increase participation of students
and junior researchers from diverse backgrounds, due to its accessibility and
strong visibility at the conference. This funding will supplement the existing
program of the Student Innovation Contest, which is a collaboration between
industry (supplying hardware and software) and academia (supplying the general
framing and mentoring). The organizers want to increase the attractiveness of
the conference for students and researchers from currently underrepresented
socio-economic groups. To this end, these funds will be used to support travel
and conference expenses of U.S.-based students from groups that would otherwise
lack sufficient means to attend. The organizers will aim to include teams from
diverse cultural and institutional backgrounds, with equal representation of
genders. To further increase participant socio-economic diversity, the requested
funds will allow the financial support of only one team per educational
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Student Innovation Contest will help shape
future research projects aimed at technological&lt;br/&gt;advancement in HCI.
The event will promote scholarship and networking among new researchers in this
interdisciplinary area. The contest will give students and new researchers
constructive feedback on their work, and will expose these promising young
researchers to a larger international community. A key component of building
this community is through its youth. The Student Innovation Contest brings
students together from various backgrounds (e.g., engineering, computing,
design, architecture) so that they can see the broader spectrum of research and
development approaches. For the contest, students will receive specific hardware
to develop innovative systems and showcase their work at UIST 2019 as
demonstrations. The contest's objectives are to allow promising students and
young researchers to showcase their work and technical skills at an
internationally renowned conference through an evening-long event and gather
feedback from experts in the field, to get access to a large network of
researchers and practitioners in the field of HCI and build and expand their own
network, to enable these junior researchers to attend the entirety of the UIST
2019 conference, and to support a new generation of researchers with information
and advice on academic, research, industrial, and nontraditional career paths.
The Student Innovation Contest will provide an opportunity for student
participants to demonstrate their technical and creative skills to a large
number of internationally renowned HCI experts, and to create a network of peers
that includes both researchers and practitioners. The event will also offer
participating teams the opportunity to attend the full conference and allow them
to explore the diversity of the research that composes the UIST community.
Evaluation of the Student Innovation Contest, and its organization, will be
conducted, and the results of the evaluation will be made available to the
organizers of future conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.