* 1929543
* Student Travel Grant for Embedded Systems Week (ESWEEK) 2019
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Andreas Gerstlauer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support student travel to attend the 2019 annual Embedded
Systems Week (ESWEEK) to be held on the New York University (NYU) campus in New
York City, NY. The ESWEEK is a premier international event that brings together
three leading conferences in the field, the International Conference on
Compilers, Architecture, and Synthesis for Embedded Systems (CASES), the
International Conference on Hardware/Software Codesign and System Synthesis
(CODES+ISSS), and the ACM SIGBED International Conference on Embedded Software
(EMSOFT), as well as several co-located workshops, tutorials, and one co-located
symposium, the International Symposium on Networks-on-Chip (NOCS). The ESWEEK
conferences are traditionally attended by a large number of students, allowing
them opportunities for interaction with peers from academia and industry around
the world, and enabling their participation via paper and poster presentation.
Beyond registration fees at reduced student rates, major expenses for attendance
include travel and subsistence costs. These often prove to be beyond limits of
affordability of students including those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will provide travel support averaging
$500 for approximately 30 eligible students to defray their costs of attending
and participating and thus increase both the number and diversity of the student
population at ESWEEK. Priority will be given to students presenting their
research work at ESWEEK and its accompanying (co-located) symposia and
workshops, with preference given to US citizens and permanent residents as well
as under-represented groups. Under-represented groups will be specifically
reached out to and strongly encouraged to apply for this travel grant. This
proposal will improve the conference because the increased attendance by
students as well as a more diverse participation. It will help to attract under-
represented minorities and women to the field of embedded systems and STEM
research in general. Finally, students that receive support will benefit by
interacting with other students as well as with experts in the field, enabling
them to network and establish connections that can help their professional
careers going forward, thus helping to create future generations of embedded
system designers crucial to technological workforce of the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.