* 1929261
* SaTC: CORE: Small: A Secure Processor that Exploits Multicore Parallelism while Protecting Against Microarchitecture State Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Omer Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 516,000.00

Microprocessors are widely deployed in cloud, fog, edge, and mobile computing
platforms. In all cases, the economies of scale stem from our ability (through
the use of mature virtualization technologies) to host large sets of
applications from diverse domains. These applications increasingly operate on
private or confidential user data. A major hurdle for exposing and exploiting
virtualization capabilities in next generation processors is the lack of a clear
vision for how to address the security challenges associated with co-locating
applications that share hardware. This project singles out the challenge of
controlling leakage of speculative and non-speculative microarchitecture state
information: the ability of an adversary to glean sensitive information about a
co-located workload by observing patterns of communication or resource
utilization at various layers of the processor hardware stack. The importance of
this problem is exacerbated by recent attacks on commercial microprocessors,
where hardware resource sharing is exploited to expose microarchitecture state
information to an adversary that is otherwise inaccessible or not directly
visible in the system state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a new
abstraction for securing the microarchitecture state vulnerabilities in
multicore processors. Today's processors assume temporal execution of secure
(victim) and insecure (potentially malicious) applications under the purview of
virtualization. For strong isolation, at each context switch, a secure processor
must clean the microarchitecture state from all shared hardware resources. This
project re-thinks secure processor designs, and challenges these assumptions in
the context of multicore processors. A spatio-temporal execution model is
envisioned, where the cores are spatially partitioned into secure and insecure
clusters (or domains). The secure cluster and its accompanying software and
hardware is envisioned to become the only trusted component in the multicore
processor trusted computing base (TCB). This allows the concurrently executing
domains to fully exploit their allocated hardware resources for performance,
while guaranteeing bounded information leakage through the hardware sharing of
microarchitecture state. The incorporation of security to tackle
microarchitecture state vulnerabilities at various levels of the processor
hardware is timely, as it ensures that the consideration of security concerns in
the still-evolving hardware stack is not an afterthought. Doing so will speed up
the adoption of emerging safety-critical secure applications, thus improving the
hardness and certification of the US cyber infrastructure, with significant
benefits to our economy and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.