* 1929174
* RII Track-4: Using Otolith Geochemistry to Understand the Ocean Ecology of a Changing Alaskan Salmon System
* O/D,OIA
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Kristen Gorman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 11/30/2022
* USD 162,010.00

High latitude regions of the global ocean are responding rapidly to atmospheric
and other environmental changes. Thus, these ecosystems are important models for
understanding environmental driver and ecosystem response relationships,
providing a framework for better predicting how other regions of the global
ocean might respond to future environmental changes. Of particular concern are
the impacts of rapid marine ecosystem changes to fisheries. Seafood plays a key
role in meeting the food security needs of global human populations and is a
critical foundation of many regional economies in the United States,
particularly for remote states such as Alaska. Between 2014-2016, the eastern
sector of the North Pacific Ocean including the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) experienced
one of the largest marine heatwaves ever recorded. How the ocean ecology of
Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) responds to ocean-climate variability and
other environmental changes is generally not well understood. The purpose of
this study is to advance an understanding of the ocean ecology of salmon by
taking advantage of the complete life history record captured by natural markers
of water temperature, metabolic activity, and diet based on oxygen and carbon
isotope values in the ear bones, or otoliths, of adult sockeye salmon (O. nerka)
returning to the Copper River, Alaska. This research is important for advancing
the general knowledge of high latitude marine ecosystem response to rapid and
unprecedented levels of environmental change, as well as developing the
scientific information needed to inform the long-term sustainable management of
this key Alaskan salmon system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between 2014-2016, the
eastern sector of the North Pacific Ocean including the Gulf of Alaska (GOA)
experienced one of the largest marine heatwaves ever recorded. Responses by
southcentral Alaskan salmon stocks to these anomalous ocean-climate conditions
in the GOA, and other density-dependent environmental changes related to the
release of significant numbers of hatchery pink salmon to the GOA, have been
highly variable and range from record returns by Prince William Sound pink
salmon (Oncorhynchus gorbuscha) in 2015 to run failures by these same stocks in
2016, as well as run failures by sockeye salmon (O. nerka) returning to the
nearby Copper River system in 2018. Thus, Pacific salmon of the GOA appear to be
responding to recent, highly anomalous environmental changes, however,
environmental driver and salmon response relationships have not been formalized.
The research described here will fill this knowledge gap. The goal of this
EPSCoR Fellowship project is to relate otolith and isotope variability during
ocean residency of adult sockeye salmon returning to the Copper River, Alaska,
over a 15-year period (2004-2018) to a suite of environmental variables that
capture signals of ocean-climate and density-dependent factors operating in the
North Pacific Ocean, as well as population performance traits of sockeye
including adult body size and body condition. Time series analysis will be used
to formalize relationships between environmental drivers and responses by Copper
River sockeye to advance the general knowledge of high latitude marine ecosystem
response to rapid and unprecedented levels of environmental change, as well as
the scientific information needed to inform the long-term sustainable management
of this key Alaskan salmon system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.