* 1929217
* RII Track 4: Arctic Nitrous Oxide (N2O): Training and Technical Advances to Quantify Emission of a Powerful Greenhouse Gas
* O/D,OIA
* 12/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Tamara Harms, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2023
* USD 126,218.00

Nitrous oxide is a potent greenhouse gas, with about ~300 times the climate
warming potential of carbon dioxide. Nitrous oxide is produced and released to
the atmosphere by microbes that cycle nitrogen in soils and sediment, often in
response to excess nitrogen. High-latitude ecosystems typically contribute
little nitrous oxide to the atmosphere because of limited availability of the
forms of nitrogen conducive to nitrous oxide production. However, exceptionally
large fluxes of nitrous oxide are increasingly documented from arctic and sub-
arctic soils that are subject to cryoturbation or thawing permafrost. It remains
unclear how this nitrous oxide is produced and how long disturbed soils might
generate emissions. This project will support training in several analytical
approaches for determining the quantity and pathways of nitrous oxide production
in soils. Research will focus on Alaskan ecosystems that are subject to wildfire
and permafrost thaw. Researchers will also adapt and apply novel methods with
stable isotopes to determine the microbial pathways producing nitrous oxide.
Determining how nitrous oxide is produced will decrease uncertainty in
predicting how ecosystems respond to changing regimes of fire and permafrost and
clarify how ecosystems might in turn influence the climate system. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Several studies over the past decade have documented significant
emissions of nitrous oxide (N2O) from arctic soils where permafrost is thawing.
However, these studies have not revealed the biological processes generating
N2O, which might include denitrification, nitrification, and nitrifier-
denitrification. Because the pathways of N2O production in high-latitude soils
remain unknown, it is presently difficult to forecast potential emissions under
warmer, more nutrient-rich, and fire-prone conditions predicted for high-
latitude ecosystems. An Alaska-based research team will work with the nitrogen
analytical facility at the Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies to apply and
optimize novel analytical approaches. These studies will include real-time
production of N2O in response to manipulated soil conditions, and analysis of
isotopomers (describing site preference of 15N), which can identify the
microbial pathway producing N2O. These approaches will be applied across
precipitation events, seasonal, and successional time scales and spatial
gradients encompassing variation in nitrogen inputs, permafrost, and burn
history within the region of spatially discontinuous permafrost in Interior
Alaska. Goals of the research include identifying the microbial pathways that
produce N2O in high-latitude soils and testing hypothesized relationships
between nitrogen cycling and the fire, permafrost, and moisture regimes of the
boreal forest. Establishing these relationships is an essential step toward
identifying potential positive feedback loops between nitrogen cycling and
climate warming in high-latitude ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.