* 1929464
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Building New Tools for Data Sharing and Re-use through a Transnational Investigation of the Socioeconomic Impacts of Protected Areas (PARSEC)
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Shelley Stall, American Geophysical Union
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,951.00

The capability to bring computer science and technology as well as large and
complex data sets to bear on interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary science is
emerging. It is therefore critically important to establish and enable
transnational frameworks so that data-driven scientific knowledge can transcend
disciplines and geographical borders, ultimately increasing the scientific
underpinnings of policy and action. International collaboration within global
environmental change research fields holds the potential to establish
international foundations for federated data integration and analysis systems
with shared services, bring together best practices from the public and private
sectors, foster open data and open science stewardship among the science
communities including related areas such as publishing, and encourage data and
cloud providers and others to adopt common standards and practices for the
benefit of all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a coalition of 29 funding
agencies from 23 countries through the Belmont Forum Call for proposals on
"Science-driven e-Infrastructure Innovation (SEI) for the Enhancement of
Transnational, Interdisciplinary and Transdisciplinary Data Use in Environmental
Change". SEI is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects
that bring together environmental, social and economic scientists with data
scientists, computational scientists, and e-infrastructure and cyber-
infrastructure developers and providers to solve one or more of the
methodological, technological and/or procedural challenges currently facing
inter-disciplinary and transdisciplinary environmental change research that
involves working with large, diverse and multi-source transnational data. The
SEI call will intimately link research thinking and technological innovation
toward accelerating the full-path of discovery-driven data use and open science
and enable a broader scientific community to benefit from the identified new and
potentially disruptive demonstrators or pilots toward
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific advances depend on the availability,
accessibility and reusability of data, software, samples, and data products. Yet
large amounts of data on the Earth are not well preserved or preserved at all.
This project will address these questions by supporting the collaboration of a
synthesis science team and data-science team. The teams will conduct a trans-
disciplinary, trans-national synthesis science project in parallel and in
partnership with a project on the use and re-use of environmental and
socioeconomic data to assess practices for managing and preserving data. The
project will provide a unique opportunity for data scientists and synthesis
scientists to collaborate in real-time toward the goal of improving research
outcomes and data sharing. In partnership with teams in France, Brazil, the
United States, Japan, Australia, and the United Kingdom, the project will
examine the socioeconomic effects of natural protected areas on local
communities. The resulting tools and metrics will enable better prediction and
mitigation of the effect of actions that disrupt historical land use practices.
The project team will develop leading practices on data citation, attribution,
credit, and reuse. With these new practices as the content, a toolkit and
workshop materials to deliver the content via face-to-face meetings and webinars
will be created as will a tool for researchers to view their shared data, data
usage and reuse through widgets and on-line profiles. The project results will
be useful to circa 300,000 earth, space, and environmental researchers
worldwide. It will advance the momentum of cultural change in the use and re-use
of big data in research on real-world problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.