* 1929881
* Urban food waste solutions from farm-to-fork: A conference for advancing sustainable urban systems research networks
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Thomas Trabold, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2020
* USD 47,948.00

This grant is in support of a Sustainable Urban Systems (SUS) workshop. While
food waste has been studied in the scientific literature, primarily from the
technical perspective, much of the existing research is fragmented across single
disciplines and disconnected case studies. Modeling, managing, assessing, and
replicating sustainable urban food waste solutions will require novel research
approaches, organized under the principle of convergence, which deeply
integrates knowledge and methods from different disciplines, and carried out
through meaningful collaborations between scientific researchers and
stakeholders embedded in the food supply chain. This SUS workshop is targeted to
catalyze these collaborations, provide a platform of exchanging knowledge across
fields, and establish a sustainable urban systems research agenda organized
around the specific and compelling problem of minimizing and managing food waste
for broad social, economic, and environmental benefit. A key aspect is the
planned approach to capturing geographic heterogeneity in urban food waste
systems and solutions, by structuring the workshop scope to consider both
aggregate impact of multiple urban areas in a single state and comparative
analysis of cities across the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient, resilient,
and robust food supply chains are a critical part of sustainable urban systems.
Knowledge created by convergent research networks can inform design of resource-
efficient technologies, policies, and social interventions to minimize food
waste and attendant energy, water, and resource use in cities and the peri-urban
and rural regions on which they rely. Research catalyzed by this workshop is
expected to generate new models of multi-scale transboundary interactions and
innovative solutions for urban food waste challenges. These findings have
potential for broad social, economic, and environmental benefit, and will be
broadly disseminated to both scientific and stakeholder audiences. The workshop
is anticipated to lead to greater understanding of how SUS science can be
communicated effectively to help individuals, communities, and businesses take
action to reduce their contribution to food waste. The workshop will also
provide attendees with new understanding and approaches to engage traditionally
underrepresented groups, particularly deaf/hard of hearing learners and
scientists, in research leading to discovery and
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.