* 1929596
* Innovative Strategies for Scalable Mixed-Matrix Hollow Fiber Membranes with Sub-micron thick Molecular-Sieve-Containing Composite Skin Layers for Tailorable Gas Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hae-Kwon Jeong, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 340,000.00

The separation of chemically similar gases such as propylene (an olefin) and
propane (a paraffin) is a key step in the petroleum-based production of fuels
and commodity chemicals. However, the separation of gases with similar molecular
sizes and physical properties is extremely challenging, often requiring
extensive energy consumption. The use of membranes (i.e., molecular filters) to
separate olefins and paraffins is an appealing energy-efficient alternative.
However, there are no such commercially available membranes because current
membrane manufacturing technologies are prohibitively expensive. The goal of
this project is to develop a scalable, cost-effective process for producing
membranes capable of olefin/paraffin gas separation. The ability to cost-
effectively design and produce membranes capable of high-performance
olefin/paraffin separation has the potential to substantially reduce energy
usage in refining processes and, subsequently, reduce carbon emissions. Graduate
and undergraduate student researchers will be directly engaged in completion of
the project, receiving training in chemical synthesis, material characterization
methods, and professional skills. The investigator will also host a local high
school teacher in the lab each summer so that area K-12 students may indirectly
benefit from the project. Videos demonstrating related project content will also
be developed and published on YouTube as resources for the public and K-12
educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goals of this project are to
develop scalable approaches for the preparation of zeolitic-imidazolate
framework (ZIF)-containing mixed-matrix hollow fiber membranes and modules and
to tailor the molecular sieving properties for gas separations of interest.
Polycrystalline ZIF-8 membranes have shown promise for energy-efficient
propylene/propane separation, but commercial application of such membranes is
prohibitively expensive given the complex and slow processing steps required for
preparation. Moreover, the discrete apertures of crystalline filler materials
like ZIF-8 and zeolites does not allow for sufficient control over selectivity.
The investigator hypothesizes that asymmetric mixed-matrix hollow fiber
membranes with sub-micron thick selective composite skin layers can be prepared
by decoupling the hollow-fiber spinning process from the mixed-matrix formation
process using a polymer-modification-enabled in situ metal-organic framework
(MOF) formation technique. A second, related hypothesis to be tested is that the
molecular sieving properties of such a membrane can be fine-tuned by engineering
the structures of the ZIF fillers with multiple linkers and/or metal centers.
Three objectives will test the hypotheses: (1) understand how ion-exchange, ion-
diffusion, and reaction processes shape the polymer-modification-enabled in situ
MOF formation process and fabricate membranes with sub-micron thick selective
composite skin layers; (2) engineer the microstructure of the membranes and
their modules with tunable molecular sieving properties; and (3) test the
performance of the membrane and modules in propylene/propane, ethylene/ethane,
and nitrogen/methane separations under industrially-relevant conditions. The
outcome of the project will be a strategy to develop efficient gas separation
membranes that overcomes many of the limitations of existing polymer-based
membrane technologies and the attendant fundamental knowledge necessary for MOF-
based mixed-matrix membrane design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.