* 1929599
* EXP: To Enact, To Tell, To Write: A Bridge to Expressive Writing through Digital Enactment
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Sharon Lynn Chu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2022
* USD 542,533.00

This cyberlearning project explores a novel approach, called Digitally-Augmented
Enactment (DAE), to support learning expressive writing by children at the
critical grade 4-5 developmental period, with a focus on English Language
Learners (ELLs). Expressive writing is core to the learning of all school
subjects. An alarmingly high percentage of students enter middle school with low
proficiency in writing, which hinders further learning in high school and
college. Children from these underserved populations are particularly at risk of
withdrawing from writing during the grade 4-5 stage in school when it matters
most. The key reason for children's difficulties is that writing requires not
only mastery of writing mechanics (e.g., grammar, sentence structure), but also
the possession of ideas to convey, and a mastery of the process of translating
ideas into expression. Accordingly, the DAE approach bifurcates the writing
process by harnessing the power of pretend play to bring forth children's
imagination, enabling them to focus on ideas, without at the same time having to
be concerned with the technical details of writing. DAE combines low-cost
motion-tracking technologies, such as Kinects, with animation technologies. This
technological environment allows children to enact with props and produces
animated cartoons as the 'outline' for their essays which serves as a scaffold
for their writing. The new technological approach to expressive writing is
explored in a charter school and a public elementary school, both of which serve
a high percentage of ELLs, and the majority of the students are on reduced lunch
programs. The project will help children from diverse backgrounds to become
literate individuals in a modern society. The project also provides unique
cross-disciplinary educational and learning opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students to serve predominantly underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the intensification of self-evaluation
and the gradual engagement in symbolic thinking during this critical
developmental period, children are at risk of developing negative perceptions of
writing if no support is provided. The DAE approach intends to help children to
move from ideas to written expression through a process of enacted imagination.
The idea is for children to materialize their imagination through embodied
enactment, and to transform this into an animated cartoon. The child is able to
view and interact with this congealed imagination to engage their technical
writing skills. This gives children license to engage their capacity for vivid
pretend play to give ideas form and fuel the writing process. Hence, DAE
facilitates a "minds-on" bridge between ideas and the formal writing activity
through enactment and feedback. The DAE approach is embodied in a representative
system that combines motion-tracking, sketch-recognition and animation
technologies. The system will scaffold children's externalization, organization
and conversion of ideas into writing-ready imagination. An iterative
development, test, and evaluation strategy through lab studies will be used to
ensure usability in Years 1 and 2, and classroom studies will be conducted in
Year 3 to test for effectiveness and potential of the new technological genre.
One grade 4 or 5 class from each of two schools (a charter school and a public
elementary school) will engage in two writing assignments using the DAE
approach, and two comparable assignments with conventional methods (e.g.,
graphic organizers). Both schools serve a high percentage of ELLs, who will
participate in the studies. Video-based psycholinguistics and gesture analysis,
interviews, questionnaires, and writing assessments will be used to understand
how DAE may bridge the children's ideas to formal writing. This project will
expand core understanding of how embodied processes participate in structuring
and articulating ideas and imagination for writing.