* 1929738
* PurSUiT: Discovery and phylogenetic analysis of chytrid fungi using cultures and single cells
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Timothy James, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 733,924.00

Chytrids are a poorly studied group of aquatic fungi that ubiquitously inhabit
bogs, ponds, and oceans. These fungi are fundamental to the cycling of
nutrients, such as through the degradation of pollen, keratin, or through
parasitism of organisms such as algae or frogs. Most of what is known about the
diversity of chytrids is based on microscopic observations over the last century
or from pure cultures established in the last few decades. However, diversity
based assessments using the more recently developed DNA-based environmental
approaches challenge whether we truly know chytrid diversity, because the
species documented in this way typically fail to match species identified using
traditional approaches. This project will implement multiple approaches to
provide a holistic picture of chytrid diversity and classification that avoids
biases of any particular method. Understanding taxonomy of this poorly known
group and other fungi is vital for cataloging biodiversity and predicting its
environmental impacts. This project will support one Postdoctoral Fellow, a
graduate student, and will provide training to undergraduates. Web-based content
on the chytrid biology, classification, and will be developed in order to
disseminate information to a broader audience. A week-long, hands on workshop on
chytrid methods will be held at the University of Michigan Biological Station in
order to encourage continued research on this understudied group.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages an existing and growing historical
collection of chytrid cultures and recently developed methods to sequence DNA
from single cells. The proposed research includes generating or completing at
least 840 ribosomal RNA sequences and 20 genome sequences of chytrids in the
Collection of Zoosporic Eufungi at the University of Michigan (CZEUM). It will
also employ a single cell approach to phylogenetically characterize uncultured
diversity. Specifically, chytrid fungi will be identified in situ in from field
sites, photographed, and single cells subjected to genome amplification. From
the successfully amplified genomes, 100 diverse samples will be targeted for
whole ribosomal RNA operon sequencing using long-read, single molecule DNA
sequencing. An additional 20 samples will be used for genome sequencing. A major
outcome will be a phylogenetic analysis of the chytrids combining both ribosomal
RNA and genome sequencing into a supertree. A final aim of the project is to
screen and sequence novel diversity of fungal viruses from the CZEUM collection
and to determine the effect of ecology and morphology on viral prevalence. This
project will serve as a model for addressing systematics in eukaryotic lineages
where culture-based approaches produce an incomplete picture of
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.