* 1929068
* RII Track 4: Expanding Research Capacity across Arctic Systems: Expertise Development in Coupled Ice Sheet - Groundwater Processes
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2023
* Toby Meierbachtol, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 01/31/2023
* USD 164,733.00

Ice sheets are tightly connected to the underlying earth upon which they rest.
Where liquid water resides at the bottom of an ice sheet, it can exchange with
the groundwater system. Whether the bottom of an ice sheet is frozen or melted
is therefore an important control on the connection between ice and groundwater
but depends on the complex ways in which water and heat pass between ice and
earth systems. In this project the PI, with expertise in glacier science, will
work closely with groundwater experts at New Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology, sharing discipline-specific knowledge to overcome challenges to
understanding connections between ice sheets and groundwater systems. The PI
will carry out computer modeling that connects both ice sheet and groundwater
systems to determine how groundwater flow influences where the bottom of the ice
sheet is frozen or melted. Where a glacier or ice sheet is frozen or melted at
its base controls where it can slide, and also determines where water can
recharge the groundwater system. Outcomes from the project are therefore
relevant to both ice sheet dynamics and groundwater flow in cold regions. The
project will increase research capacity and student opportunities at University
of Montana, and guest lectures to Montana high schools will benefit the local
jurisdiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water cycling in the Arctic is distinctly
unique from the global hydrologic cycle due to the presence of large ice masses
that source and generally drive groundwater to adjacent terrestrial and ocean
systems. Linking coupling processes between ice sheet and groundwater systems,
however, requires merging the knowledgebase and skillsets of a spectrum of
scientific sub-disciplines. The objective of this project is to overcome
discipline-specific barriers by enabling close collaboration, sharing of
expertise, and educational exchange between experts in ice sheet processes and
groundwater systems. Project research is focused on mass and energy feedbacks on
the inland extent of melted conditions at the bottom of an ice sheet: a key
problem that is highly relevant to both glaciology and hydrogeology disciplines.
The problem will be addressed through novel modeling of coupled ice sheet and
groundwater systems: the PI will be an early adopter of modeling packages
developed by host collaborators, and generate new thermal coupling between
systems. Outcomes of the project will advance understanding of heat and water
fluxes across ice sheet and groundwater systems: two critical components of the
Arctic that impact sea level rise, groundwater resources at the global scale,
and submarine fluxes of fresh groundwater. Activities will generate new learning
opportunities for students at the University of Montana, increase the
institution’s research capacity, and yield jurisdictional benefits through
outreach lectures to Montana high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.