* 1929592
* The Role of Hydrogen Sulfide in the Hypoxia Tolerance of Hibernators
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Allyson Hindle, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Colin Saldanha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 163,963.00

Hibernation is an extreme physiological condition among mammals. Small
hibernators, such as ground squirrels, survive the winter by falling into deep
bouts of torpor, in which vital physiological rates and metabolism are reduced
dramatically and body temperature drops significantly. Torpor is punctuated
throughout hibernation by periodic arousals, in which animals re-warm to normal
summer body temperatures, and restore body functions. As part of this dramatic
cycling, hibernators naturally experience reduced blood flow and depleted oxygen
supply (hypoxia) to tissues. Such disruptions in blood supply and resulting
hypoxia can be lethal to non-hibernators, including humans. By examining how
hibernating ground squirrels survive low oxygen levels in critical tissues such
as the brain, this project expands our understanding of strategies for cellular
energy production in all mammals, and may highlight new avenues for therapies
associated with low oxygen conditions in the brain, such as stroke.
Specifically, the investigators examine a signaling pathway hypothesized to
sense low oxygen conditions and initiate a response that suppresses cellular
energy production. To evaluate the function of this signaling pathway in a
natural hibernator, the investigators examine metabolism and hypoxia tolerance
in 13-lined ground squirrels, and compare the sequences of key genes among
mammals. The project also furthers the NSF goals of training new generations of
scientists and making scientific discoveries available to the general public:
the project includes training of undergraduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher, and public outreach via a center for community health improvement
and a public zoo.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One of the many physiological mysteries
of small-bodied hibernators is their marked tolerance to severe hypoxia, which
occurs during rewarming arousal from deep torpor bouts. The goal of this project
is to identify mechanisms that support hypoxia tolerance of hibernating ground
squirrels in normally hypoxia-sensitive tissues such as the brain. In non-
hypoxia tolerant species like mice, damaging or lethal hypoxia is mediated in
the brain by an acute increase in the gasotransmitter hydrogen sulfide (H2S),
which inhibits the electron transport chain. This project uses in vivo, in vitro
and in silico approaches to examine the hypothesis that the brain cells of deep
hibernators are able to metabolize H2S, and that this innate ability underlies
their survival of severe hypoxic events. This study addresses three specific
objectives in the brain of 13-lined ground squirrels (Ictidomys
tridecemlineatus). The first aims serves to determine the seasonal
responsiveness of ground squirrels to inhaled H2S, in comparison to rats. The
second aim serves to track H2S production and metabolism during hypoxia exposure
in isolated mitochondria and neurons. The third and last aim serves to evaluate
selective pressures on the key genes of H2S production and metabolism within the
rodent lineage. It is expected that the proposed studies will advance our
knowledge of the biochemical and physiological adaptations that allow
hibernators to tolerate cerebral hypoxia.