* 1929028
* ISS: Microphysiologic Model of Human Cardiovascular Stiffness-Related Diseases in Microgravity
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Sachs, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 515,832.00

Cardiovascular disease is one of the most devastating health problems in the
modern world, with heart failure and hypertension impacting a rising percentage
of the aging population. Increased cardiovascular cell and tissue stiffness is a
characteristic associated with normal aging as well as a wide range of
cardiovascular diseases. Interestingly, astronauts exposed to microgravity also
experience aortic stiffening and reduced cardiac function. Thus, understanding
the process and cardiac consequences of arterial stiffening in microgravity may
provide new insights into the related cardiovascular diseases associated with
aging on Earth. This may then lead to new ways to improve cardiovascular health
for humans on Earth as well as for astronauts in microgravity. The overall
objective of this research project is to utilize organ-on-chip technology to
study accelerated cardiovascular aging in microgravity. The researchers will
deploy a novel, organ-on-chip model, known as a micro-CVchips, of the human
cardiovascular system in which cardiac and arterial structures will be grown
from human pluripotent stem cells and linked in a functional, miniature
circulatory system. This will allow for the modeling of fluid movement and
organoid stiffness in addition to cell and tissue physiology. A set of these
micro-CVchips will be sent to the International Space Station (ISS) to
experience microgravity, where they will be monitored and manipulated within a
robotic laboratory to determine any signs of an accelerated aging process.
Finally, the micro-CVchips will be retrieved and examined on Earth with a set of
thorough biological tests. These chips will be compared to control chips that
remained on Earth, in addition to patient samples obtained from a tissue biobank
at Mount Sinai. This project will also be used as a vehicle to teach and inspire
local high school students as part of an ongoing collaboration between Mount
Sinai and several New York City schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by 3 scientific objectives. First, a multi-tissue in vitro
microfluidic human organoid model of the cardiovascular system will be
characterized. This microfluidic system includes separate cardiac and arterial
organoid compartments linked in an endothelialized circulatory system. It will
be capable of autonomous cardiac driven flow and arterial driven fluidic
resistance changes, allowing it to model arterial stiffening and associated
cardiac diastolic dysfunction. Second, a set of the micro-CVchips will be sent
to the ISS to experience extended microgravity. Tests for phenotype markers of
arterial stiffening and diastolic cardiac dysfunction will be made on board the
ISS using an innovative robotic pressure control and video system for near-real-
time terrestrial monitoring. This will be combined with post-flight histology
studies. Finally, the post-flight analysis of the samples returned from the ISS
will be compared to control samples maintained on Earth through numerous
molecular biology techniques in order to identify novel disease biomarkers and
pathways. The data from the micro-CVchip will also be compared to data obtained
from patient samples obtained through the Mount Sinai Cardiovascular
Biorepository and 'Omics Facility in order to evaluate the strengths and
limitations of the new in vitro model of cardiovascular
aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.