* 1929975
* Data-Driven Voltage VAR Optimization Enabling Extreme Integration of Distributed Solar Energy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Zhaoyu Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2024
* USD 346,999.00

The increasing penetration of solar energy poses significant challenges on the
safe and reliable operation of power distribution systems. This project will
leverage data-driven and machine learning techniques to address voltage
fluctuations induced by volatile solar generation. It will significantly advance
the state-of-the-art of voltage regulation, enable utility companies to address
overall voltage issues, and ultimately support the large-scale solar integration
in power distribution grids, thus providing higher-quality, more reliable and
cleaner electricity to millions of customers across the United States. The
incorporation of electrical engineering, data analytics, statistics, and
optimization knowledge will foster the multidisciplinary education of graduate
and undergraduate students, promote teaching and training of future workforce,
and improve scientific and technological understanding through dissemination of
findings to academia, industry, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional voltage VAR optimization (VVO)
algorithms, which are model-based, computationally intensive, offline and non-
scalable, cannot meet the operation requirements of a modern power system.
Important technical issues such as rapid changes of two-way power flows,
coordination of new and legacy VVO devices, and lack of accurate system circuit
models, will need to be resolved to accommodate a very high penetration level of
solar energy. This project will develop a comprehensive data-driven VVO
framework that leverages voluminous sensor and meter data to identify real-time
system models, perform online prediction of nodal voltages, and orchestrate
voltage control devices across different time scales to address severe voltage
violations and fluctuations induced by reverse power flows and volatile
renewable outputs. The new data-based VVO technique is distinguished from
existing methods as it is exempt from the requirement of detailed circuit
models, and can achieve high scalability and a significant speed-up of
computation time without sacrificing the robustness and accuracy of VVO commands
thanks to the linear superposition nature in the proposed modeling and
optimization methods. The effectiveness and readily application of the developed
techniques will be validated using practical distribution system models and
operation data obtained from utility collaborators. The project will benefit
from the PI's strong collaboration with utility companies to ensure a pathway
for the successful implementation of the outcomes in the real
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.