* 1929912
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: A cell-free synthetic biology platform for water quality monitoring - field testing and validation at the Camp Fire site in Paradise, California
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Julius Lucks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Water quality is central to every human activity, yet, water quality is being
increasingly threatened by environmental forces and disasters such as
hurricanes, floods, droughts, and most recently, by the wild fires of
California. These firestorms have resulted in the potential release of massive
amounts of toxic metals and compounds into groundwater supplies. Successful
remediation and safe human relocation require large environmental monitoring
efforts to test water supply safety. However, these efforts are hampered by
state-of-the-art water quality assessment technologies which are costly,
centralized, slow and laborious. Therefore, there is a critical need for rapid,
cost-effective and field-deployable water quality monitoring technologies.
Towards addressing this need, the PI's laboratory recently developed a rapid,
low-cost synthetic biology platform named RIViTS, that detects a range of toxic
compounds in water samples. This project transitions RIViTS from the laboratory
to the field by performing field use studies for the detection of toxic metals
in water samples from Paradise, California. These samples are taken from the
remains in the aftermath of the firestorm of November 2018. Field water samples
at known contamination zones are tested with RIViTS and collected for
independent validation using gold-standard environmental water analysis.
Comparison of field and lab validation data is used to develop statistical
measures of RIViTS performance, uncover factors affecting field performance and
to study how RIViTS performance is dependent on metal ion complexation. As part
of the project, RIViTS kits are distributed to undergraduate students at
California State University Chico, to test the ability of non-experts to operate
the platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI has recently developed a rapid, low-
cost synthetic biology platform using regulated in vitro transcriptional sensors
(RIViTS) that detect a range of toxic metals in aqueous samples. In this project
RIViTS is field tested and assessed for non-expert usage. Field testing occurs
at known contamination locations for the presence of lead, copper, zinc, cadmium
and mercury. Water and soil leachate samples are collected and stored for
independent validation. The project employs state-of-the-art analytical methods
to determine metal concentration in collected aqueous samples, to validate
RIViTS field tests. Metal speciation is measured to determine which species is
detected by RIViTS. Kits developed for the RIViTS method are distributed to
undergraduate students at California State University Chico, for monitoring
metal ions after rainfall. The kits include RIViTS reaction tubes, handheld
illuminators and a graphical field guide. This project is the first field
testing and validation for a new technology that is a direct application of
synthetic biology to environmental monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.