* 1929718
* Collaborative Research: The demise of the world's largest piedmont glacier
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Douglas Brinkerhoff, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,580.00

Located on the coast of Southeast Alaska, Malaspina Glacier is the world’s
largest piedmont glacier, a type of glacier that starts in the mountains and
spills out onto the coastal plain. The Malaspina Glacier is currently rapidly
thinning and retreating, forming a series of proglacial lakes along the bottom
edge. Some of these lakes are only separated from the open ocean by a narrow
band of sediment moraine. The underside of the glacier is located well below sea
level and all current indications are that retreat and thinning will continue,
and most likely accelerate, even with little future climate change. This has the
potential to be the largest loss of ice in Alaska from one glacier in the next
several decades. As the Malaspina Glacier retreats and thins it will transform
the landscape, exposing more rocks and moraine, creating new lakes, and/or
leading to significant changes in the coastline, such as the formation of marine
fjords. If this happens, it will be one of the largest modern changes to
Alaska’s and the nation’s coastline with large impacts to both terrestrial and
marine ecosystems. These changes would also constitute the largest single change
in terrestrial land cover in the National Park system in recent
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this work is to use a computer
model to estimate what the future could look like for the Malaspina Glacier and
surrounding area. Measurements collected in the field, on and around the
glacier, will provide the necessary model input data. The work will result in a
comprehensive data set on glacier mass balance, ice velocity, ice thickness,
glacier bed conditions, surface debris extent and thickness, proglacial lake
development, and proglacial thermokarst evolution. These data will be ingested
into a numerical model that will be used to explore a large range of possible
future scenarios for the evolution of Malaspina Glacier. The model scenarios
will account for different climate trajectories as well as uncertainties of
model parameters, such as those associated with hydrology and motion at the
underside of the glacier. Specifically, the following questions will be
addressed:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Is a pathway from the ocean to the glacier
front critical for catastrophic retreat?&lt;br/&gt;2. Will the retreat of
Malaspina be dominated by surface mass balance?&lt;br/&gt;3. What are the main
uncertainties for model predictions?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will lead to
a better understanding of how climate change interacts with dynamic
instabilities that are independent of climate, in an area that has historically
been characterized by large glacier fluctuations and spatial and temporal
variability. While dynamically caused retreats are common for coastal glaciers,
these effects are amplified in the presence of ongoing
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Malaspina Glacier is located in the Wrangell-St.
Elias National Park and has the potential to help people envision the
potentially dramatic effects of climate change on the Earth’s cryosphere. A
graphic artist will convert the model results into striking visuals that show
the opening up of a new landscape. Using an online message testing experiment,
the project will test and develop outreach materials to increase visitor
knowledge of ongoing and anticipated future glacier change and climate change.
Visuals and associated information will become interactive exhibits that will
engage thousands of visitors at the Wrangell-St. Elias National Park visitor
center and online. In addition, this project will train three graduate students
in relevant geophysical techniques, modern ice sheet modeling approaches, and
collaborative research. The project outcomes will be published in peer-reviewed
literature and presented at professional meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.