* 1929502
* ISS: A Microgravity Microfluidic Study of Packing and Particle Stabilization of Foams and Emulsions
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Charles Maldarelli, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 10/31/2023
* USD 442,459.00

The project is concerned with foams and emulsions, which appear in many edible
food products, such as salad dressing and ice cream, as well as consumer and
personal care products, such as shaving creams, cosmetics, and detergents. In
addition, they are central to many technologies and industries like
distillation, oil recovery, and removal of pollutants from environmental media.
In many of these products and processes, microstructure and stabilization of
foams and emulsions play critical roles in determining their properties and
performance. However, some fundamental questions such as what the most efficient
structure is in "very dry" foams and emulsions has been a long-lasting, unsolved
problem for over a century. Moreover, as eco-friendly nanoparticles emerge as an
alternative stabilizing agent to replace traditional surfactants, how these
particles help stabilize foams and emulsions remains unclear. The project aims
to answer these questions by imaging foams and emulsions at high resolution in
microgravity environment in which gravity-induced influencing factors can be
eliminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand (a)
the packing structure of monodisperse foams and emulsions close to the dry limit
with zero-fraction of continuous phase and (b) the impact of using colloidal
particles instead of surfactant on microstructure and stabilization of foams and
emulsions. Microgravity environment is especially suitable for these studies
because 1) bubbles/drops can freely assemble without being confined by a
container, and 2) coalescence can be eliminated and the coarsening process can
be isolated and studied. Proposed microgravity experiments include microfluidic
generation of monodisperse bubbles and drops, collection of foams and emulsions,
and microscopy imaging of foam/emulsion samples. The resultant microscopy images
to be collected on ISS will then be analyzed and interpreted using Imaris,
ImageJ, in-house Matlab program, and Surface Evolver program. The proposed
experiments plus data analysis will provide important insights on understanding
the long-lasting Kelvin problem regarding 3D space partition into equal volumes
with the least surface area, as well as elucidate the role of particles,
especially those with rough surfaces, in suppressing
coarsening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.