* 1929769
* Collaborative Research: Workshop on Improving Knowledge of Connections Between Urban and Hinterland Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Mahmoud Reda Taha, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 39,660.00

The goal for this Sustainable Urban Systems (SUS) workshop is to improve
understanding of the interconnections between Sustainable Urban Systems (SUSs)
and the hinterlands (communities and landscape) on which they depend and impact.
Urban systems, their surrounding landscapes, and rural communities (the
hinterlands) are intricately linked. One region where this interdependency is
clear is the intermountain western United States, where cities (e.g.
Albuquerque, Phoenix, Denver, Boise, Salt Lake City, Las Vegas, etc.) dot vast
landscapes containing isolated rural communities. The urban systems depend on
their hinterlands for drinking water supplies, energy generation, food
production, and other ecosystem services. Likewise, rural communities and
landscapes are largely shaped by the economic, political, and cultural forces of
adjacent urban systems. The connections between urban systems and their
hinterlands is shaped by engineered, natural, and cyberinfrastructure systems
along with social, political, and legal systems. This workshop will explore the
connections between urban systems and the hinterlands to advance basic theory
and applied knowledge of SUS-hinterland systems. The workshop will focus on the
intermountain western U.S. with an emphasis on the host city of Albuquerque, New
Mexico as a case study.the workshop will draw from broad transdisciplinary and
cross-sector expertise to advance basic and applied questions and concepts on
interconnected SUS-hinterland systems.

The workshop aims to bridge the gap between resilience theory and practice to
advance knowledge and ultimately improve community resilience. To do so, the
workshop will integrate local/applied systems expertise with international
experts on resilience principles and practice. The host institution, the
University of New Mexico, is a Hispanic Serving Institution and the workshop
will involve students in all aspects of the workshop with an emphasis on
students from underrepresented backgrounds. The workshop organizers will draw
upon strong collaborations with the Southwest Indian Polytechnic Institute and
Central New Mexico Community College to broaden engagement in the workshop.
Further, the organizers will host students and faculty from Universidad de
Sonora and Instituto Tecnologico de Hermosillo (Mexico) for the workshop and
follow-on activities. The results will be disseminated through a white- paper,
conference presentations, and via the NSF-supported research collaborative
network on headwater systems throughout the Americas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.