* 1929268
* Workshop on Recent Advances in the Modeling and Simulation of the Mechanics of  Nanoscale Materials; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; August 21-23, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Celia Reina, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 25,200.00

This grant provides support for the workshop entitled "Recent Advances in the
Modeling and Simulation of the Mechanics of Nanoscale Materials," at the
University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, August 21-23, 2019.
Material models and simulations at different scales, encompassing quantum,
atomistic or continuum descriptions, play a crucial role in the understanding
and prediction of material behavior. However, their use for accelerated material
discovery has not yet served its full potential due to the severe difficulties
that still exist in achieving a truly predictive understanding of
microstructure-property relations. This workshop aims at discussing the
computational advances that will bring us closer to this goal, by revisiting the
state-of-the-art and identifying the major challenges to be solved. For this,
the meeting will gather experts at the forefront of modeling and simulation
through the scales, including senior and junior participants. This grant will
help support the travel and registration expenses of the youngest members of the
scientific community.

This three day workshop will be comprised of 11 sessions, organized by themes,
including electronic structure calculations, atomistic modeling, continuum
approaches for microstructure evolution and scale bridging techniques. The
workshop will also feature a poster session where students and postdocs will be
able to present their work. Finally, the meeting will include ample breaks in
between sessions to foster discussions among the participants and help catalyze
collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.