* 1929937
* Concepts for Advancing Sustainable Urban Systems (SUS) Research Networks: Sustainable Integration of Urban Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Sean Qian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 05/31/2020
* USD 49,998.00

The goal of this project is to convene faculty, students, and participants from
industry, municipalities, and the non-profit sector to discuss groundbreaking
topics for research on applications of the integration of new automated
technologies into cities and communities. The U.S. is currently at the beginning
of an age of advanced automated technology in transportation, energy systems,
buildings, agriculture, and infrastructure. For example, sensing and computing
technology can improve management of facilities, reduce traffic congestion,
enhance community resilience, improve air quality, and inform emergency response
decisions -- depending on use, deployment, and systems impacts. There is a
critical near-term need to understand the opportunities for, and impacts of,
integrating these technologies in communities, and this workshop will contribute
to this need by bringing together diverse stakeholders to develop the path
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will foster convergence by engaging
diverse participants from academia, government, and industry, across a range of
disciplines in a focused dialogue that integrates these communities to identify
systems-level opportunities for maximizing the benefits and minimizing the
consequences of integration of automation technologies into cities and
communities. The workshop will recruit a diverse group of junior faculty,
postdocs, and emerging graduate students to the workshop, both to benefit from
their perspectives and to connect them with collaborators and mentors. The
workshop will develop a list of the most promising emerging research
opportunities of integrating automation into cities and communities, and develop
workshop outputs that can direct research efforts and future investments toward
the most critical needs in the next five to ten years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.