* 1929843
* RAPID: Assessing the ecosystem impact of drinking water orthophosphate addition on urban watersheds
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Sarah Haig, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 03/31/2022
* USD 194,824.00

The city of Pittsburgh is planning to add corrosion inhibitors (e.g.,
orthophosphate -PO43&amp;#8722;), at the end of March 2019 to the 70 million
gallons of drinking water (DW) it produces, to combat lead leaching from lead
service lines. The planned rate of addition is 2-3 orders of magnitude higher
than current levels of reactive phosphorus (P) in DW and urban streams. This
substantial change in P concentration, alongside the fact that Pittsburgh's DW
pipe network loses an estimated 15 million gallons/day due to leaks, suggests
that elevated concentrations of P are likely to infiltrate into groundwater and
could ultimately impact the health of urban streams. This Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) project will assess changes in the microbial ecology, water
chemistry and nutrient availability in water collected from DW pipes and
hydrologically connected urban streams before and after PO43&amp;#8722;
addition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this RAPID is to determine
whether PO43&amp;#8722; addition in the Pittsburgh DW pipe system will impact
the ecology and geochemical cycling in hydrologically connected urban streams.
Water samples will be collected from urban streams and DW pipe locations eight
times before and eight times after PO43&amp;#8722; addition. By performing
comprehensive water chemistry analysis, microbial community characterization and
quantification of specific genera and species linked to PO43&amp;#8722;
accumulation and nitrogen fixation, the scientists will observe whether broad-
scale ecological or nutritional shifts occur. Likewise, algal nutritional
limitation studies will provide insight into the eutrophication potential of
urban stream water after PO43&amp;#8722; addition. Overall, the study will help
answer fundamental ecological questions relating to how leaking DW
infrastructure can impact nutrient cycling and aquatic ecosystems in
hydrologically connected urban streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.