* 1930237
* Developmental functions of insect Dbf4 link replication and transcription
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Vikki Weake, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2023
* USD 690,000.00

Developmental functions of insect Dbf4 link replication and
transcription&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells copy their DNA each time they divide in
a process that is carefully controlled by specialized proteins that are found in
fungi, insects, and other animals. In insects, one of these key regulators of
DNA replication has evolved a second essential role to chemically modify
chromosomal proteins. This project seeks to understand how and why these two
functions are combined within a single gene, since this could provide a
mechanism to coordinate DNA replication with other chromosomal processes. In the
long term, this research could identify novel targets for insecticides, and
could also enhance our understanding of how DNA replication and gene expression
are controlled and coordinated in different organisms. Graduate students will be
trained as part of this project, which also provides an undergraduate course-
based research experience (CURE). This CURE aims to involve undergraduate
students in authentic research experiences as early as possible during their
university career to enhance their academic performance, retention in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM), and improve their laboratory research
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA replication is initiated by the action of two
kinases, CDK and Cdc7, which both require binding of regulatory subunits for
activity. Dbf4 is the regulatory subunit for Cdc7, and loss of either of these
subunits disrupts DNA replication and mitosis in organisms from yeast to
mammals. Previous studies showed that Chiffon, the single identifiable Dbf4
homolog in Drosophila, binds and activates Drosophila Cdc7 (dCdc7). In contrast
to dCdc7, which is essential for DNA replication and viability, the
dCdc7-binding activity of Chiffon is not required for development. Instead,
Chiffon has a second replication-independent function that is essential; it
binds Gcn5 and nucleates formation of an insect-specific histone
acetyltransferase complex, Chiffon Histone Acetyltransferase (CHAT).
Surprisingly, CHAT can substitute for the well characterized Gcn5
transcriptional coactivator Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase (SAGA) during
development. Since the histone acetyltransferase activity of SAGA stimulates
transcription, the hypothesis of this project is that histone acetylation by
CHAT is necessary for proper transcription activation of genes that are
essential for Drosophila growth and development. This project will identify
genes that require CHAT for proper gene expression, characterize the genome-wide
distribution of CHAT, and explore the mechanisms that control cell type-specific
expression of the DDK versus CHAT complexes. Overall, these studies will provide
insight into the dynamics and spatiotemporal coordination of genome replication,
chromatin modification and transcription.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.