* 1930610
* Collaborative Research: Bioinspired liquid-gated membranes reduce biofouling
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jessica Schiffman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2024
* USD 340,541.00

Ultrafiltration membranes are considered the 'state-of-the-art' material for
water treatment, because they effectively remove particulates and waterborne
pathogens from drinking water. Unfortunately, over time, membranes become fouled
and require cleaning, which increases water treatment process downtime.
Improving membrane lifetime is vital to decreasing the cost and energy required
to produce clean water. In nature, the Nepenthes Pitcher Plant uses a thin,
immobilized liquid layer to create an ultra-slippery surface which causes
insects to slide into its cup. Inspired by the pitcher plant, this research
project will develop a new approach to membrane design that reduces the adhesion
of foulants and thereby enables the membrane's long-term operation. By properly
selecting a stable 'gating liquid' that provides a thin protective layer on the
membrane, reversible pore gates are created that quickly open and shut to enable
liquid transport while reducing the ability of foulants to attach. Furthermore,
when pressure is released, the gating liquid refills the pores, dislodging
contaminants trapped within the pores and enabling flux recovery. In addition to
improving the functionality of membranes for water purification, understanding
the materials-biology interface will help inform the design of new membranes for
a broad range of separations, including food processing, blood filtration, and
protein purification. A key component of this research is providing an
experiential platform to give women and underrepresented groups the confidence
and tools to become successful engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will engineer high-flux liquid-gated membranes that resist biofouling
without the use of biocides or physical cleaning. The approach employs
fabricating liquid-gated membranes using non-toxic perfluoropolyether liquids
with various viscosities systematically paired with fluorinated polyethersulfone
ultrafiltration membranes to establish a continuous, stable liquid gate. Data
acquired from pure water flux experiments as a function of transmembrane
pressures will establish the membrane's performance and in-line liquid-gate
regeneration capabilities. This experimental data will be benchmarked against
both theoretical and chip-based models. The biofouling resistance properties of
liquid-gated membranes will be established using organic and biological
foulants. This research project provides a critical translation between the
structure and properties of liquid-gated membranes and the use of a bioinspired
materials approach to reduce the attachment of microbes to membranes while
enabling a facile mechanism for flux recovery. This research project will result
in numerous new research experiences for women and underrepresented groups both
at the undergraduate and graduate level at the University of Massachusetts and
the University of Maine. Collaboratively, this team will develop, pilot, and
broadly disseminate an educational module called, 'Bioinspired Clean Water
Solutions' to middle and high school students. This project is jointly funded by
the Molecular Separations program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.