* 1930809
* Collaborative Research: Scalable Photo-patterning of Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials for Reconfigurable Microelectronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Hanwei Gao, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2023
* USD 196,623.00

Advances in modern electronics have been largely driven by the success in
fabricating and packaging microscopic devices into integrated circuits. The
recent emergence of two-dimensional nanomaterials enables unique and superior
electronic and optoelectronic circuit functionalities, which are promising for
the next-generation microelectronics beyond silicon. A key challenge to
realizing this vision is the lack of manufacturing approaches that are capable
of integrating and producing two-dimensional nanomaterial-based microelectronics
at a large scale. This award addresses this challenge through fundamental
research on a photo-patternable medium, which can lead to scalable manufacturing
of reconfigurable microelectronic devices. The photo-patterning method is
applicable to various two-dimensional materials for versatile circuit
functionalities. Reconfigurable microelectronics is a key component enabling
advanced technologies such as artificial intelligence and the internet of
things. This project enhances U.S. competitiveness in these critical areas and
advances national prosperity and security. Undergraduate and graduate students
and senior researchers benefit from this project through multidisciplinary
laboratory research, and the general public benefits through multifaceted
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a novel
manufacturing approach, based on switchable non-volatile ferroelectric gating,
to define fundamental electronic elements (e.g. p-n junctions) and to fabricate
functional electronic devices (e.g. logic gates and photodiode arrays) in a wide
range of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials. This approach centers on photo-
patterning the ferroelectric phase regions in In2Se3 thin films, a scalable
process that is compatible with established photolithography procedures.
Additional benefits of this approach include circuit reconfigurability,
maintaining the material lattice pristineness as no defects or dopants are
introduced for the p-n junction formations, and compatibility with chemically
sensitive materials such as the halide perovskites. This project addresses a key
scientific issue central to the successful implementation of this approach,
particularly the photon-induced phase transition kinetics in In2Se3 as the
fundamental mechanism underlying the photo-patterning process. The mechanistic
insight obtained provides an important guide for optimizing the process
parameters. In addition, the effects of the ferroelectric gating are studied
with a focus on verifying and understanding the resulting p-n junction
characteristics, such as the barrier height and the space-charge region width,
which are critical to device prototyping. The project is a collaboration between
experts in synthesis and characterization of In2Se3 and halide perovskite thin
films and involves the study of the photo-patterning process and the
ferroelectric gating effects on different 2D nanomaterial systems, demonstrating
the versatility of this scalable approach in manufacturing reconfigurable
microelectronic devices and circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.