* 1930546
* Academic Support, Career Training, and Professional Development to Improve Interdisciplinary Graduate Education for the Next Generation of Computational Scientists and Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Dustin Thoman, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, and engineers by supporting the recruitment, retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at San Diego State University (SDSU), a four-year Hispanic-serving
institution. Over its 5-year duration, this project will provide two years of
scholarship support ($10,000/year) to 30 graduate students who are pursing
degrees in Computational Science, Engineering Sciences (Civil, Mechanical,
Aerospace, Structural, Electrical and Biological), Computer Science,
Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Geology and Biology. The project will also
enable curricular improvements aimed at improving student development and
engagement in interdisciplinary research teams. In particular, the principal
investigators will use the educational programs and research infrastructure of
the SDSU Computational Science Research Center to explore how students develop
expertise and establish their identities as interdisciplinary scientists. The
proposed project will generate new knowledge to advance the understanding of how
to effectively train and support graduate students to facilitate development of
interdisciplinary skills, experience, and identities while helping students
overcome common barriers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cornerstone of the project
is to establish a cohort of graduate students in computational science and
engineering and create a community of practice to explore, understand, and
overcome the challenges faced by early career scientists entering
interdisciplinary research. STEM education research has demonstrated the
effectiveness of strategies to help students develop discipline-specific skills
and science identities. However, less is known about how to optimally facilitate
the career and identity development of interdisciplinary computational
scientists. Through mentoring, professional development seminars, and activities
for early career exploration, scholars will interact with renowned
interdisciplinary researchers invited from industry, academia, and national
research labs to learn about the current and emerging opportunities and
challenges in interdisciplinary research. With the help of mentors, the scholars
will create Individual Development Plans outlining their career goals for
advancing as interdisciplinary scientists/engineers and steps and timelines
toward achieving those goals. The resulting community of practice will enable
the project to investigate how computational scientists develop identities as
interdisciplinary scientists, and to devise tools and metrics to assess students
during their formative development. The project will also advance the
understanding of barriers and supports for the development of diverse students'
career paths. Moreover, it will enable exploration of how mentoring and
individual development plans support retention and degree attainment. The
project will be evaluated by employing outcome mapping and developmental
evaluation approaches using information from training assessments, participant
reports, and institutional data. Results of the project will be made available
by conference papers/presentation, workshops, webinars, and papers in peer-
reviewed journals. Through dissemination of findings, the project plans to
increase broader participation of education researchers in discussions on
training interdisciplinary scientists and engineers for the future workforce.
This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.