* 1930507
* Creating Pathways from College to Careers in Mathematics and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Yongwen Lampert, Portland Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 10/31/2024
* USD 999,941.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Portland Community College (PCC). PCC is the largest institution of
higher education in Oregon. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
one-year scholarships to 108 students who are pursuing associate degrees in the
biological, physical or mathematical sciences, with the expectation that 36
students (3 cohorts of 12 students) will receive these scholarships for two
years, with 36 one-year scholarships awarded to these scholars transferring to
Portland State University (PSU). The project will implement evidence-based
project activities from recruitment to degree completion and transfer, such as
targeted recruitment from local high schools, a comprehensive mentoring program
from high school to PSU, enhanced faculty-student interactions, academic
excellence workshops, and use of peer tutors. In addition, the project team will
embed hands-on activities in PCC's mathematics curriculum related to culturally
responsive teaching/learning that lower barriers to participation for women and
other underrepresented students in STEM fields. The project will investigate the
effectiveness of recruitment and retention strategies and other evidence-based
approaches in broadening participation of underrepresented students by designing
activities for a diverse pool of scholars. Furthermore, it will create a bridge
between high school, PCC, and PSU, thus providing students with consistent
exposure to STEM academic fields and careers and a built-in cohort for peer
networking and support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
increase success of students pursuing STEM degrees by implementing evidence-
based strategies, such as 1) collaborating with local high schools to provide
additional support and encouragement of participants in entering post-secondary
education, and 2) embedding peer mentors in introductory PCC math courses to
begin cohort-building activities that continue throughout the scholarship
program as most community colleges are not residential, thus effecting students'
ability to persist in STEM. The project will make curricular changes to two
introductory math courses taken by students majoring in STEM, and will
investigate the degree to which these changes impact retention, with an
expectation that there will be an overall increase in the percentage of students
passing the course. It is anticipated that 85% of scholars will be retained from
their first to their second year due to the curricular changes and intensive
supports provided to them. The project will be assessed using qualitative
methods such as surveys, guided interviews, and focus groups with scholars and
faculty; and quantitative measures such as pass rates of targeted math courses
and scholar retention and transfer rates. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.