* 1930784
* High-Density Photonic Chip Integration with Extreme Skin-Depth Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Sangsik Kim, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,912.00

Nontechnical: Chip-scale photonic devices can miniaturize a bulk optical system
into a single tiny chip, making it portable and allowing various optical
applications outside of the laboratory. The integration of photonic chips with
electronic circuitry can also lead to a broad range of applications, for
example, in high-speed optical communication, chemical- and bio-sensing, high-
precision spectroscopy, and light detection and ranging for driverless
automobiles. As electronic devices have been revolutionized in support of high-
density integrated circuits, increasing the photonic chip integration density is
highly desired in many optical applications; it offers more functionality and
lower power consumption in a chip. However, due to the wave nature of light,
high-density photonic chip integration is extremely difficult, and the current
approach relies on the index-contrast of composite semiconductor materials.
Research at Texas Tech University will explore an alternative approach of using
all-dielectric and highly anisotropic metamaterials, i.e. artificially
engineered man-made materials, to increase the photonic chip integration
density. The proposed research will be implemented on a monolithic silicon-on-
insulator wafer, which is compatible with the current semiconductor foundry
process and provides a low-cost solution; thus, this research would have a
broader impact in industry as well, accelerating the practical use of photonic
chips in many applications. Educational and outreach activities are a high
priority of this project and will provide hands-on experiences for undergraduate
and graduate students, especially underrepresented groups of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Realizing a high-density photonic chip
integration is highly desired in many applications, as more building blocks
provide more functionalities on a single chip (analogous to electronics).
However, current approaches of light confinement rely on the index-contrast of
core and cladding materials and further miniaturization of photonic devices is
hampered by the wave nature of light, i.e., the evanescent wave in the cladding
causes waveguide crosstalk. The goal of this project is to suppress the
waveguide crosstalk significantly and to devise and implement ultracompact on-
chip photonic devices and circuitry. This project will pursue this goal through
fundamental analysis and experimental demonstration of the exceptional coupling
phenomena in the extreme skin-depth waveguides. An anisotropic coupling
mechanism in the extreme skin-depth waveguides will be explored to fundamentally
understand the phenomena and extremely long coupling lengths with low crosstalk
will be experimentally demonstrated on a silicon chip. The fabrication tolerance
of the exceptional coupling will be assessed as well, and all the
characterization results will be compared with numerical and analytical results.
The project will also explore the effect of active media in anisotropic
claddings and will implement various passive and active ultracompact photonic
devices with anisotropic metamaterials. The outcomes of this project will
scientifically reveal the fundamental mechanism of an exceptional coupling that
can suppress optical crosstalk and will technically advance photonic
applications by providing more functionalities on a
chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.