* 1930274
* Community-building, Mentoring, and Research Experiences to Develop Undergraduate STEM Majors' Scientific Identities and Preparation for STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Timothy Flood, St. Norbert College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 998,759.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at St. Norbert College. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
four-year scholarships to 18 students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science
degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Geology,
Mathematics, or Physics. The project builds upon existing student success
initiatives at the College, with the goal of providing Scholars with a mentored
pathway to academic and career success. The Scholars will begin their
undergraduate career with an early arrival program, reside in a living learning
community with other Scholars, participate in an established academic peer
mentoring program, and engage in multi-year faculty-mentored research and/or
internships with local industrial partners. Career and educational development
will be supplemented via activities that include resume development, a seminar
series, a career day, outreach activities, and graduate examination preparation.
The project aims to increase the recruitment, retention, graduation, and success
of academically-talented students who face economic and financial barriers. The
programming developed as part of this project be available to other students,
thus broadening the impact of the award. In addition, the project includes a
research study to examine when and how students develop their scientific
identity, and to determine how project activities affect that
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Scholars will participate in a combination of
activities and supports that are well-established for improving success rates
among STEM students. The project will study the effect of the combination of
activities and supports on development of Scholars' scientific identify. The
point at which STEM students identify themselves as future career scientists
often affects whether they complete STEM degrees. The project will explore how
students' scientific identities and attitudes toward science change as they
progress through the project activities and supports. The research study will
investigate three research questions: What is the impact of scientific identity
and self-efficacy formation on STEM success? How effective is positive
scientific socialization on STEM success and retention? Does participation in
the project activities and supports increase STEM success for students with low
socioeconomic backgrounds? Using the Epistemological Beliefs Assessment and the
Lawson Classroom Test of Scientific Reasoning, the project will evaluate
academic readiness, scientific identity and scientific self-efficacy formation,
positive socialization, and STEM success of Scholars versus
sociodemographically-matched non-Scholars before, during, and after the
undergraduate experience. By tracking changes between the cohorts over time, the
research will identify if, how, and when scientific identity, self-efficacy
formation, and positive socialization impact STEM success. The assessment and
evaluation team will also conduct annual focus groups of science majors and the
Scholar cohort to gather qualitative information on the project's impact. The
findings derived from the assessment and evaluation efforts are intended to be
disseminated at local, regional, and national conferences. This project is
funded by NSFs Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.