* 1930525
* Supporting the Success of STEM Students Through Scholarships and Structured Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Khalid Salmani, South Texas College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 649,369.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of students at South Texas College, a two-year Hispanic
Serving Institution. Over five years, the project will provide scholarships to
forty undergraduate students who are pursuing Associate degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and/or Physics. The
project aims to increase the Scholars’ retention, transfer, and/or graduation by
linking scholarships with structured professional development activities. These
activities include faculty mentoring, tutoring, undergraduate research
experiences, internships, and participation in scientific conferences. Because
South Texas College has a high percentage of Hispanic students, this project is
likely to broaden participation in STEM fields. In addition, results of the
project’s research will produce new knowledge about how to improve the success
of STEM students, particularly students at two-year institutions and from
backgrounds that are underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This project aims to:
(1) increase student awareness, skills, and sense of community for two
sequential cohorts of 20 undergraduate students; (2) improve student retention;
and (3) facilitate graduation or transfer of Scholars within the period of this
project. Research indicates that financial support in the form of scholarships
helps retain students in STEM fields; however, less is known about the impact of
structured student professional development on the retention, persistence,
transfer and/or graduation of low-income students majoring in a STEM discipline.
Additionally, limited data are available regarding the impact of student cohorts
on students' sense of belonging, especially on students from the demographic
backgrounds represented at South Texas College. Research questions addressed in
this project are: (1) To what extent does structured student professional
development improve retention, persistence, transfer rates and degree completion
of students majoring in a STEM discipline? (2) To what extent does participation
in the program increase students' sense of belonging, and motivation to pursue
STEM degrees and careers? To address these questions, the project will collect
longitudinal data on connectedness, commitment, engagement, and student academic
performance. This project will distinguish between the expected positive impact
of activities on sense of belonging and student success by comparing data
collected from participants to data from a non-cohort control group of STEM
students with similar academic backgrounds and demographics. An independent
internal evaluator will provide formative and summative evaluation of engagement
and academic performance for each of the project's three objectives. Findings
will be disseminated at internal professional development conferences, local and
state STEM conferences, and through publications in STEM education journals.
This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.