* 1930032
* Functional electromagnetic surfaces on irregular grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Do-Hoon Kwon, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 369,062.00

For electromagnetic and optical waves, thin surfaces or films incorporating an
array of carefully designed small particles can achieve useful functionalities
such as focusing, guiding, redirecting, or absorbing power and energy. The
state-of-the-art design methodologies utilize analytical and numerical
techniques based on periodicity of particle placement for accuracy and
efficiency. While they have enabled rapid development and maturation of an
important class of devices in recent years over a wide range of frequencies from
microwaves to visible light, the periodicity condition limits the surface shape
to be planar and the particle positions to be strictly regular. Such
restrictions are incompatible with surfaces having curved boundaries or
profiles, leading to sub-optimal performances in modern curved platform-
conformal applications. In this project, a novel design methodology for such
functional surfaces that comprise particles positioned on irregular grids will
be investigated, lifting the traditional restrictions and allowing curved
conformal surfaces to be accurately designed and realized. Its key foundation is
accurate semi-analytical evaluation of the interactions between particles
positioned at irregular grid points. This project advances knowledge in wave
control methods using thin engineered surfaces. The technique developed in this
project can be readily extended to controlling sound or seismic waves. A
successful completion will also enhance the electromagnetic signature control
capabilities of electronic warfare assets, contributing to national security.
Active research participation by undergraduate students and live demonstrations
of wave propagation and control mechanisms in front of high school audiences
will raise the awareness, interest, and literacy in electromagnetic wave
phenomena as well as in STEM disciplines in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate functional electromagnetic surfaces of flat and curved
profiles comprising an array of subwavelength elements arranged on an irregular
grid. Design techniques will be first established for individual elements on
irregular grids for planar transmission-line metamaterials and both reflective
and transmissive metasurfaces. In the microwave regime, transformation-optics-
based devices in planar transmission-line metamaterials, a subwavelength-thin
spherical-shell metasurface cloak for free-standing scatterers, and a
transmissive hemispherical-shell metasurface lens will be synthesized,
fabricated, and measured based on the new design theory. Overcoming the
challenges associated with traditional designs based on periodic boundary
conditions, subwavelength elements are placed on irregular grids created by an
unstructured mesh generator. For a desired response, the local electric and
magnetic fields that excite each individual resonator are accurately evaluated,
taking into account mutual coupling effect from all elements. This is achieved
by first partitioning the entire surface into near and far regions from a
resonator location. Elements in the far region are represented by surface-
averaged current densities in evaluating their collective coupling, while those
in the near region contribute as individual elements. Then, each resonator is
uniquely determined from the fundamental polarization relation. Transformation-
optics-based devices will be designed on irregular transmission-line grids,
fabricated using the standard printed-circuit technologies, and measured. For a
reflective surface, a spherical-shell metasurface cloak will be designed as an
array of printed resonators on a grounded spherical dielectric substrate and the
prototype will be measured for its cloaking effectiveness. For a transmissive
application, a conformal bi-anisotropic metasurface focusing lens comprising
multilayer resonators will be designed on an unstructured hemispherical grid,
fabricated, and measured. The project advances the understanding of functional
surface design and operation, and enables a new class of subwavelength-thin
conformal devices optimized for curved boundaries and
profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.