* 1930806
* Fate of Cadmium and Arsenic Under Engineered Physico-Chemical Gradients in the Soil-Water-Rice Nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Matthew Limmer, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 353,911.00

Rice is a staple food for half the world's population. Despite its importance,
the yield and quality of rice are threatened by arsenic and cadmium uptake from
soil. Rice will uptake and concentrate arsenic when it is grown under
conventional soil flooding, because arsenic is released into the water from
biogeochemical reactions in the soil. This process can happen even when soil
arsenic concentrations are low. Although minimizing soil flooding can decrease
arsenic contamination of rice and even save water resources, doing so can
increase rice grain uptake of cadmium from the soil. The goal of this research
project is to develop methods that simultaneously limit rice uptake of both
arsenic and cadmium. Manganese(II) is less toxic to plants than cadmium or
arsenic and has been recently shown to share a root transport pathway with
cadmium. Therefore, it should be possible to exploit the geochemical
characteristics of manganese to decrease uptake of cadmium into the plant via
engineered soil electrochemistry. This research project takes a
multidisciplinary approach that incorporates geochemistry and plant biology
methods and also will utilize resources at the NSF-funded Rice Investigation,
Communication, and Education (RICE) Facility. This work will help train and
foster the professional development of the next generation of STEM professionals
to tackle the grand challenge of a sustainable food supply. Additional outreach
efforts to high schools will increase scientific literacy of students and
hopefully interest them in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rice is often the
first food consumed by infants and is also a staple food for half of the global
population. However, the yield and quality of rice are threatened by the uptake
of toxic arsenic and cadmium during the soil flooding process integral to rice
cultivation. Although arsenic cycling has been well studied over the last two
decades, cadmium cycling and uptake by rice is less well understood. The
hypothesis behind this research project is that controlling manganese(II)
availability can provide an engineered solution to limit cadmium and arsenic
uptake by rice. The specific objectives of this project are 1) to understand the
role of increasing manganese(II) availability in decreasing cadmium uptake by
rice in simple hydroponic systems; 2) to evaluate the impact of engineered redox
states on dissolution, plant uptake, and localization of metal(loid)s including
manganese, iron, cadmium, and arsenic, in rice plants grown in rice paddy
mesocosms; and 3) to compare traditional redox measurements to novel techniques
for quantifying indicators of reduction in soil (IRIS) films. IRIS film
technology will be evaluated as a low-cost means for farmers to know when to
drain their fields in order to restrict rice uptake of toxic metalloids. The
outcomes of this research will transform the ability of rice agronomists,
wetland scientists, farmers, and other stakeholders to prevent toxic metal
uptake and thereby safeguard the food supply of billions of people. The results
of this study should be applicable to many other plants beyond rice, because
many plants also accumulate cadmium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.