* 1930282
* Attracting and Cultivating Cybersecurity Experts and Scholars through Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Robin Hensel, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its 5-year duration, this project will fund 120 annual scholarships
to approximately 40 students pursuing B.S. degrees in Computer and Information
Sciences with specialization in Cybersecurity. First-year students will receive
up to four-years of scholarship support. Students who become eligible upon
deciding to pursue a major or an Area of Emphasis in Cybersecurity after the
first year will receive two or three years of scholarship support. Cybersecurity
is of critical importance to the U.S. economy, public safety, national security,
and the nation's critical infrastructure. This project will address the high
demand for cybersecurity professionals by recruiting academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need and providing them with the resources
necessary to succeed in their undergraduate education and become globally
competitive cybersecurity experts. Furthermore, the project aims to broaden the
participation of women and other underrepresented groups in the Cybersecurity
area. This project is expected to provide a significant contribution to the
emerging knowledge-base of Cybersecurity education, including strategies that
may be implemented by other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specifically, this
project aims to address the governmental and industry need for highly skilled
cybersecurity experts. It has the following goals: (1) increase the annual
enrollment of undergraduate students with specialization in Cybersecurity; (2)
enhance curricular and extra-curricular student support services and activities
for students; (3) strengthen partnerships with computer and information
technology employers; and (4) investigate the impact of the curricular and co-
curricular activities on student success. Though significant research has been
done for other STEM fields, cybersecurity is a new field of study and factors
affecting student recruitment, academic success, retention, and persistence to
graduation within this field are not yet known. The project research questions
are focused on (1) measures of student success; (2) discovering which aspects of
the project are most impactful for students; (3) identifying student strategies
for overcoming academic challenges; and (4) the impact of the program on
students in terms of academic motivation, grit, outcome expectations of
students, and retention. Measures of student success and persistence will be
collected and analyzed against a comparison group to determine if the specific
student engagement interventions make a significant difference in student
success, retention, and persistence to graduation. The project will be evaluated
using a mixed methods approach using information from student records, surveys,
and student feedback. Results of this project will be made available through
relevant web media, peer-reviewed publications, and presentations in regional
and national STEM communities. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.