* 1930047
* Preparing Diverse STEM Researchers to Address Global Challenges
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Quincy Brown, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 4,595,833.00

In its strong commitment to broaden the participation of students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields from groups
underrepresented in those disciplines, the National Science Foundation (NSF)
provides funding for conferences and workshops. To this end, the American
Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) will hold the Emerging
Researchers National (ERN) Conferences in STEM in 2020, 2021 and 2022 with the
theme of "Preparing Diverse STEM Researchers to Address Global Challenges." The
conferences will include undergraduate and graduate students from the following
programs at the NSF: Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Undergraduate Program, Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation,
Centers of Research Excellence in Science and Technology, Alliances for Graduate
Education and the Professoriate, Tribal Colleges and Universities Program,
Hispanic-Serving Institutions Program, and Research Experiences for
Undergraduates. However, any student wishing to participate in the conference,
is encouraged to apply. Estimated annual conference participation is 1,100;
including 750 students and 350 faculty and administrators. This conference,
unlike those of most other professional societies, allows for presentations in
all NSF supported disciplines, as well as presentations in interdisciplinary and
cross-disciplinary areas of study. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to:
provide opportunities to enhance students' sense of community and belonging in
STEM; provide students with science communication and other professional skills
for STEM workforce success; and disseminate resources and best practices to
support student researchers and faculty. The three-day conference will include
undergraduate and graduate student posters and oral presentations; plenary
sessions that feature STEM professionals discussing their educational and career
pathways and lessons learned about navigating a career in the STEM workforce;
workshops focused on strategies for applying for and succeeding in graduate
programs and finding funding for graduate school; and career preparation
workshops. The project will include community building, professional
development, and dissemination activities in three areas of engagement to
provide students opportunities to build networks, connections and relationships
within specific STEM education and research contexts to enhance their academic
and social capital in STEM. The first pillar will support the community and
foster a sense of belonging in STEM and includes in-person networking, exposure
to STEM role models, and exposure to professional STEM contacts. The second
pillar focuses on professional development and includes e-mentoring, STEM career
and presentation skills webinars, and skills development sessions during the ERN
conference. The third pillar, dissemination, uses the ERN website to share and
promote resources, opportunities and best practices related to supporting
student researchers and faculty. The project is guided by formative and
summative evaluation; as well by an advisory board. The evaluation plan includes
research questions designed to build knowledge in how these conferences
contribute to students' efficacy in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
co-funded by programs in the Directorates of Biological Sciences, Computer and
Information Science &amp; Engineering, Education and Human Resources,
Engineering, Geosciences, and Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Major funding
contributions come from the following programs in the Division of Human Resource
Development: Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate, Centers of
Research Excellence in Science and Technology, Louis Stokes Alliances for
Minority Participation, and Historically Black Colleges and Universities-
Undergraduate Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.