* 1930037
* Supporting the Academic Success of Undergraduate STEM Students through Scholarships and STEM Identity Development
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2024
* Gisela Spieler-Persad, Rio Hondo College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 10/31/2024
* USD 996,708.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income undergraduate students with
demonstrated financial need at Rio Hondo College. Located in Southern
California, Rio Hondo College is a public, two-year, Hispanic-serving
institution. More than 55% of its students are classified as low-income, first-
generation college students. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
two-year scholarships to 45 students who are pursuing associate degrees for
transfer in Biology, Chemistry, Environmental Sciences, Engineering,
Mathematics, and Physics. The project aims to increase student persistence in
STEM fields by providing financial support, combined with efforts to analyze and
support the success of low-income STEM students. The project will include a
"Thrive as a Scientist" course, along with support activities such as
mentoring/tutoring, undergraduate research experiences, and curricular
improvements. This multi-faceted approach is expected to help Scholars acquire a
STEM identity that can carry them throughout their college and professional
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Current theory about the development of science
identity offers a framework to investigate how science identity and cultural
identity affect student agency, and what college structures support this
development. Unfortunately, most measurement tools related to development of
STEM identity were created by four-year institutions for students enrolled in
four-year degree programs. Considering the increasing number of underrepresented
minority students who begin their post-secondary education at a community
college, a pressing need exists to better understand STEM identity development
at two-year institutions. This project will help to address this need by using a
culturally-sensitive STEM identity instrument to measure and address the
barriers and opportunities facing STEM students at two-year colleges. The
results will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of interventions, and to
advance understanding of the effects of cultural and STEM identity as students
complete their courses of study at two-year institutions, and graduate and/or
transfer to four-year institutions in STEM fields. With an emphasis on the two-
year college setting, the results of this project will add to the discourse in
STEM education with a renewed focus on not just changing student behaviors but
also chancing the culture of institutions in which they are enrolled. The
project will evaluate the effectiveness of each of the project's components and
will publish results of the knowledge generated in education and social science
journals, and disseminate findings at regional and national meetings to broaden
the impact of the project. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.