* 1930313
* Graduating the Next Generation of Engineering Technology Professionals by Promoting Competence, Group Identity, and Autonomy
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Michael Eastman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,889.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). Over its 5-year duration,
this project will provide scholarships to 36 undergraduate students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in Civil, Computer, Electrical, Electrical
Mechanical, Mechanical, and Robotics and Manufacturing Engineering Technology.
Students will receive scholarship support for their first five semesters at RIT.
To increase retention, the project will use faculty and peer mentors, create
individualized scholar support networks, and improve instruction through faculty
development aimed at fostering a more welcoming environment for all students.
Because the percentage of African American, Latin American and Native American
(AALANA), first generation, and deaf/hard of hearing students enrolled in
Engineering Technology programs at RIT exceeds national levels, the broader
impact of this project lies in its potential to increase diversity in the
engineering workforce. This project also has the potential to significantly
advance the understanding of best practices that address the social and
environmental factors which have historically contributed to low retention of
underrepresented students in Engineering Technology programs. Thus, it supports
a key strategic objective of NSF, to grow a more capable and diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The guiding principle of this project is to
promote competence, develop relatedness (or a sense of group identity), and
nurture autonomy in Engineering Technology students through the implementation
of support networks and pedagogical reform. As posited by Self-Determination
Theory (SDT), when these three basic psychological needs, competence,
relatedness, and autonomy are met, individuals will be intrinsically motivated
to support their own personal growth and well-being. This project is important
because it will help to fill the void in the literature on evidence-based
strategies to improve retention of underrepresented groups specifically in
Engineering Technology. This project will investigate if three particular
strategies designed to address social and environmental factors, indeed improve
scholars' motivation and persistence. First is programmatic implementation,
using an SDT framework, to address the basic psychological needs of autonomy,
competence, and relatedness. Second is utilization of faculty and peer mentors
along with individualized scholar support networks. Third is the adoption of
evidence-based practices to engage and improve learning for a diverse group of
students in the Engineering Technology classroom. The effectiveness of these
strategies will be evaluated quantitatively using GPA and retention data along
with results from an SDT measurement instrument. The evaluation also includes a
qualitative component featuring focus group interviews with scholarship
recipients. The results of this project will be disseminated through conference
papers, peer reviewed journals, and RIT's and the College of Engineering
Technology's social media accounts. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.