* 1930150
* Scholarships and Learning Community to Build Academic Momentum in STEM Students who Transfer from a Community College to a Four Year University
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Kimberly Henry, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,741,708.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, this project will support students at Front Range Community
College and Colorado State University. Front Range Community College is the
largest community college in Colorado. It has a diverse student body and is the
largest source of transfer students to Colorado State University. Over the
project's five-year duration, the project will provide up to four years of
scholarship support for at least 150 STEM students. These students will pursue
associate's and bachelor's degrees in mathematics, life sciences, physical
sciences, engineering, or computer sciences. A team of faculty and student
success coaches will contribute to Scholars' success by: implementing Scholars'
onboarding into a math and science learning community at both institutions;
developing Scholars' knowledge and skills; ensuring transfer continuity through
curriculum mapping and articulation; providing hands-on experiences; and
mentoring the Scholars. This project is significant because it will integrate
national best practices for improving student retention, transfer, and degree
completion that are being adopted by community colleges nationwide. Broader
impacts of this project include narrowing of educational gaps in Colorado and
increasing the diversity of students completing STEM degrees. Its intellectual
merit lies in a research study that will evaluate the use of near-term measures
of student success (academic momentum) to predict and support long-term success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Specifically, this project aims to increase the number of low-
income, academically talented students from Front Range Community College who
complete a STEM associate degree, transfer to Colorado State University, and
complete a STEM baccalaureate degree. The specific aims are: 1) optimizing
enrollment and persistence of low-income, academically talented students from
Front Range Community College Math and Science Career and Academic Community; 2)
increasing Scholar's STEM engagement, knowledge, and skills; and 3) improving
continuity and articulation in the transfer process to increase student success.
This project's research component will generate new knowledge about best
practices for supporting baccalaureate degree completion of STEM students who
begin their education at a two-year colleges. The research project will measure
the effect of scholarships and the project's activities on student self-
efficacy, science identity, and academic momentum. The project expects that
academic momentum metrics will provide actionable data that may be better suited
for measuring success of interventions than retention/completion metrics. An
external evaluator will measure the extent of implementation of the project's
activities, who participated, and if the project's objectives are met using
formative and summative mixed-method measures. This project's outcomes and
research findings will be submitted for publication in peer-reviewed journals,
posted on websites such as the Department of Education's "What Works
Clearinghouse," and presented at regional and national conferences. This project
is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.