* 1930649
* Motorized Nanolabs: Dually High-Speed and Ultrasensitive Bioanalysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Donglei Emma Fan, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 515,849.00

The objective of this research is to investigate a new concept of a biochemical
analysis system made of motorized micro/nanosensors that offers unprecedented
high sensitivity and detection speed of biomarkers, relevant to disease
diagnosis and early intervention. Although significant efforts have been made in
advancing nanosensors with extremely high sensitivity for bioanalysis, the low
efficiency of the detection of molecules in fluidic samples remains a grand
unmet challenge. The challenge arises from low attachment opportunities of
molecules to a nanosensor at ultralow concentrations. This intrinsic problem has
greatly hindered the practical applications of nanosensors in early disease
diagnosis. In this work, an advanced actuation approach is proposed to realize a
bioanalysis system, namely robotic nanolab, which will actively enhance the
capture speed of molecules by utilizing arrays of ultrasensitive nanosensors.
The high speed and sensitive bioanalysis system will be applied for the
detection of multiple biomarkers of pancreas cancers for early-stage diagnosis.
The proposed research will be combined with various educational and outreach
efforts. A workshop will be organized that will gather leading researchers from
both academia and industry to facilitate a discussion on nanosensors. Results
will be disseminated in conferences. Demonstrations of device module will be
conducted in specific events, including explore-UT (University of Texas at
Austin) and Girl's Day, to inspire the public interest and awareness of new
technological breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, researchers
have developed nanoscale sensors with sensitivity at the single-molecule level.
However, the nanoscale features of these devices that enable ultrasensitive
detection undesirably results in low detection speed, due to the low probability
of molecules captured by small sensing areas. The difficulties are further
compounded by the complex fabrication and integration schemes. To overcome these
issues, the objective of this research is to investigate a new concept of
motorized nanolab to offer unprecedented ultrasensitivity, motion control, and
robustness for biodetection and analysis. The motorized nanolab will be realized
by arrays of Raman micro/nanosensors with highly reproducible detection scheme.
The system will be controlled intelligently and efficiently for high-speed
detection of cancer biomarkers. The detection time of biomarkers at low
concentrations could be substantially reduced, e.g. from hours to minutes. If
successful, this research could inspire an innovative class of biosensors for
early cancer detection and intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.