* 1930354
* Retaining Undergraduate Engineering Students Through Experiences in Industry, Entrepreneurship, Community Engagement, and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Charmane Caldwell, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 11/30/2024
* USD 999,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for engineers by supporting
high-achieving, low-income undergraduate engineering students at Florida
Agriculture and Mechanical University. Over its five-year duration, this project
will provide scholarships to 40 students. Sophomores will receive three-year
scholarships and Juniors will receive two-year scholarships. The Scholars will
pursue bachelor's degrees in biomedical, chemical, civil, computer, electrical,
industrial, or mechanical engineering. The project plans to help the Scholars
persist in their engineering program of study, all the way to graduation. It
plans to do so by providing students with scholarships and academic support, as
well as professional development activities. These activities include
experiences in industry, entrepreneurship, community engagement, and multi-year
research projects. Florida Agriculture and Mechanical University is a large,
public Historically Black University. It has a high percentage of students from
populations that are underrepresented in engineering. As a result, this project
has the potential to broaden participation in engineering fields and to help to
prepare a globally competitive, diverse engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in engineering
fields. The specific objectives of this project are to: (1) have at least 80% of
the Scholars successfully complete the pre-engineering program; (2) achieve an
engineering graduation rate of at least 80% for the Scholars who successfully
complete the pre-engineering program; (3) achieve a mean GPA for Scholars that
is at least 0.3 points higher than their engineering peers; and (4) equip
students with professional and technical skills that will enable them to be
successful in STEM careers and/or STEM graduate programs. The project includes a
research study to investigate whether implementing flexible options for
continued student engagement through the summer after their first year of study
helps students persist through their second year of study. Building on the
Theory of Planned Behavior, this project will investigate the questions: How do
Scholarâ€™s post-graduation plans evolve from entry through graduation? Is there a
notable change at the point of completing the pre-engineering program? How well
do intentions predict post-graduation pursuits? Further, the project will
investigate which program elements correlate best with successful student
outcomes and differences that might exist depending on student demographics
and/or first-year experience. Formative and summative process and outcome
evaluations will be conducted using primary data collected from interactions
with the project team, student surveys, and data from institutional records.
Results of this project will be made available in scholarly publications,
presentations, social media, and university communication channels. This project
is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.