* 1930950
* Developing Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge of Pre-Service Math Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Omar Hernandez Rodriguez, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 206,027.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by helping pre-service secondary mathematics teachers learn
how to design technology-based lessons that help students learn mathematics. The
project's main goal is to develop the pre-service teacher's knowledge about how
to use technological tools to enhance their teaching. To accomplish this goal,
the project will adapt a strategy called "Lesson Study," which was designed to
improve teaching through cycles of planning, teaching, and reflecting. The
project will implement a Lesson Study process that includes pre-service
teachers, university teacher educators, and cooperating teachers (the
experienced in-service teachers with whom pre-service teachers have their
initial clinical experiences). As a result, this project aims to overcome a
challenge that often exists in pre-service education: clarifying the
relationship of what pre-service teachers experience in teaching methods courses
at the university to what happens in their clinical practice. This collaboration
in Lesson Study will recognize and build upon the knowledge that pre-service
teachers, collaborating teachers, and teacher educators each bring to the work
of teaching. In doing so, the collaboration is designed to bring coherence
between clinical experiences and methods courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty
members at the University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras and the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign are collaborating on this project. The project aims
to revise one of the methods courses at the University of Puerto Rico to
integrate Lesson Study strategies and create a collaborative space to advance
the pre-service teacher's technological pedagogical content knowledge.
Interconnectivity technology allows students to share their work and represent
mathematical ideas through multiple representations. The methods course will
target algebra and geometry concepts in the secondary mathematics curriculum
using Desmos or GeoGebra, both of which are open source software packages with
interconnectivity capabilities. Desmos is an online graphing calculator and
GeoGebra integrates algebra and dynamic geometry. Through adaptation of Lesson
Study, this project employs a theory of instrumental orchestration to promote
pre-service teachers' use of technology to develop students' mathematical
proficiency. Instrumental orchestration consists of three elements: didactic
configuration, mode of exploitation, and didactic performance. Pre-service
teachers will use the technology tools and tasks, which are part of the
didactical configuration, and descriptions of the exploitation modes in the
lessons. The didactical performance will be the outcome of the planning and will
be observed in the implementation phase of the Lesson Study. It is expected that
the collaboration among the pre-service teachers, university teacher educators,
and cooperating teachers will support co-construction of new knowledge and
skills in teaching through Lesson Study leveraging the mathematical technology
tools for instruction. The project will explore the following research
questions: In what ways do pre-service teachers learn to apply the principles of
instrumental orchestrations planning and implementing mathematics lessons for
promoting students' mathematical proficiency? What supports from Coordinating
Teachers enable pre-service teachers to apply instrumental orchestrations in
their lessons? And, how does the modified Lesson Study model enable
opportunities for creating hybrid spaces that connect methods courses and
clinical experiences? Through the analysis of videos, student journals, and
interviews, the project will construct an evidence-based case that examines the
integration of methods courses and clinical experiences. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.