* 1930356
* I-Corps: NC2 Team - Sustainable Polymer Nanocomposite
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Dongyang Deng, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in lighter
and stronger polymer composite materials with partial sustainability. 'Light and
strong' features are essential to polymer composites. These composites have
demonstrated their effectiveness in the automobile industry from improved engine
efficiency, low fuel consumption, reduction in the emission of CO2 and increased
safety. The enhanced properties of our polymer nanocomposite materials including
lighter weight, higher strength, and partial sustainability in combination with
cost-effectiveness is of interest to the current composite industry and will
benefit a wide range of industrial sectors such as aerospace, automotive,
sports, defense, construction, packaging, electrical &amp; electronics,
biomedical etc. There is a growing market in polymer nanocomposites. The global
polymer nanocomposite market will reach $11.5 billion by 2022 according to new
research published by Allied Market Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on developing polymer composite materials with nanoscale
reinforcing fillers as well as a partially sustainable polymer matrix. Compared
to traditional polymer composite materials, benefits of nanofiller come from
their significantly higher specific surface area and concurrently enormous
interfacial area. Surface modification of nanofillers will be carried out to
efficiently stabilize the dispersion of nanofillers in the polymer matrix,
substantially strengthen interfacial bonding between nanofillers and the polymer
matrix, and consequently improve mechanical performance of the polymer
nanocomposites, which brings in great potential for even lighter and stronger
materials. In the meantime, environmentally friendly bio-based binders will be
developed to not only replace conventional surface coupling agents to surface-
modify nanofillers, but also to partially replace the conventional polymer
matrix to enhance the sustainability and mechanical performance of the resultant
polymer composite materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.