* 1930341
* Promoting Opportunities and Pathways for Undergraduate Persistence in Science, Engineering, Technology, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* J. Andrew Hauger, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 905,444.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Augusta University. Augusta University is one of four public
comprehensive research universities in Georgia, with a highly diverse student
population, especially in STEM majors where two-thirds are female and nearly
half are from groups underrepresented in science. Over its five-year duration,
this project will fund three-year scholarships to 30 students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics, and/or
Physics. The project seeks to provide unique learning opportunities for student
growth and development through workshops focused on improving persistence in
STEM, enhancing personal and academic skills, and increasing career awareness.
It is expected that the workshops will help students develop important skills
that are not often integrated into STEM courses. The workshops should also
stimulate student interest and self-efficacy in STEM. A mentoring program that
includes peer, faculty, and professional mentors will provide Scholars with a
network of academic and career guidance. A Learning Community will complement
the mentoring program and workshops by providing an environment to build a
strong sense of community. The project will support STEM faculty engagement in
ongoing professional development, thus facilitating significant improvement of
formal STEM learning for all students. The project intends that Scholars will
graduate with critical skills and motivation needed for success in the STEM
workforce. This project will contribute new knowledge about the persistence of
undergraduates in STEM educational and career tracks, including the persistence
of students from populations that are underrepresented in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree
completion of high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need.
Institutional data suggest that, for a significant number of students, the
obstacles to their successful pursuit of a STEM degree do not result from lower
academic capabilities. This project seeks to address potential non-academic
obstacles to success, including financial obstacles, loss of interest and/or
limited career awareness, low STEM self-efficacy, and the classroom learning
environment. The project components are intentionally designed to: a) positively
impact student self-efficacy, including STEM self-efficacy; b) stimulate and
support a sustained interest in STEM courses of study and STEM careers, c)
create a sense of belonging through a strategic mentoring program and a learning
community; and d) improve the quality of STEM classroom instruction. Early
interventions via workshops will focus on increasing students' interest in STEM
careers and courses of study and helping students gain valuable skills in an
interdisciplinary, low-stakes social environment. A mixed methods research
design will be used to determine the effectiveness of each aspect of the
project, leading to a better understand factors that influence persistence in
STEM. The overall effectiveness of the project will be measured using student
retention and graduation rates. Student interest, STEM self-efficacy, and sense
of belonging will also be assessed using validated survey instruments.
Quantitative data will be triangulated with qualitative data obtained from
student and faculty focus groups to provide insight into which project
initiatives had the most significant impact on student persistence in STEM. The
results of the project will be disseminated to the scientific community by
presentations in scientific conferences, publication in peer-reviewed journals,
and posting on the project website. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.