* 1930636
* I-Corps: Health and wellness supportive mobile application
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Alicia Chung, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be a
comprehensive digital lifestyle solution for providers serving patients at low-
resourced facilities to optimize patient adherence to diet, physical activity
and sleep national guidelines. We define low-resourced facilities as having 10
full time-employees or less, serving patient populations whose median income is
at least 25% below the poverty level and are uninsured or under-insured. Patient
populations may be characterized as having low health literacy, and experiencing
economic and social disadvantage, which are crucial social determinants of
health. Thus, the target immediate user, providers at low-resourced facilities,
may not have financial, employee, or material resources to support patients to
improve their health outcomes. Distal outcomes include improved provider
performance measures that could affect reimbursement rates. The commercial
impact of a digital support tool is to aid providers in improving the health
behaviors of their patient populations that could prevent and manage health
conditions in high-need populations. Providers at low-resourced facilities could
supplant their patient lifestyle support services, which typically offer
nutrition, exercise, and mental/social support during isolated events. This
mobile application would allow continuous lifestyle support services, outside of
patient office visits.

This I-Corps project is focused on a personalized mobile application synced with
a wearable device that uses machine learning to generate tailored data
visualizations and text messages to optimize user healthful behavior change.
Based on customer discovery with providers serving low-resourced facilities, the
project aims to unearth whitespace opportunity areas with a novel technical
innovation that incorporates three behavioral pillars of cardiovascular health:
physical activity, diet/nutrition, and sleep. The proposed application utilizes
data on daily lifestyle habits, combined with a user's biological footprint of
healthcare data, to automatically generate tailored just-in-time communications
to nudge users towards behavior change goals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.