* 1930655
* LTREB:  Response of a reservoir ecosystem to changing subsidies of nutrients and detritus
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Vanni, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 08/31/2024
* USD 759,282.00

This award in long-term research in environmental biology examines how long-term
changes in agriculture affect streams and lakes, using an Ohio landscape as a
model system. In the 1990s, this landscape experienced a pronounced increase in
conservation tillage (reduced- and no-till farming), which strongly affected
nutrients and sediments in streams that feed downstream Acton Lake. Also, the
abundance of bottom-feeding fish in the lake increased. These fish consume
sediments and excrete nutrients into the water, providing another source of
nutrients to algae. In the lake, the amount of algae is controlled mostly by
concentrations of sediment in the water (which block light that algae need) and
the abundance of bottom-feeding fish; this project explores long-term changes in
these interactions. This research is important because similar agricultural
changes are occurring throughout the US, but little is known about long-term
effects on streams and lakes. The investigators will mentor several
undergraduate and graduate students who will conduct research projects, and
offer summer workshops for high school students, targeting students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests hypotheses
about the long-term dynamics and consequences of ecosystem subsidies. Over the
past 25 years, watershed subsidies of nitrogen, phosphorus, and detritus
(sediments) to Acton Lake have changed because of an increase in conservation
tillage. Furthermore, nutrient subsidies from detritivorous fish (gizzard shad),
which translocate nitrogen and phosphorus from sediments to water, have varied
temporally. Over the 10-12 years, stream phosphorus and sediment concentrations
declined, and Acton Lake phytoplankton increased because light limitation was
alleviated by decreased suspended sediments and because of increased biomass
(hence nutrient excretion) of gizzard shad. However, more recently stream
soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP) concentrations increased, nitrate
concentrations declined, and lake phytoplankton biomass stabilized. Furthermore,
phytoplankton became increasingly limited by nitrogen relative to phosphorus,
coinciding with declining nitrate and increasing SRP in streams, and with
greater biomass of gizzard shad, which excrete at low nitrogen:phosphorus ratio.
This long-term research in environmental biology award tests the following
hypotheses: 1) in streams, SRP will continue to increase while nitrate continues
to decline; 2) gizzard shad excretion rates will remain consistently high; 3)
phytoplankton will become increasingly nitrogen-limited; and 4) phytoplankton
biomass will be stable, or decline as nitrogen becomes more limiting. In
addition, it is hypothesized that long-term environmental change and short-term
weather variation will modulate watershed subsidies, and thus lake ecosystem
dynamics. These hypotheses will be tested using a variety of statistical and
modeling analyses on long-term data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.