* 1930389
* Collaborative Research: Wind Tunnel Modeling of Higher-Order Turbulence and its Effects on Structural Loads and Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Michael Shields, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 318,766.00

Wind hazards are among the most destructive and costly natural forces
confronting civil infrastructure. To mitigate risk and business interruptions,
reduce damage, and save lives it is essential that we understand the basic
nature of wind forces. One important tool for assessing wind loads on structures
is the Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel (BLWT), which simulates the effects of high
intensity wind field on scaled structures in a controlled environment. The
University of Florida Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel (UF-BLWT) is a shared-use
facility supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) program. The UF-BLWT is a state-of-
the-art facility capable of rapidly modifying wind behavior in an automated
fashion to investigate the effects of terrain on wind fields and resulting
forces on structures. This study will conduct a set of novel experiments at the
UF-BLWT to understand the influence of terrain variations on peak wind pressures
that load structures during storms. The experimental outcomes will provide a
precise description of how a building?s surroundings affect wind pressures and
enabling engineers to cost effectively design to survive extreme winds. The
novel experiments proposed herein will be further leveraged to support unique
educational initiatives including a student exchange program between University
of Florida and Johns Hopkins University, and a NSF NHERI workshop on advanced
cyber-physical, data-driven, and active learning experimental designs applied to
BLWT modeling. A trove of data generated through this study will be curated and
published for public access, and will serve as a resource for the wind
engineering and machine learning communities as well as an educational resource
for teaching wind engineering courses. The project will also support the PIs to
continue individual outreach activities at their home institutions that include
afterschool programs and internships for underprivileged
youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel (BLWT) is a commonly
used tool for assessing wind loads on structures. Existing BLWT facilities
routinely match first- and second-order wind field models that have been
validated with full-scale wind measurements. However, a growing body of evidence
suggests that winds in the roughness sublayer and the inertial sublayer exhibit
non-Gaussian higher-order properties in both full-scale wind measurements and
BLWT wind fields. These non-Gaussian properties can strongly influence peak wind
pressures, which govern certain structural limit states and play an important
role in design. To date, no systematic study has been conducted to investigate
the influence of these higher-order features in a BLWT, let alone understand
their connection to the BLWT roughness elements in an effort to control the
higher-order properties of mechanically induced turbulence. We propose a BLWT
effort derived from two fundamental hypotheses: 1. Second-order equivalent wind
fields can possess different higher-order properties and these properties can be
linked to surface roughness features; 2. Differences in higher-order properties
of the wind field can significantly influence peak pressures and consequently
the response of structures. These hypotheses will be tested through a sequence
of four tasks that will systematically modify the automated roughness element
array (terraformer) unique to the University of Florida BLWT to identify
roughness arrays that create second-order equivalent, but higher-order divergent
wind fields. Machine learning methods will be employed to identify relationships
between roughness element configurations and higher-order statistical properties
of the wind field. The effect of these higher-order wind fields on structures
will be studied by investigating peak pressures on two low-rise bluff bodies and
measuring the dynamic response of a single degree of freedom flexible structure
with tunable nonlinear response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.