* 1930866
* Conjugated Energy Transport and Hot Carrier Diffusion in 2D Transition Metal Dichalcogenides: Novel Characterization toward Fundamental Understanding
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Xinwei Wang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 337,730.00

Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are materials that have
an extremely small thickness (down to a few atoms level). They have broad
applications including flexible circuits, sensors, and low power transistors.
Their thermophysical properties and energy transport capability directly
determine their performance and durability. Also, their electron transfer rate
is a property that directly determines device functionality. This project uses
ultrafast lasers and a continuous laser to excite and probe the molecular
vibrations modes (Raman spectroscopic signal) of TMDs, and use such signals to
distinguish and characterize the thermophysical properties, electron transfer
rate, and interface energy transfer capability. The outcome of the project
should establish the critical knowledge base needed in TMDs structure tailoring,
device design, and thermal optimization. Furthermore, the project integrates
research activities into education via classroom teaching and new class module
development, fosters minority student research training, and stimulates research
interests of K-12 students by various outreach activities including science
fair, lab tour, and providing high-school teacher research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to conduct
further deployment of a novel energy transport state-resolved Raman to
characterize hot carrier diffusivity, phonon thermal conductivity, interface
thermal resistance for supported TMDs, and electron-hole nonradiative
recombination coefficient for monolayered TMDs. The project investigates the
effect of physical structure on the three transport processes: hot carrier
diffustion, in-plane phonon transport, and cross-interface energy transport (for
supported TMDs), studies the effect of substrate on properties, and explores the
effect of temperature (70 K to 850 K) on properties as well. This represents the
first and high precision consideration of hot carrier transport and radiative
electron-hole recombination in 2D materials. This project significantly promotes
the field of defect engineering in 2D TMDs, and provides frontier perspective on
the challenges and opportunities in this emerging
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.