* 1930478
* Greater Equity, Access, and Readiness for Success in Engineering and Technology: Pathway to and Through Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Lesley Berhan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,984.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund seven-semester
scholarships to 30 students in the University of Toledo's University College.
The Scholars will pursue bachelor's degrees in engineering and engineering
technology and related computer science majors. Applicants to the College of
Engineering who do not gain direct admission to their desired majors are
admitted to the Department of Exploratory Studies within University College,
where they receive curricular and co-curricular support in preparation for
transfer to the College of Engineering. This project addresses the need to
provide Exploratory Studies students with greater access to and success in
engineering. Diversification of the STEM workforce is essential for the nation
to remain globally competitive. Consequently, increasing the diversity of the
local and regional engineering workforce is a long-term goal of this project.
Under-represented minority students comprise only about 9% of students who are
admitted to the College of Engineering from high school, but comprise nearly 50%
of students in the Department of Exploratory Studies. Thus, each cohort of
Scholars is expected to be more diverse than the students admitted into the
College directly from high school, supporting the effort to broaden
participation in engineering at the University of
Toledo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Project activities are designed to create a
supportive ecosystem that will promote student belonging, motivation, and
success. Activities include community engagement, faculty and peer mentoring,
and industry-focused professional development. The project is expected to
improve the mathematics preparation and transfer rates of students from
Exploratory Studies into engineering. The project will also contribute to the
adoption of evidence-based inclusive mentoring and instructional strategies by
faculty across the College of Engineering, which have the potential to
positively impact all engineering students. The project's research plan focuses
on analyzing the effects of proposed curricular and co-curricular supports on
Scholars' motivation and sense of belonging, competence in and through pre-
engineering, and success in completion of an engineering degree. Results from
this research have the potential to increase the equitable recruitment,
retention, student success, co-op placement, and graduation of students who
aspire to careers in engineering. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.