* 1930420
* Retention of Undergraduates in STEM: Reducing Barriers to Success in Mathematics, Engineering, and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Nathan Tintle, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2024
* USD 649,947.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. This project will directly encourage, support, and provide resources to
academically talented, financially disadvantaged students to pursue and succeed
in four-year STEM undergraduate degree programs at rural Dordt University. Over
the five-year award period, the project will provide up to four-year
scholarships to fourteen students who are pursuing undergraduate degrees in
engineering, mathematics, and computer science. The project will support the
development of programs that enhance Scholars' perceptions of self-efficacy and
STEM identity, and determine which factors most contributed to their success.
The project has the potential to support a diverse group of graduates who will
join the STEM workforce or pursue further STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase STEM degree completion
of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need.
To achieve this goal, the project will use multiple approaches focused on two
specific aims: 1) support cohort experiences, including student involvement in
foundational quantitative STEM courses, research colloquia, growth mindset
training, and matched faculty, industry, and peer mentoring; and 2) develop new
curricular pathways to enhance student transitions between two-year and four-
year STEM degree programs. Throughout their college experience, Scholars will
have access to evidence-based practices proven to foster STEM success and to
reduce barriers to retention. The project will use mixed quantitative and
qualitative methods through interviews and surveys to explore how program
components and contextual elements impact overall student success. This project
is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.