* 1930535
* Pathways for the Successful Transfer And Retention of Engineering Students from Two-to Four-Year Colleges in New Mexico
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Sara Hanson, Dona Ana Branch Community College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,247,737.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, this project will provide scholarships to 90
students who transfer from Dona Ana Community College to engineering programs at
New Mexico State University, both Hispanic-serving Institutions. Students at
Dona Ana Community College are 86% Hispanic, 58.2% female, and 67% Pell-
eligible. About 36% have high-school grade point averages greater than 2.75 and
are therefore eligible for admission into New Mexico State University
engineering but instead chose to attend Dona Ana Community College. The
objectives of this project are to: enhance the existing Community College-
University transfer pathway; provide need-based financial assistance to
academically talented engineering students; enhance transfer engineering
students' math proficiency through a Summer Math Boot Camp; enhance students
self-efficacy, growth mindset, and engineering identity through metacognition-
and cohort-based activities; and assess students' academic performance using
data analytics; and utilize near-peer mentors and tutors for academic
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving engineering
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project will contribute to
increasing the success of a two- to four-year pathway between Dona Ana Community
College and New Mexico State University College of Engineering, both Hispanic-
serving Institutions. Participating faculty and near-peer student mentors will
receive training to support their mentoring efforts and to inform their teaching
and mentoring practices. The program aims to enhance the current transfer
pathway, initiate concurrent enrollment opportunities, and use data analytics to
identify students' academic performance in near real time. The project will also
add to the STEM education literature through measuring: the impact of
metacognition-based study practices on grade point average; the impact of
engineering identity, math grades, and near-peer mentoring on retention and
graduation in engineering; and the impact of the summer boot camp and other
program activities on math grades. The demographics of Dona Ana Community
College students suggest that many are likely to also be historically
underrepresented minorities and/or first-generation college students. As a
result, this project has the potential to broaden participation in STEM
education and careers for students in these groups. The project aims to enhance
the partnership between Dona Ana Community College and New Mexico State
University, with specific focus on students' cognitive and noncognitive
development; collective mentoring by PIs, faculty, and near-peers; and
internships and co-ops in industry, national laboratories, and universities.
Workshops will be available to Scholars and other students, thereby broadening
the impact of these interventions. Findings about the relationships among
student study habits, learning performance, retention, metacognition,
engineering identity, and self-efficacy for transfer engineering students will
be of value to the STEM education field. Further, successful completion of the
Project can serve as a model for supporting the success of STEM transfer
students from two-year into four-year institutions. This project is funded by
NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.