* 1930496
* Supporting Undergraduate STEM Students through an Integrated Community of Biology and Mathematics Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Roberto Frontera-Suau, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2024
* USD 649,566.00

This project will help meet the national need for highly-skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by giving scholarships
to a cohort of twenty rural, academically talented undergraduate students. The
Scholars will receive up to four years of support to pursue bachelor’s degrees
in mathematics or biology. As part of the project, Scholars will have the
opportunity to live together in an environment that provides collaborative
learning activities. The project will apply evidence-based practices in other
student support experiences, including a summer computation camp, early research
experiences, and parental education. The project activities are expected to
broadly benefit STEM students and faculty at the University, thereby extending
the program's impact beyond the Scholars who will be directly supported by the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Project aims include to: 1) recruit twenty Scholars
and increased overall enrollment in mathematics and biology majors; 2) Adapt,
implement, and sustain curricular, co-curricular, and support services to
achieve a 90% five-year graduation rate of Scholars; 3) Ensure that Scholars are
prepared for entry into STEM careers or graduate school in biomathematics; and
4) Generate knowledge about the effectiveness of the projects’ activities.
Scholars will participate in a one-week residential computational skills camp in
the summer before their first year. This experience will provide Scholars with a
review of algebraic functions and introductory statistics, thus enhancing their
success in college mathematics courses. The project will adapt a learning
community and peer mentoring model that was previously funded by the NSF to
support the success of student cohorts in STEM courses, particularly
mathematics. In this adaptation, peer academic coaches will assist with math
recitation sessions. The project will support an "S-STEM Navigator” who will
serve as a mentor to help first-year students adjust socially and academically
to the University. This project will contribute new knowledge about the
education of rural, academically talented, low-income students pursuing STEM
degrees. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics Program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.