* 1930132
* Supporting Undergraduate Students in Bioscience and Applied Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Kerry Lutz, SUNY College of Technology Farmingdale
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,740.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund four-year scholarships
to 32 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Bioscience or Applied
Mathematics. Both cohorts of 16 Scholars will experience a four-year plan of
guidance, support, and academic challenge designed to keep them on track in
their STEM majors and support their entry into STEM careers or STEM graduate
programs. Some distinguishing features of this effort include: (1) a dedicated
STEM counsellor who will teach the First Year Experience seminar for Scholars
and will partner with faculty advisors to guide the Scholars through all four
years of college; (2) supplemental collaborative learning workshops attached to
foundational STEM courses; (3) optional community-building activities; and (4)
one-on-one faculty-mentored research experiences in their majors. This project
has the potential to contribute new knowledge about the role of need-based
financial aid and other evidence-based practices in reducing attrition,
promoting inclusion, and educating a diverse STEM-prepared workforce that will
fuel the local and national economies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific quantifiable
objectives of this project include that the Scholars will: (1) maintain a 3.0
GPA; (2) have an 85% Year 1 to Year 2 retention rate at the College and in their
STEM majors; (3) have 4-year and 6-year graduation rates that are 20% higher
than the College's reported Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System rate;
and (4) have a six-month post-graduation placement rate of 90% either in STEM
jobs or STEM graduate programs. Scholars will be selected by applying a random
number generator to the pool of eligible applicants. Such randomization will
yield a treatment group of S-STEM scholarship recipients and a control group of
eligible applicants who do not receive S-STEM scholarships. Performance by
treatment and control group will be tracked and compared throughout the study.
The basic research question of the project is: Can a second-tier public commuter
institution replicate the methods of a Research 1 University for STEM students
and produce significant gains in GPA, year-to-year retention, credit
accumulation, graduation rates, and the pursuit of post-graduation
academic/career pathways in STEM? The project will also collect demographic data
and data from surveys and focus groups to examine the possible role of
attitudinal differences (e.g., college adjustment, confidence in STEM), as well
as the impact of key components of the project. Through quantitative and
qualitative data, the relative contributions of various activities on the
desired outcomes will be explored. The external evaluator will use a mixed-
method research approach, to test and inform refinements of intervention
attributes and the measures to assess them. Farmingdale State College is a
second-tier public commuter institution with an undergraduate population of
10,000 students (94% commuter, 59% with financial aid, 44% minority, 44% first-
generation college). Consequently, this study will contribute to research on
broadening participation in STEM. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.