* 1930881
* Atomic-Layer Dependent Adhesion of Two-Dimensional Transitional Metal Carbides (MXenes)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Vadym Mochalin, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 08/31/2023
* USD 423,962.00

A novel large family of low dimensional materials, 2D transition metal carbides
(MXenes), have shown excellent electronic and optical properties that are often
superior compared to other 2D materials. Importantly and in contrast to other 2D
materials, these properties can be systematically varied and studied within the
same family, without changing elemental composition and type of interatomic
bonds in the material. These unique features make MXenes equally interesting for
fundamental science and application development, where they can be used in new
planar and flexible devices, leading to new technologies and significant
economic impacts. Some of these applications that are researched now include
health monitoring sensors, high performance energy harvesting and storage
systems, and chemo-photothermal cancer therapy. However, the adhesion of MXenes,
which is critical in many of these applications, has yet to be systematically
investigated. To date, there have only been a few theoretical studies of the
adhesive behavior of MXenes, with little to no experimental data. In a broader
sense, experimental determination of adhesive properties of MXenes will
contribute to our understanding of the fundamental relationships between
adhesion and atomic structures for low dimensional materials. This could
revolutionize the modern materials and manufacturing industries in harnessing
the adhesion for coatings and planar devices made of low dimensional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to: (i)
systematically investigate the adhesive interactions of MXenes at the atomistic,
nano- and micrometer scales, (ii) using the unique advantages provided by
MXenes, systematically and separately examine the effects of surface functional
groups and monolayer thickness of 2D materials on their adhesive interactions,
and (iii) explore the environmental effects on the adhesion of MXenes including
surface water and oxidation process. To achieve the goals, we intend to: (1)
utilize the atomistic scale contact-based experiments to investigate the effect
of atomic structures and surface terminations on the adhesion, (2) employ
nanoindentation to understand the interfacial traction-separation relations of
MXenes with themselves and other materials, (3) explore the potential use of in-
situ nano-shear-lag experiments to investigate the shear interactions of MXenes,
(4) combine the multiscale modeling and the experimental results to understand
the coupled adhesive mechanisms involving the surface defects, terminations,
monolayer thickness, and (5) explore the possible evaluation of the effects of
surface water and oxidation process on the adhesion of
MXenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.