* 1930163
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Mechanism of Magnetogenetics for Remote Activation of Cell Function
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Jonathan Dordick, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,001.00

We are entering a new age of manufacturing where living cells are used to
produce fuels, chemicals, and therapeutic proteins. Cell therapies offer the
promise of enhancing a patient's natural immune system cells to fight cancer and
other metabolic diseases. These technologies are possible because of our ability
to control the metabolism of cells. Most of the currently used control methods
rely on chemical signaling, but chemical signals can also interfere with normal
cell metabolism. This project will develop a alternate biological control system
that responds to magnetic signals. Research opportunities for undergraduates
will develop a skilled STEM workforce. Outreach efforts will be multiplied
through development of an 8-week summer workshop for K-12 teachers and high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remote gene activation through static and
alternating/oscillating magnetic fields will be evaluated for the control of
protein expression in mammalian cells and cell cultures. The core hypothesis to
be tested is that magnetic fields can induce the opening of ion channels upon
co-expression of and mediation by ferritin tethered to the ion channel. The
ferritin nanoparticles would serve as transducers, converting magnetic signals
into physical ones that can activate a signal cascade. Magnetic fields offer
much finer temporal and spatial control than is available using chemical
signaling. The scope of the project and specific activities are threefold.
First, elucidate the mechanism of static and oscillating/alternating magnetic
field induced activation of ion channels. Second, tune sensitivity and
responsiveness of magnetically activated ion channels by constructing genetic
systems and controlling cell culture conditions to enhance ferritin properties
leading to transient receptor potential (TRP) channel gating. Third, as a
bioengineering application, use the genetically-encoded TRP channel-ferritin
system to remotely control gene transcription and induce expression of key
proteins involved in neurogenesis. The outcome of this study could be a
foundation for designing methods to control cellular signaling, gene
transcription, and protein expression/production for biomanufacturing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.