* 1930165
* Ion signaling oscillatory patterns as integrators of chemotropic responses in pollen tubes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Jose Feijo, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2023
* USD 899,999.00

Periodic oscillations are present at all levels of biology, from ecology and
circadian clocks, to neural function and molecular phenomena. Oscillatory
phenomena in the minute/hour range are, however, particularly intriguing since
they have important roles in cellular and organ physiology but are poorly
understood in terms of mechanisms. Pollen tubes are the male gametophytes of
plants, indispensable for the formation of seeds, hence food, and display
conspicuous oscillations of small inorganic ions in the minute range when grown
in vitro. Previous work has identified these oscillations as implied in
intracellular coordination and/or cell-cell communication and this project
builds on previous research supported by the National Science Foundation that
resulted in the development of a suite of statistical tools to study such
oscillations with quantitative precision. Besides pollen tubes, these tools are
being applied to phenomena ranging from circadian clocks to astrophysics,
revealing unsuspected oscillatory patterns and their underlying mechanisms. The
prevalence of oscillations associated with such widespread phenomena and
different areas of scientific knowledge, make them attractive topics for any
STEM education program, bridging mathematics and physics with biology at various
levels. This project will have extensive training opportunities for students at
all levels in the quantitative analysis of these oscillations in cellular
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pollen tubes, reach to the female gametophyte by
chemotropism, which is the ability of some cells to grow towards or against an
external stimuli. The present project will focus on the surprising finding that
mutation of two genes coding for proteins that exchanges potassium against
protons in the cell membrane of pollen tubes affect their chemotropic response
to an extent that the mutant plant barely produces any seed. It thus unveils a
mechanism which is essential for food production. Preliminary evidence showed
that the mutant pollen tubes have distinct oscillatory "signatures", which were
taken as representing information about specific aspects of cell physiology. The
present project will dissect quantitatively the nature of these oscillations
when challenged with various negative and positive chemotropic molecules in
different genetic backgrounds. Researchers will utilize state-of-the-art methods
of cell imaging, molecular genetics, biophysics and mathematical biology. The
project is crafted around the hypothesis that the disturbances in proton or
potassium concentration resulting from these mutations will affect cell
physiology by perturbing some basal level or property of the cell membrane,
namely its electric potential, which in turn will render the signaling
underlining the chemotropic reaction null. This stringent theoretical framework
will be tested, on one hand, through the elaboration of mathematical models that
can predict the robustness of key features of cell growth and, on the other
hand, by direct proof that the electric potential of the cell membrane is
affected is different ways in the mutant and the wildtype pollen tubes.
Maintenance of electric potential potentials through cell membrane is a vital
property of all living cells and has been evolutionarily co-opted for many
fundamental physiological processes, e.g. excitability in the nervous system.
The major transducers of energy to create such electric potentials in nature are
proton-ATPases, proteins that "pump" protons out of the cell, thus creating a pH
gradient used by numerous other proteins to transport molecules into and out of
cells. This project will genetically dissect the proton-ATPase family of
proteins to determine the boundaries of electric potential in the cell membrane
outside of which chemotropism signaling becomes mute.The widespread relevance of
chemosensing in biology and the expected mechanistic advances, suggests the
present project has a high potential to generate new fundamental models for
understanding these phenomena by bridging cell biology, biophysics and
mathematical biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.