* 1930211
* Educating Undergraduate Students for STEM Career Opportunities in Nebraska: Networks, Experiential-learning, &amp; Computational Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* W. J.  'Jim' Lewis, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,580,869.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over five years, this project will fund two- and four-year scholarships to
124 STEM students who are pursuing associate degrees at Southeast Community
College or Western Nebraska Community College and bachelor degrees at the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The project will recruit, educate, and mentor
cohorts of academically talented, low-income students, with the goal of
supporting the graduation of Scholars who have expertise in mathematics and
computer science and who are prepared to enter the STEM workforce or pursue
graduate education in a STEM field. The project will emphasize recruiting women,
underrepresented minorities, first-generation students, and rural students, thus
contributing to the diversity of the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. At all
three campuses, Scholars will take special sections of computer science and
mathematics courses during their first two years. Faculty from the three partner
institutions will collaborate to implement active learning approaches and to use
open education resources that are currently being developed at the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln. Scholars will take a one-credit seminar designed to help
students develop leadership potential, gain valuable academic skills, become
informed about available support services, and build a supportive peer
community. In addition to staff advisers who will support all students, each
S-STEM Scholar will have faculty and peer mentors, who will contribute to
building a supportive network that can attend to S-STEM Scholars' academic and
non-academic needs. The project's mixed methods efficacy research study aims to
answer the research question: To what extent are project activities and
structures helping the scholars persist in their selected STEM majors and STEM
career pathways? Findings from this research will advance understanding of
factors that affect the retention, academic success, and graduation of
academically talented, low-income STEM students, with a special emphasis on
factors that affect students who transfer from a community college to a four-
year institution. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.