* 1930025
* Assessment and Evaluations of NSF OAC-Funded Program Impact on the Scientific Community
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Changwon Suh, Nexight Group LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 06/30/2020
* USD 52,458.00

Cyberinfrastructure (CI) is essential to the advancement and transformation of
science and engineering. Over the last decade, the CI community has focused on
developing secure, advanced, scalable, and global CI resources, tools, and
services, creating an interoperable and collaborative CI ecosystem. In order to
move forward strategically, it is critical to understand the impact that CI
programs have had on the scientific research community. This award supports an
effort to develop an understanding of this impact, by working with the
Cyberinfrastructure community to understand and enhance the impact of programs
such as NSF's Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI)
program and its predecessors. To this end, the PIs will gather relevant
information, conduct a targeted survey, and prepare a report describing findings
and mapping out the future directions of CI research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will provide new understanding of the impact of recent Data and Software
Programs, through a systematic cross-cutting survey-based assessment. The
assessment will seek to evaluate the impact of the activities funded under the
Data Infrastructure Building Blocks (DIBBs), Software Infrastructure for
Sustained Innovation (SI2), and Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific
Innovation (CSSI) programs. The approach is to (1) determine the scope of the
activity and establish a framework for design of the survey (2) design and
administer the survey and (3) analyze the results and synthesize the findings
into a report. The outcomes will benefit the scientific research community
broadly, by providing insights into the most effective methods of research
support in Cyberinfrastrucutre, and broadening the impact of advanced
Cyberinfrastructure research on the science and engineering
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.