* 1930558
* Pathways to Success in Graduate Engineering: Understanding and Supporting the Critical Transition from Undergraduate to Graduate Engineering Studies.
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Miguel Velez-Reyes, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 11/30/2024
* USD 997,159.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Texas at El Paso, a research university with a
majority Hispanic student population. Over its five-year duration, the project
will provide three-year scholarships to 20 students who are pursuing Fast-Track
Bachelor-to-Master's degrees in Engineering. Majors include Electrical
Engineering, Computer Engineering, Industrial Engineering, Manufacturing
Engineering, Systems Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering, and Civil
Engineering. This project will create a student support system that combines
financial support, curriculum improvements, and mentoring, as well as research
skill and professional development opportunities. A noted strength of the
proposal is its inclusion of activities to engage students’ family members and
peers. The project will conduct a research study to examine the success of the
student support system, which provides supports at appropriate points in
students' educational path. If successful, this support system has the potential
to not only increase success rates of engineering graduate students at the
University, but also to improve success at other institutions that apply it. As
a result, this project can help meet the critical national need for a well-
trained STEM workforce, particularly the need for more
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project focuses on supporting and understanding
the critical transition between undergraduate and graduate education, an area
that has not been well studied. The project intends to provide an evidence-based
model to support this transition that can be implemented at other institutions,
thus increasing the successful preparation of students for STEM careers. The
project objectives are to: create an innovative, multi-faceted student support
ecosystem; implement a mentoring structure to train students as researchers; and
analyze the students' pursuit of, persistence in, and success in graduate
education. No conceptual model is currently available to orient understanding of
the dynamic role of educational interventions in student development through
time. Therefore, the project has developed a novel three-stage Student
Developmental Trajectory model that will frame its research. Research
methodology includes multivariate analyses that control for the effects of
differences in initial student attributes and in student exposure to educational
environments. The research questions will investigate the impact of
interventions on students' short-term, mid-term, and long-term career outcomes,
thus advancing basic knowledge of engineering education, as well as applied
knowledge of the role of educational interventions in improving STEM career
outcomes. The improved knowledge that will emerge through this research is
expected to produce a model for student success that will be disseminated
nationally. As a result, it can help to increase the number of students who
enter successful STEM careers, particularly low-income students who are first-
generation and/or from populations underrepresented in STEM. Outcomes and
outputs linked to project objectives will be used to evaluate the project.
Dissemination of results will occur via publications and presentations at
scientific or professional conferences, including those focused on engineering
education, graduate studies, and sociology. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.