* 1930046
* IIBR RoL: Applying innovative structural tools to highlight RNA's structural dynamics as RNA-protein complexes self-assemble
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Lois Pollack, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2023
* USD 773,205.00

Life functions are supported by the interaction of large biological molecules,
including proteins and RNA. Although the shapes or structures of some of these
complexes have been visualized, very little is known about their dynamics of
assembly. How do these differing components interact to create complexes whose
function exceeds that of either alone? This is a challenging problem because of
the intertwined motions of the components. Through this project, new tools will
be applied to highlight the motions of just one macromolecular species during
the assembly of a complex. Although both proteins and RNA are present, only the
RNA is visible. Students will design, build and apply the new technology to
study the self-assembly of a small plant virus, an intricate structure
consisting of a protein shell surrounding a nucleic acid core. These studies
will allow us to more clearly define the rules that govern the joining of
nucleic acids and proteins into biological complexes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important biological assembles are
comprised of distinct macromolecular components, such as proteins in conjunction
with the nucleic acids. Despite their importance, less than 2% of the static
structures in the protein data bank reflect RNA-protein complexes. Even less is
known about the dynamic interactions between RNA and protein components.
Although much effort has been expended in watching one type macromolecule self-
assemble, e.g. protein folding, it is much more difficult to interpret dynamic
structural information for multicomponent machines because multiple species are
present. The inability to separate the signal from the distinct components
precludes a simple interpretation. This project will exploit and innovate
existing experimental infrastructure to create tools that highlight the signal
of only one species on the background of the other, vastly simplifying
measurements of complexes' dynamics. Mixers that rapidly combine the protein and
RNA precursors will be constructed and will allow experimenters to track the
changing structures of only the RNA component during complex assembly. A small
plant virus will serve as a model system for these studies. The development and
application of two complementary techniques (small angle x-ray scattering and
single molecule fluorescence) will offer a unique perspective on this self-
assembly problem. Once established, these methods can be applied other RNA-
protein complexes, gathering data to elucidate the rules governing their
assembly. Project results, sorted by topic, will be posted at:
https://pollack.research.engineering.cornell.edu/all_publications/. This project
is jointly funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure program for
Infrastructure Innovation for Biological Research, the Molecular Biophysics and
Genetic Mechanism Clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences, and the Rules of Life initiative in the Emerging Frontiers office
of the Biology Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.