* 1930564
* Engagement, Achievement, and Graduation of Undergraduate Students: A Partnership in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Erin Shortlidge, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 4,998,656.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Portland State University and Heritage University. Portland State
University is a four-year urban institution; Heritage University is a two-year,
rural, minority-serving institution located on the Yakama Reservation in
Washington State. Over its five-year duration, this project will bridge the
urban-rural divide by awarding two-year or four-year scholarships to at least
116 students who are pursuing associate's or bachelor's degrees in STEM fields,
including environmental sciences and engineering. The project is centered on the
organizing theme of environmental pollution in the Columbia River Basin and the
Pacific Northwest. Scholarships will be provided to high-achieving STEM
students, enabling them to participate in research and service-learning projects
that address authentic regional issues, focus on community-based challenges, and
strengthen community connections. The project will create new STEM career
pathways for Heritage University students by building a seamless transition into
undergraduate STEM programs at Portland State University. Project outcomes
include increased STEM retention and graduation rates of Scholars at both
institutions. As a result, the project has the potential to broaden
participation of traditionally underrepresented groups in the local and regional
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Through recruitment at local high schools and
community colleges, outreach across both campuses, the use of promotional
materials and social media postings, a broad group of Scholars will be
recruited. The project will focus on increasing enrollment, retention, and
graduation in STEM majors by developing the student's sense of science identity
in environmental sciences and engineering. A research study will be conducted to
advance understanding of correlative relationships between the many beneficial
elements of the project, such as deliberative pedagogy, research experiences,
student sense of community, science identity, and research self-efficacy. An
experienced, independent external evaluator, who is an educational psychologist,
will conduct formative and summative evaluation of the project. This project is
funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.