* 1930268
* Enhancing Retention and Graduation of Resident and Commuter Undergraduate Students in STEM Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Matthew Mastropaolo, Neumann University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 11/30/2024
* USD 649,556.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. To support this goal, the project
will provide scholarships and additional supports to twenty-four high-achieving,
low-income undergraduate students who have unmet financial need. The Scholars
will pursue bachelor’s degrees in mathematics, biology, computer and information
science, data science and analytics, or cybersecurity. The availability of STEM
careers in the United States continues to grow. Unfortunately, many of these
well-paying positions remain unfilled because of the lack of qualified STEM
professionals. In Philadelphia County, twenty-five miles from Neumann
University, the average income is 34% less than the national average. With
strong STEM programs and a diverse student body, the University has strong
potential to launch students into well-paying STEM careers. This project aims to
increase the number and diversity of STEM professionals by recruiting
academically talented, low-income students from a diverse base and helping them
graduate and enter the STEM workforce or advanced STEM studies. During their
freshman year, Scholars will be enrolled in a special section of a first-year
experience course and will be paired with upper-level peer mentors. The Scholars
will have opportunities to participate in an internship or research experience.
The project team will investigate the impact of the project’s student support
activities, including scholarships and peer teaching assistants, on Scholars’
retention and graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. To this end, the project will
recruit academically talented, low-income students from a diverse base and
provide them with scholarships to help them overcome financial barriers, while
also addressing other barriers to success. Measurable objectives include the
recruitment of two cohorts of twelve S-STEM Scholars majoring in mathematics,
computer and information science, biology, data science and analytics, and
cybersecurity. In addition, the project team aims to increase the first-to-
second year retention rate of Scholars by 25% over baseline, and to achieve a
75% four-year graduation rate and 100% placement rate in a STEM job or STEM
graduate programs six months after graduation. The project will generate new
knowledge by determining the impact of teaching assistants who have been trained
to enhance commuter STEM student success. Specific measurements include impact
on student engagement, persistence in a STEM major to graduation, perceived
career readiness, and learner agency. The teaching assistant training and other
program supports will likely contribute to improvements in academic performance,
student engagement, and retention in STEM for the teaching assistants
themselves, as well as the students in their classes, which include non-
traditional adult students and low-income students who are not Scholars. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.