* 1930539
* Expanding Career Pathways for Academically Talented Biology and Chemistry Undergraduates by Combining Financial Support with High-Impact Co-curricular Services
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Rita Hagevik, University of North Carolina at Pembroke
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/28/2025
* USD 999,978.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of North Carolina at Pembroke (UNCP), an historically
Native-American Indian institution, with a 59.7% overall minority undergraduate
enrollment. Over the 5-year project term, the program will serve a total of 30
students: 3 cohorts of 10 students, who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Biology or Chemistry, recruited as rising freshmen and supported to graduation.
This project will focus on increasing scholars' self-efficacy, STEM identity,
motivation, career awareness and preparing them for entry into graduate school
or the STEM workforce through high-impact co-curricular support services. Such
services include exposure to career paths, career counseling, research
experiences, faculty mentoring, and tutoring by faculty, graduate students, and
professional tutors. This project will also exercise important broader impact by
supporting the economic development of UNCP's rural, predominantly minority
service region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Three principle objectives inform the
project's execution. First, to identify, retain, and graduate students with
demonstrated financial need in the Biology and Chemistry fields through
financial support and academic interventions. Second, to help students set
personal goals and identify careers in STEM, then provide the support and
experiences needed to work towards attainment of those goals. Third, to support
students as they transition to the STEM workforce or graduate education and
capitalize on an established alumni workforce to build sustained interest in
STEM careers for future UNCP science students. The majority of UNCP students
hail from the local Southeast North Carolina region, a rural, economically
depressed region, and the majority have unmet financial need. UNCP is one of the
three institutions in the UNC system participating in the North Carolina (NC)
promise tuition plan which provides $500 tuition for in-state students and
$2,500 for out-of-state students. This situation provides a unique opportunity
to evaluate the importance and impact of the project's proposed strategies and
interventions by comparing its results with a control group consisting of low-
income students who are taking advantage of the NC promise tuition plan, but are
not participating in the proposed activities. As such, the project's research
questions will be geared toward understanding which factors most positively
contribute to persistence and post-graduation placements. This investigation
should help in identifying the predictors of successful STEM-workforce career
paths for rural, low income, mostly minority students and effective
interventions to promote such career transitions. The PI and team anticipate
that their project's results can inform sister NC promise institutions, as well
as other institutions of similar characteristics, with results being
disseminated through publications and presentations at regional and national
conferences. Using a combination of surveys, focus groups, and individual
interviews, an external consultant will evaluate the project's outcomes in the
areas of student academic performance, activities and interventions, awareness
and understanding of STEM pathways and careers, STEM identity, and post-
graduation career activities/placement. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.