* 1930609
* WORKSHOP: Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North America Student Design Challenge 2019
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Andrea Van Hook, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2020
* USD 19,698.00

This is funding to partially support the undergraduate Student Design
Competition (SDC), which will be part of the 2019 RESNA conference to be held
June 24-28. Today, over 70 million people in the United States report some
degree of disability, a number which will likely grow in coming years as the so-
called "baby boomer" generation ages. RESNA, the Rehabilitation Engineering and
Assistive Technology Society of North America, is the one organization with an
international focus that is devoted solely to technology for individuals with
disabilities. RESNA's membership consists of individuals and institutions
covering a range of disciplines (including researchers, clinicians, suppliers,
manufacturers, consumers and educators who work in both non-profit and for-
profit settings), all of whom are dedicated to promoting the exchange of ideas
and information for the advancement of assistive technology. The annual RESNA
Conference and the Student Design Competition combine to create a forum for
interaction between experienced rehabilitation engineers and students who are
about to enter the field. Unique in its primary focus on undergraduates, the
event provides participants with experience and skills that help them succeed in
their engineering and design careers. It encourages and mentors students in
various disciplines to become involved in the assistive technology and
rehabilitation engineering fields, and provides an opportunity for the students
to network with their peers as well as with participants in previous SDCs, many
of whom are now leaders in service, research, and education related to
technology for persons with disabilities. All participants (not just the
finalists) create blog posts that capture and archive their submissions, which
remain accessible indefinitely through the RESNA website and the assistive
technology AT Wiki. Thus, educators can share this information with their
students as examples of projects that others have done, while service providers
and persons with disabilities can search for unique solutions to barriers they
may face.

The annual RESNA Student Design Competition (workshop) fosters innovation and
creativity with the ultimate goal of producing technology that can contribute to
the independence of individuals with disabilities. The first SDC was held in
1980 as part of the inaugural RESNA conference; since then over 265 designs have
been identified as winning entries from among over 850 submitted by students
from over 125 different universities and institutes of higher learning. Both
undergraduate and master's level graduate candidates are eligible to submit
entries, which must represent the work of students only; no faculty or
professionals may be included as co-authors, although faculty may be mentioned
as advisors and/or mentors. This year's funding will enable the SDC to be
further expanded and enhanced, so as to include more entries and support for
more design teams, especially from minorities, women, and individuals with
disabilities. A call for participation has been posted on the conference
website, and also distributed electronically to a large number of colleges and
universities with engineering and design schools. The content of all
submissions, not merely the finalists, will be captured and accessed through the
RESNA SDC website. Five industry-savvy judges will review the submissions and
select at least 7 semi-finalist teams from which two representatives will be
invited to attend the conference and present their working prototypes to
determine the finalists. The teams will give 10-minute presentations to the
judging panel on June 24 in a session open to all who are interested and in
which the teams will interact with the judges, members of other teams and all
who attend the session. The conference schedule includes a platform session
where the finalists can present their designs to the general conference
audience. In addition, finalists will have an opportunity to present their
projects during the Developers' Showcase, which highlights new products under
development (some past SDC student team designs have been patented and are now
available commercially).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.