* 1930677
* I-Corps: Fabrication of accurate and realistic anatomical models for medical education, training, and medical device development
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Jack Stubbs, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this I-Corps project encompasses
all human tissue models currently manufactured for medical education, training,
surgical planning, and medical device development. Medical students, residents,
surgical fellows, and physicians rely on human simulators and part-task trainers
made out of silicones, rubbers, common plastics, and foams. Trainers are used
for suturing, intubation, laparoscopic surgery, among others. The disparity
between simulator materials and human tissues has been known to induce negative
training. To satisfy this need, medical professionals and medical device
engineers rely on animal and cadaveric models. These models are expensive,
unreliable, and require additional protocols for handling and disposal. The lack
of a solution that consolidates anatomical and physical realism leads physicians
and engineers to draw conclusions by interpolating findings from several,
unrealistic experiments. This I-Corps project seeks to consolidate and satisfy
these needs through the development and printing of patient- or case-specific,
high fidelity human tissue models. These models could disrupt the medical
simulation and medical device development markets ($1.36 billion and &gt;$300
billion respectively). 3D modeling and 3D printing manufacturers have recently
received FDA 510(k) clearance for patient data modeling and fabrication,
indicative of a growing medical demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the premise that heterogeneous, composite structures give
rise to particular physical properties in nature. In order to replicate the non-
linear mechanics of human tissues for instance, composites that resemble the
microstructure of tissues must be designed. The I-Corps team has developed and
patented a method for the automated design and fabrication of composites with
tunable physical properties (U.S. Patent No. 10,073,440). The team's patent
portfolio includes three continuations to the base patent. The method shifts the
paradigm of additive manufacturing from replicating form to recreating function,
physical behavior. The most advanced additive manufacturing systems feature
multiple materials, with varying color and compliance, and micrometer
resolution. Relying on a library of geometries with known characteristics, the
method can approximate the physical response of an input or target material by
re-iterating through design parameters and material combination. The method
builds upon itself, as each iteration expands the libraries of solutions for
future targets. The resulting composite structures cannot be fabricated using
traditional methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.