* 1930049
* TRIPODS+X:RES: Collaborative Research: Data Science Frontiers in Climate Science
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Rebecca Willett, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Understanding the factors that determine regional climate variability and change
is a challenge with important implications for the economy, security, and
environmental sustainability of many regions around the globe. Our understanding
and modeling of the large-scale dynamics of the Earth climate system and
associated regional-scale climate variability significantly affects our ability
to predict and mitigate climatic extremes and hazards. Earth observations and
climate model outputs are witnessing an unprecedented increase in data volume,
creating new opportunities to advance climate science but also leading to new
data science challenges that must be addressed using tools from mathematics,
statistics, and computer science. This project focuses on two central challenges
at the heart of modern data-enabled climate science: (1) Increasing the
predictive capacity of subseasonal forecasts by discovering and quantifying the
sources of (un)predictability, including known and emergent climate modes and
their interactions and non-stationarities; and (2) Understanding and quantifying
the intricate space-time dynamics of the climate system to provide guidance for
climate model assessment and regional forecasting. This project brings together
an interdisciplinary team that combines expertise in both hydroclimate science
and statistical machine learning to create new platforms for climate diagnostics
and prognostics. The broader impacts of an enhanced knowledge of the climate
system and robust and accurate seasonal forecasts have wide-ranging implications
for society as a whole. For example, better seasonal forecasts will allow water
resource managers to make sustainable decisions for water
allocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This TRIPODS+CLIMATE project will develop novel
machine learning and network estimation methodologies for analyzing the climate
system over a range of space and time scales, to understand climate modes of
variability and change and to explore their predictive ability for regional
hydroclimatology. The two main objectives of this project are the following.
Objective 1: Develop novel classification and regression tools that account for
highly-correlated features or covariates, nonlinear interaction terms in high-
dimensional settings, and nonstationarity in climate observations. These tools
will be used to improve seasonal-to-subseasonal forecasts of regional
precipitation using multidimensional climate modes and feature vectors in the
presence of evolving dynamics and nonstationarities. Objective 2: Develop
network identification methods that leverage recent advances in machine learning
and statistics and that can account for the nonstationarity and limited
timeframe of climate data. The network representation will be used to analyze
the structure and dynamics of the learned dependencies to contextualize and
interpret them physically, and to quantify changing patterns in climate modes
and their regional predictive capacity. Emphasis will be placed on the western
Pacific dynamics where an interhemispheric bi-directional connection has
recently been discovered, promising earlier and more accurate seasonal-to-
subseasonal forecasts in the southwestern US and other parts of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.