* 1930628
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Social and Ecological Effects of Cattle Introduction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Nicolas Delsol, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 29,516.00

When Europeans arrived to the Americas in the late 1500s, they introduced many
organisms unknown to the "newly discovered" continent. The most impactful of
these organisms was the domestic cow, the raising of which dramatically changed
landscapes, animal management, and interactions among people. The biological
consequence of the European colonialism, and in particular the introduction of
cattle, constitutes a major event of human history that definitively shaped the
modern world. In this study, archaeological remains of colonial period cattle
are analyzed to better understand the effects of this introduction not only on
the cattle themselves, but also on the development of the diverse colonial
societies of Mesoamerica and the Caribbean during the two first centuries of
Spanish rule. Archaeology, and more particularly zooarchaeology is particularly
well placed to explore this topic because it provides a direct analysis of the
fine-grained processes that affected the animals' biology and behavior but also
how their management affected human social systems. Archaeological remains from
five early colonial sites from Mexico, Guatemala, and Haiti, dating between the
early 16th and the late 17th centuries, will be studied to identify the
geographic origins of the animals (ancient DNA), their morphological diversity
(skeletal morphometrics), and their demographic and health structure (age/sex
and pathologies of the individuals within each population). Together these lines
of evidence will provide an image of how the first colonists brought, traded and
exchanged these animals. Cattle raising represented, and still represents in
many regions of the Americas including the US, a crucial aspect of culture and
economics. Studying the first steps of the implementation of cattle raising will
shed a new light on the pivotal role played by domestic animals such as cattle
in the early colonization of the Americas. This project is also a methodological
contribution to the field by constituting the first use of combined
archaeological genomics and morphological traits to document the history
trajectory of colonial faunas in the Americas. Collaborations among US, Mexican
and Guatemalan researchers, as well as lectures and museum exhibits will provide
information and encourage discussion among the international audience of
archaeologists, biologists, and cattle-owners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
the question of how the transplantation and exploitation of cattle transformed
both cattle and human populations in the Caribbean and Mesoamerica during the
early Spanish colonial period, the research project will use three
methodological approaches: (1) extraction and sequencing of ancient DNA from
archaeological cow remains will clarify the origins and phylogeographic history
of New World colonial cattle. (2) Geometric morphometric (GMM) data will define
the regional and temporal variability of cow molar shape as a proxy for cattle
morphotype diversity. These two lines of evidence will reveal the composition of
the original populations of Spanish colonial cattle, highlight whether the
animals were brought from Europe or Africa, and clarify the chronology of these
introductions across the study region. (3) Finally, zooarchaeological markers of
age and sex will document cattle herd demographics, and paleopathological
indicators of health will illustrate the impact of diverse cattle husbandry
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.