* 1930873
* A Microtwist Theory of Polarized Mechanical Metamaterials: Modeling and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Hussein Nassar, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Lattice-based metamaterials are materials that have a defined architecture
reminiscent of atomic lattices but at a larger length scale. These materials
oftentimes display unique capabilities that can be traced back to their micro-
architected design. Modern advances in fabrication techniques together with
increasingly environmentally conscious design constraints have motivated
research in lattice-based mechanical metamaterials, which offer a range of
properties unusual to natural materials. To enable their use, it is mandatory to
build a fine understanding of how the composition, geometry and overall
morphology of the underlying truss govern the mechanical properties desired and
targeted on the macroscopic scale (centimeter to meter). This proposal aims to
design, model and test lattice metamaterials that are polarized: while featuring
the same microstructure everywhere, they still manage to be soft to indentation
on one side but hard on the opposite side. While electric polarization is a
classical concept of continuum electrodynamics, mechanical polarization in
elastostatics and elastodynamics has escaped the scope of earlier theories. The
theory developed through this research effort should thus be a new addition to
the body of fundamental knowledge in the field of elasticity. The research will
also include support of education through recruiting undergraduate in research
and graduate students and increasing exposure of engineering students, and the
general public, to revolutionary materials with
microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isostatic lattices exhibit a number of
infinitesimal collapse mechanisms, i.e., zero modes, that are sensitive to pre-
set geometric distortions, such as twisting in Kagome lattices. In a topological
transition, zero modes shift from being evenly distributed across bulk and edges
to overpopulate preferential edges. In that case, the isostatic lattice displays
a polarized behavior where it appears soft on one side and hard on the opposite
side. The main aim of the present project is to understand the microstructural
mechanisms by which polarization emerges and fades on a macroscopic scale. Focus
is on polarization effects that remain dominant even when the size of the unit
cell becomes infinitesimal in comparison to the whole lattice. Research efforts
are structured around two goals: (1) to build a kinematically enriched continuum
theory of elasticity, called ?microtwist elasticity?, capable of modeling
polarization effects as well as the underlying zero modes quantitatively and
qualitatively by employing suitably developed asymptotic homogenization methods;
(2) to investigate the range of static and dynamic phenomena predicted by the
microtwist theory and to systematically validate these predictions by mechanical
testing of fabricated samples. The proposed theory should bring a fundamental
new understanding of architected materials with microstructures based on
isostatic lattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.