* 1930848
* Design and Development: Research Exploring Activity Characteristics and Heuristics for Early Childhood Engineering (REACH-ECE)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Gina Svarovsky, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 478,805.00

Early learning experiences for children have the potential to make a lasting
impression on a young person, and ultimately influence their interests, school
trajectories, and professional careers. As such, there has been an increasing
effort to understand what can make these experiences more or less productive for
young people, particularly in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
fields that face ongoing challenges related to workforce development. A better
understanding of what happens during and after early engineering activities -
and in particular, what contributes to a productive and engaging experience for
children between the ages of 3 and 5 - can inform the design of new activities
and potentially catalyze greater interest and learning about engineering at a
young age. This study seeks to add new knowledge in this area by exploring how
and why different elements of engineering activities for young children might be
more or less effective for early learners. In addition, the study also examines
engagement and interest related to engineering at the family level,
acknowledging the essential roles that parents and families play in the overall
development of young children. Finally, this study includes a specific focus on
low-income and Spanish-speaking families, thereby engaging with communities that
historically have less access to early science and engineering learning
opportunities and remain persistently underrepresented in these fields. In order
to maximize the impact of this research, findings from this study will be shared
broadly with parents, educators, and researchers from multiple fields such as
engineering education, child development, and informal/out-of-school time
education. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study has the potential to have a
transformative impact on engineering education by developing both educational
products and conceptual frameworks that advance the field's knowledge of how to
effectively engage young learners and their parents/caregivers in meaningful and
productive engineering learning experiences. This study seeks to break new
ground at the frontiers of early childhood engineering, specifically through a)
articulating and refining a new integrated conceptual framework that weaves
together theories of learning and development with theoretical constructs from
engineering design and b) applying and refining this integrated framework when
creating, implementing, assessing, and revising components of family-based
engineering activities for early learners, particularly those from low-income
and Spanish-speaking families. Unlike many other early childhood engineering
programs, this project focuses on the family context, which is the primary
driver of learning and interest development at this age. The study therefore
provides an opportunity to advance the field by both helping young children
build engineering skills and interests before starting kindergarten while also
empowering parents to support their children?s engineering education at a
critical developmental period. Additionally, by enhancing parent-child
interactions and supporting a range of early childhood development goals, this
project will also contribute to efforts to decrease the persistent kindergarten
readiness gap across racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups. The research
ultimately supports efforts to increase the diversity of individuals who will
potentially enter the engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.