* 1930288
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: The Development of Mobile Pastoralism
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Loukas Barton, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,601.00

Researchers have long sought to understand the emergence and development of the
distinctive pastoral ways of life characteristic of central Eurasia. Many
inhabitants of this enormous territory have been sustained for thousands of
years by herding sheep, goats, cattle, and horses. The animal herds must be
moved continually to fresh pastures in a pattern that often precludes the
establishment of permanent residences. The relationship of such subsistence
systems to sedentary agriculture or to highly mobile foraging for wild resources
is poorly understood. The possibility that specialized herding may have
developed directly from mobile foraging rather than as an adaptation
complementary to sedentary farming is especially interesting and little
investigated. Under the supervision of Dr. Robert Drennan and Dr. Loukas Barton,
Jennifer Farquhar will investigate the role of hunter-gatherers in the
development of mobile pastoralism in the desert-steppe region of Mongolia. The
study focuses on patterns of mobility across the entire economic and social
transition from small-scale egalitarian societies some 7000 years ago to the
more complex larger-scale sociopolitical integration of the Bronze Age some 2500
years ago. Mobility is critical to both foraging and herding modes of
production. Its study provides not only important insight into how settlement
strategies changed with the addition of domestic animals, but also puts in
context other aspects of social life including patterns of social interaction,
hierarchy, and differential access to material wealth, prestige, production, and
ritual. Models from evolutionary ecology will be used in the effort to
understand better how hunters and, later on, herders distributed themselves
within habitats, identifying changes in how, when, and why people moved. The
evaluation of these models will contribute to our understanding of the nature of
human decision making as well as of the mechanisms of behavioral change.
Application of these models over the past two decades has led to advances in
understanding a range of phenomena including the origins of agriculture and the
emergence of institutional inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ms. Farquhar will
carry out systematic regional-scale survey in the Ikh Nart Nature Reserve in
southeastern Mongolia to identify locations where the ephemeral remains of
highly mobile hunters and herders can be found, and to collect samples of these
materials for study. The research is a central part of Ms. Farquhar's doctoral
training and will provide field training and experience for both U.S. and
Mongolian students. Cooperation among US and Mongolian team members in field
work, laboratory analysis, and interpretation will encourage the exchange of
people, ideas, and information in order to promote outcomes that reflect the
goals and values of all participants. A collaborative approach to public
outreach to local herding communities and the large urban center of Ulaanbaatar
will contribute to the goals of Ikh Nart Nature Reserve and the national
government to promote environmental management and resource conservation, topics
of particular concern in light of recent declines in both natural and cultural
resources in the face of unprecedented extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.