* 1930907
* Extending Micro-Pulse DIAL (MPD) Water Vapor Estimation Capability for Increased and Enhanced Weather Applications by Leveraging Advanced Signal Processing Techniques
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Willem Marais, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 10/31/2023
* USD 198,323.00

The accurate measurement of water vapor in the lower atmosphere is one of the
keys to unlocking improved forecasts of cloud, precipitation, and severe
weather. Through NSF funding, researchers have developed a network of lidars
that can run unattended and provide research-quality water vapor measurements.
This project will enhance the capability of those lidars to provide measurements
in space and time by using advanced signal processing techniques that are
already in use in the medical imaging community. Beyond the potential to improve
forecasting, the project could allow for a change in how future instruments are
constructed, lowering the cost and allowing for more coverage. This also
represents the first NSF award for an early-career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is to apply a new signal
processing technique to the micro-pulse differential absorption lidar (MPD)
network to increase the capability of the instrument to retrieve water vapor
measurements. The Poisson Total Variation (PTV) technique is used as a signal
processor framework for lidar applications and can be conceptualized as an
approach where the spatial and temporal resolutions of the observations are
systematically and optimally adjusted based on the signal-to-noise ratio. The
PTV is based on well-established signal processing techniques that have been
used in medical imaging. The short-term objective of the project is to further
validate the preliminary PTV techniques and improve it where necessary by
processing several MPD datasets that have coincident radiosonde water vapor
retrievals. The long-term objective is to refine the technique to be more
computationally efficient and integrate it to the MPD testbed data processing
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.