* 1930906
* Phase Field Modeling of Thermal Transport for Predicting and Preventing Porosity and Solidification Cracking in Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Tai-Hsi Fan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 315,770.00

This project considers the geometry accuracy and mechanical quality of high-end
additively manufactured metal products used in aerospace, automobile, naval,
petroleum, and energy industries. Basic understanding of the high temperature
process such as how laser heating interacts with metallic powders and how
surface defects evolve during powder melting and fusion is key to the success of
additive manufacturing. Through theoretical analysis and experimental
validation, this project focuses on predicting and preventing the formation of
surface defects including solidification cracks. The project will help
manufacturing industry in the U.S. to develop strategies to increase mechanical
performance of critical metallic parts made by additive manufacturing.
Specifically, this project will benefit metallic material suppliers,
manufacturing machine designers, product designers and end users. Higher
education and workforce training with diversity are emphasized for the next
generation of engineers in manufacturing field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary road block on additive manufacturing of high strength alloys is
geometric accuracy, surface quality, and the quest for mechanical performance.
Defects such as pores, notches, and cracks in additive manufacturing are often
caused by incomplete melting of powders, interfacial instability, evaporating
and recoiling, balling, spattering, and cracking during solidification. There is
a great need on predictive modeling of the process dynamics at powder and
microstructure levels to mitigate defects caused by above mechanisms. The
project goal is to establish an integrated phase field theoretical framework for
this purpose. The project includes three specific tasks: (i) resolve the
dynamics and distribution of porosity by a fully coupled thermal, fluids, phase
transition, and microstructure evolution model, (ii) integrate thermal fluid
dynamics with elasticity, plasticity, grain microstructure evolution, and
susceptibility of solidification cracking, (iii) perform experimental
validations and uncertainty analysis using available data from NIST Additive
Manufacturing Benchmark Test Series (AM-Bench) ranging from microstructure to
thermal mechanical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.