* 1930043
* 2019 Physical Metallurgy GRC &amp; GRS
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Carol Handwerker, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Eva Campo
* 06/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This project is providing funding for registration and travel support to early
career scientists, including assistant professors, post-docs, and graduate
students, to attend the 2019 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS) in Physical Metallurgy. The Physical Metallurgy GRC is
well-known for providing a leading international forum for the presentation and
discussion of research at the frontier of materials science and engineering and
for providing networking opportunities for research collaborations and career
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's Physical Metallurgy GRC is
subtitled Frontiers of Coupling Computation, Data Science, and Experiments in
Physical Metallurgy, reflecting the community's commitment to the principles of
the US Materials Genome Initiative(MGI) and the National Science Foundation's
DMREF, MIP, and cross-cutting data science programs. The GRC will be preceded by
an associated GRS) where early career researchers present and discuss their work
and participate in mentoring and career-building activities. The GRS will be
held on July 6-7, 2019 and the GRC will be on July 7-12, 2019, at Southern New
Hampshire University, Hooksett NH. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC and GRC program
chairs and vice-chairs have engaged in extensive outreach within the community
to attract a diverse group of attendees, as well as creating a program with
speakers and discussion leaders who are not only scientific leaders in the
field, but also have a reputation for building the broader community, welcoming
innovative ideas, and engaging well with early career scientists and engineers.
A primary goal of the Physical Metallurgy GRC is to explore some of the most
important advances in coupling computation, data science and experiments to
enhance depth of our scientific understanding and the rate of its acquisition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another aim is to explore potential intersections of
emerging technologies and methods to frame essential questions regarding how
these intersections might further develop and how collaborative efforts might be
configured to take full advantage of the power of their coupling. The GRC and
the associated GRS will help accelerate the design and development of advanced
materials to enhance US manufacturing competitiveness, in strong support of the
NSF focus on MGI, embodied in the DMREF, MIP, and other cross-cutting
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.