* 1930464
* Scholarships and Supports to Increase Access to and Completion of Masters Degrees in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Lisa Giacumo, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,867.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund two-year scholarships
to 36 students pursuing master's degrees in Boise State University's College of
Engineering. These degrees include Civil, Mechanical, Electrical &amp; Computer
Engineering, and Materials Science &amp; Engineering. The College of Engineering
has a high population of students with financial need who are first-generation
and/or from rural backgrounds. Despite their interest, these students have not
entered the graduate programs that award degrees in high demand by the region's
industries. In addition, there is evidence that, at the graduate level, these
student populations face a compounded, more challenging version of the barriers
that they faced as undergraduates. By recruiting these undergraduates into
graduate programs, providing financial support through scholarships, and
building academic, cultural, and workforce readiness supports, this project has
a high potential to broaden participation in STEM graduate programs and
workplaces. If successful, the project will contribute to the Nation's
innovation engine by tapping into a population of talented engineers who
discount their potential as graduate students due to financially-motivated
concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving graduate students with
demonstrated financial need. The project aims to increase student persistence to
degree by linking scholarships with effective supporting curricular/co-
curricular activities and high-impact intervention strategies, including
academic mentoring, cultural/family events, community-building social programs,
skills training, and workforce readiness support, including internships and
entrepreneurship development. Research has shown that graduate students face
compounded noncognitive factors that impose additional barriers to persistence.
An additional barrier is that many graduate students have difficulty keeping up
with the high pace and intensity of graduate studies, while balancing family
responsibilities. This project aims to help fill the large knowledge gap about
whether and how implementation of research-validated interventions that have
positive impact on undergraduate STEM students affect graduate STEM student
success. The project research activities will be grounded in the social science
tradition with the goal of studying the project interventions' design and
implementation. Using outcome metrics, surveys, individual interviews, and focus
groups, the project will gather data about the effectiveness of different
interventions in reducing barriers and improving student success. Results will
be disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed STEM and general
educational journals as well as presentations at conferences. This project is
funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.