* 1930101
* Mechanisms of Transport Through Plasmodesmata
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2023
* David Jackson, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 01/31/2023
* USD 728,165.00

Living organisms are made up of smaller units called cells, and these cells need
to communicate with each other to coordinate how they grow and develop. Plants
have evolved a way to communicate by making tiny channels to connect their
cells. Many different types of molecules pass through these channels to feed
growing tissues and to instruct the plant how to grow. This project aims to
understand how the passage of signals through the channels is controlled, by
studying a newly discovered factor that controls this process. It will also
screen for new factors that influence the way in which the channels instruct the
growth of special types of cells called stem cells that are essential for plant
growth. These studies have the potential to make significant improvements to
agricultural productivity, and to limit the spread of plant diseases, which
sometimes use the channels to spread through the plant. In addition to the
scientific and technological advances detailed above, this project will train
young scientists at various levels, as well as developing resources to involve
high school students in cutting edge biology research. The PI directs the
Partners For the Future Program at CSHL, which immerses local high school
students in active research at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. He will also
develop an educational exchange with an all-female minority serving high school
in Brooklyn, New York. This activity will expose the excitement and applications
of molecular biology to students who otherwise have little exposure to
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmodesmata are microscopic channels
that connect plant cells to integrate growth, development and nutrient
availability, providing organism wide connectivity. Plant development relies on
pluripotent stem cells in specialized niches called meristems, and the movement,
or "trafficking", of homeodomain transcription factors through plasmodesmata is
required to maintain the stem cells. This research will develop and adapt state
of the art methods in protein-RNA interactions, RNA localization and proteomic
analyses to study a newly identified RNA binding protein that is required for
trafficking of stem cell regulatory proteins. It will also test the hypothesis
that the newly identified protein interacts in a protein-mRNA complex to
facilitate passage of transcription factors through the plasmodesmata. In an
independent approach, the research will also use a proteomic screen to identify
new factors that control PD trafficking. Movement of protein and RNA signals in
plants is critical for their development, as well as how plants respond to the
environment. The results of this project could therefore allow the manipulation
of plants to improve agricultural productivity. The project will also integrate
training of junior scientists, including minority high school students, in
molecular genetics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by
the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems and the Cellular Dynamics and Function Cluster in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.