* 1930373
* Bolstering the Advancement of Mathematics Master's Students to Prepare for Doctoral Mathematics Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Kimberly Seashore, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2024
* USD 368,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at California State University-Fresno (CSU-Fresno), San Francisco State
University, and California State Polytechnic University-Pomona. All of these
universities are in the California State University (CSU) system and are
Hispanic-Serving Institutions. CSU-Fresno and San Francisco State University are
also Asian-American, Native-American, Pacific Islander-Serving Institutions
(AANAPISI). Over its five-year duration, this project will fund two-year
scholarships to 30 students who are pursuing master's degrees in mathematics.
The goal is to support the retention and graduation of students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise in master's programs at the
three universities who plan to pursue a Ph.D. in the mathematical sciences,
including mathematics education. The five components of the project are: 1)
strengthened academic preparation; 2) robust mentorship; 3) structured
trajectories with interim benchmarks; 4) support for students' applications to
Ph.D. programs and graduate fellowships; and 5) travel support for student
presentations of research and networking. Additionally, scholars will benefit
from the collaboration among the three CSUs as they will have access to
resources from all three departments. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
recruit and support Master's students to matriculate and then thrive in doctoral
programs in the mathematical sciences. It builds on two prior NSF projects that
supported undergraduate students in mathematics through intensive summer
programs. The project will incorporate those earlier findings into intensive
2-year Master's programs to provide for more extensive advanced coursework,
extended research experiences and a broad range of mentorship and community
building opportunities. The project will be based on two theories of action. The
first is that providing scholarships will allow students to work fewer hours and
allocate sufficient time to dedicate to academic preparation. The second is that
structured mentorship and frequent strategic benchmarking will help students to
use their time to develop the knowledge base and academic credentials to
matriculate to a Ph.D. program. The project will document its impact by
measuring the effects of the interventions. In order to do this, research will
be conducted in two ways. First, to collecting and analyze student surveys and
short reflections on their program, questions and challenges that they are
encountering, and strategies they are using to address these challenges. Second,
to compare program and population differences among the three project sites to
study how local variation to the project may affect outcomes. A three-pronged,
mixed methods approach will be used to externally evaluate project
effectiveness: 1) monitor project implementation, 2) assess the efficacy of
project activities in moving participants towards project goals, and 3) report
on the summative effects of the project. Project members will present their
findings at conferences such as the "Field of Dreams," the Society for
Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science, and others
organized by the Mathematical Association of America, the American Mathematical
Society, or the Pacific Math Alliance and publish the results in
mathematics/mathematics education journals, including student participants as
co-authors when possible. The project will also have a website in which
materials will be accessible. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.