* 1930651
* A global climatic context (6.5 to 5 Ma) for the Mediterranean Messinian Salinity Crisis
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Timothy Herbert, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 206,804.00

The global deep ocean circulation depends on the formation of dense waters that
sink in the North Atlantic. Although these waters are not the coldest in the
global ocean, they are salty enough to convect, forming a large-scale
overturning that is an essential part of the global ocean heat and carbon
"conveyor belt". One oceanographic theory posits the important contribution to
this circulation of warm, salty water flowing out from the Mediterranean into
the deep North Atlantic - the Mediterranean Outflow Water (MOW). Some climate
models suggest that interrupting or altering the strength of the MOW would alter
ocean heat transport and hence global temperature patterns. In this project, the
research team will test the importance of the MOW using a natural geologic
experiment when the connection between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic Ocean
was completely cut off, a period of time known as the Messinian Salinity Crisis
about 6 million years ago when the Mediterranean largely dried up and thick salt
deposits were formed. Researchers will for the first time gather high resolution
paleotemperature estimates at a number of open ocean sites using sediment
sequences that span this time interval. If the MOW hypothesis is correct, the
research will find a distinctive pattern of regional temperature responses
during the time of Mediterranean isolation, followed by a shift when the
connection to the open ocean was again established and MOW production resumed.
Alternatively, if the hypothesized pattern of ocean surface temperature does not
emerge, the research would suggest that the global importance of MOW has been
overestimated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sites have been selected for this study that
span the Messinian and post-Messinian interval in the North Atlantic, central
Atlantic, South Atlantic, and equatorial Pacific Oceans. Initial results show
that sediment deposition is continuous at all sites through the time interval of
interest. The research team will utilize organic alkenone paleothermometry in
order to reconstruct ocean surface temperature evolution at approximately
3,000-year time steps from 6.5 to 5 million years ago at each site. This time
period covers climate events that precede and post-date Mediterranean isolation.
Sediment records will be correlated via oxygen isotope stratigraphy and orbital
tuning so that they can be synchronized for comparison. Results will then be
compared to climate models that simulate cessation of the MOW in order to
verify/falsify the MOW hypothesis. The results will also be used as input for
regional climate models of the Messinian interval in the Mediterranean region.
This project will provide support for an early career female researcher and
foster collaborations with an international community of researchers seeking to
resolve the cause and effects of the Messinian Salinity Crisis. As part of the
broader impacts of this work, undergraduates from Central Connecticut State
University, a non-research institution with a high fraction of first-generation
college students, will be recruited and mentored as summer
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.