* 1930437
* Engaging, Empowering, and Retaining New Scholars in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Joanne Weinreb, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,625.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at CUNY New York City College of Technology (City Tech), a Hispanic Serving
Institution. Over its 5-year duration, this project will fund 40 scholarships
per year to students pursuing bachelor's degrees in Applied Chemistry, Applied
Computational Physics, Applied Mathematics and Biomedical Informatics or
associate's degrees in Computer Science and Chemical Technology. Scholars are
eligible for support for up to nine semesters for bachelor's degrees and five
semesters for associate's degrees. With the goal of expanding the STEM degree
pipeline, this project aims to improve retention and graduation in STEM fields
by linking scholarships with effective mandatory support activities, including
enhanced academic and professional advising, cohort meetings, undergraduate
research experiences, graduate school preparation, and participation in
discipline-specific conferences. Project personnel will encourage scholarship
recipients to develop both learning cohorts with STEM peers and non-academic
endeavors such as enrichment and extracurricular activities designed to foster a
connection to the community at large. Because City Tech is a minority-serving
institution, this project will impact underrepresented students, especially
women, in STEM undergraduate and graduate programs as well as the the New York
City workforce. This project is also expected to develop successful evidence-
based interventions in support of this larger workforce
aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four primary objectives inform this project. First, to
recruit students in the targeted majors, focusing on underrepresented students.
Second, to leverage scholarships to retain and graduate academically talented,
low-income City Tech students. Third, to provide comprehensive support and
programmatic activities to promote both timely progress to graduation and
professional STEM identity formation. Fourth, to increase the transfer of
students from associate to baccalaureate degree programs and beyond. The project
will provide five evidence-based types of support to STEM students: a) increased
exposure to research experiences; b) participation in a learning community of
STEM peers; c) use of both robust peer-mentor counseling and one-on-one faculty
mentoring; d) seminars and informal meetings with STEM researchers and
professionals (especially emphasizing women and other underrepresented
minorities), and e) the development of a website and a blog dedicated to STEM
students. In addition, the educational literature can benefit from further
studies describing structural factors that foster STEM identities. This project
aims to fill this gap by identifying the key characteristics of student
experiences in both academic and non-academic areas that support success and
contribute to fostering a STEM identity. To ensure that the impact of the
project is maximized, an independent external evaluator will conduct both
formative and summative project assessments and results will be disseminated at
conferences, via peer-reviewed research journals, and through a project website
and LinkedIn accounts. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.