* 1930852
* NSF INCLUDES: Supporting Emerging Aquatic Scientists (SEAS) Islands Alliance
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Jonathan Boxerman, WestEd
* Cooperative Agreement
* Aisha Morris
* 10/31/2024
* USD 552,022.00

Individuals from underrepresented and underserved groups comprise a
disproportionately smaller percentage of STEM degrees and jobs compared to their
percentages in the U.S. population. This is especially true in the geosciences
where a mere 8% of the geoscience-related workforce is comprised of individuals
from underserved and underrepresented minority groups. Island students have the
potential to close this gap, especially if they are trained through culturally-
relevant and place-based pathways programs. The NSF INCLUDES Islands Alliance
will use a collective impact approach to: (1) build upon two successful NSF
INCLUDES Design &amp; Development Launch Pilots (DDLPs) in the U.S. Virgin
Islands and Guam to establish a national network focused on coastal geoscience
pathways in seven U.S. or U.S.-affiliated island jurisdictions (U.S. Virgin
Islands, Puerto Rico, Guam, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
Republic of Palau, Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of the
Marshall Islands) (2) empower youth, undergraduates, graduates, and post-
graduate adults within the network through scientific and professional
development trainings, mentorship, family support programs, and cohort-building
activities to pursue their interests in the marine and environmental sciences,
(3) connect partner organizations and individuals to each other and to
additional resources, expertise, and mentors, through the creation of new island
networks supported by the Islands Alliance Backbone Organization and Steering
Committee, and (4) grow the larger NSF INCLUDES community by engaging with other
INCLUDES DDLPs, Alliances, the NSF INCLUDES Coordination Hub, two professional
societies (Society for Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in
Science, Coastal &amp; Estuarine Research Federation, and the National Sea Grant
College Program Network. Through a collective impact approach, the Islands
Alliance will provide important new insights into how two aspects of identity
construction (individual science identities and collective identities) affect
student self-efficacy, interest, engagement, sense of belonging, and persistence
in STEM. The ways that pathway and student development vary across different
cultural settings and contexts will also be investigated. This is one of the
first coordinated, collaborative efforts of it's kind envisaged to connect and
include these underrepresented and underserved islands students in the nation's
STEM enterprise. Significant future gains stand to be realized by this
investment both for participants and national efforts to broaden participation
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inclusion of nuanced cultural expertise from
diverse underrepresented minority (URM) and underserved populations is needed to
broaden participation in the geosciences, including those living in U.S.
territories and U.S.-affiliated islands. Island regions are strongly connected
to the oceans that surround them and are among the country's most diverse
communities with either majority or sizable populations who are URM in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). Even so, few projects have
attempted to collaborate with these communities to broaden participation of the
STEM workforce. Over five years, the Islands Alliance will support 425 middle
and high school students in summer &amp; school year geoscience enrichment
programs; 90 undergraduate students in early-career research and career
experiences; 45 upper-level undergraduate and/or Masters students in an 8-week
summer intensive Bridge to Graduate School Program; 20 Bridge Program students
who will receive graduate training at partnering institutions (M.S. or Ph.D.
level); and 25 Island Alliance Fellows in local workforce positions. The
Alliance will document the progress of students along the pathway, and the
supports provided to those students, to determine the components of our
collective impact approach that promote student success across the pathway, as
well as the development of scientific and collective identities among students.
Studying the Islands Alliance progress toward broadening participation in these
ways has broader impacts for the field. Inclusion of these underrepresented and
underserved individuals will increase individual and cognitive diversity within
the U.S. STEM workforce, leading to increased innovation and significant
outcomes. The Islands Alliance will give participating partners and coastal
communities agency to engage, address, and solve collective coastal problems and
grow the national STEM workforce by increasing our understanding of context-
specific, culturally-relevant best practices for engaging underrepresented and
underserved groups in STEM. In addition, it will provide critical capacity
building to three National Science Foundation Established Program's to Stimulate
Competitive Research jurisdictions (USVI, Guam, and Puerto Rico) and resources
to five historically black colleges and universities, Hispanic serving
institutions, and other minority serving institutions, while advancing our
understanding of collective impact models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
INCLUDES Alliance is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in
discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening
participation in STEM at scale. This Alliance is co-funded by the NSF INCLUDES
program, the Directorate for Geoscience, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.