* 1930382
* CSBR: Living Stocks - Enhancement of the Caenorhabditis Natural Diversity Resource
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Robyn Tanny, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 708,075.00

Studies of conserved biological processes require model organisms which share
attributes with humans. Most model organisms are easily grown in the laboratory
and enable experimental manipulations. Over the last forty years, the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans has been instrumental in numerous fundamental advances in
genetics, developmental biology, and neurobiology. However, all of these
discoveries come from studies of a single strain in the species. This limitation
is similar to the argument that we can understand all of human biology by the
study of a single person in our species. This project seeks to expand the C.
elegans Natural Diversity Resource (CeNDR), which comprises nearly 1000
genetically distinct strains from around the world. This genetic diversity
facilitates discoveries about the evolution of physiological and behavioral
traits, including responses to chemical and biotic stresses. Because humans
share many of the same genes and processes as this nematode species, studies
using this organism can teach us a great deal about how the human population
differs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CeNDR has three major goals: (1) Collect,
organize, and disseminate wild C. elegans strains; (2) Organize and disseminate
whole-genome sequence and variant data for wild strains; and (3) Provide a
genetics portal to facilitate mappings and interpretations of results. This
project will address critical improvements to the methodology and technology of
each of those goals. These improvements will enable future discoveries with
CeNDR and will enable the planned expansion to include strains, whole-genome
data, and mappings for two related nematode species: C. briggsae and C.
tropicalis. This expansion to the Caenorhabditis Natural Diversity Resource
(CaeNDR) will build unparalleled new capacity for comparative evolution
approaches in nematodes and likely other organisms. Most research groups do not
have the combination of experimental, computational, and statistical training to
easily perform studies of natural variation. This project will make these tools
available and usable by research laboratories across diverse model organism
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.