* 1930214
* Increasing Undergraduates' Success and Persistence in STEM by Combining Scholarship Support with a Growth Mindset Framework
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Lei Wang, Tallahassee Community College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2024
* USD 992,723.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Tallahassee Community College. Tallahassee Community College is a public
two-year community college where 41.8% students are classified as low-income
students. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund two-year
scholarships to 60 students who are pursuing Associate of Arts degrees in the
disciplines of Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Computer Science, all disciplines
of Engineering, Mathematics, Physical Science, Physics, as well as Computer
Information Science and Technology. The project aims to increase retention and
degree completion for students through both academic and non-cognitive skills
development. The project will advance knowledge on targeted effective practices
including: (1) active learning and research experiences, (2) optimized
individual advising, (3) faculty mentoring, (4) tutoring, (5) internships and
career counseling, and (6) non-cognitive skill development that prepares
students to pursue STEM careers. The project will use the "Growth Mindset"
framework which posits that intelligence and academic success can be improved
over time with effort, and with the development of particular skills. By
deepening the understanding of the "Growth Mindset" in STEM, this project will
advance a more nuanced framing of challenges and factors for success in low-
income community college students pursuing STEM degrees. This approach will help
students develop a determined mindset when facing academic challenges and will
lead to an increase in the retention of students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project seeks to improve educational
opportunities, enhance student support services, and employ the "Growth Mindset"
framework to increase retention and degree completion of students in the STEM
fields. In addition, the project will create a predictive model which identifies
factors that affect student success in STEM disciplines. The project aims to
study the effect of the enhancement of non-cognitive and psycho-social skill
development on increasing student success. Furthermore, the project will analyze
if specific activities can be identified as influential factors for the increase
in student success. The project will be evaluated by collecting student data on
GPA, semester-by-semester grades earned, retention, and graduation rates. In
addition, through non-cognitive surveys and questionnaires the project will seek
to observe and understand how changes in the "Growth Mindset" of students
occurs. Dissemination will be conducted through presentations on the findings of
the project and the identified best practices will be shared through national
conferences and publication journals. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.