* 1930825
* SusChEM: Collaborative proposal: Engineering increased activity of cutinase toward poly(ethyleneterephthalate) for recycling of plastic
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Romas Kazlauskas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 92,712.00

The environmental consequences of plastic solid waste are serious. The problem
continues to increase as we diversify and expand plastic use and applications.
The most significant example of this problem is the rate that plastics are
accumulating in oceans, lakes and rivers. The most widely used plastic is
polyethylene terephthalate, or PET. PET is used in the manufacture of bottles,
polyester fabrics, and food trays. Production levels are estimated to be over 50
million tons per year. This project will attempt to develop an efficient enzyme
for the degradation of PET. High school students will be engaged in summer
research opportunities. Undergraduate and graduate students will also be
involved in the project. These opportunities will help develop a STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, several groups discovered enzymes that
catalyze PET hydrolysis under mild conditions. Unfortunately, these enzymes are
too slow and too unstable for practical use. Protein engineering to increase
their catalytic efficiency is a potential solution. The project tests a new
approach for engineering enzymes to act on insoluble substrates. This approach
recognizes that the interaction between an enzyme and an insoluble substrate is
complex and involves an extended binding site. The enzyme must pull the chain
from the bulk polymer, position the ester group for hydrolysis, and allow the
polymer substrate to slide within the binding site for repeated hydrolysis of
the chain. Previous attempts to increase the activity of enzymes toward
insoluble substrates have met with limited success. The proposed large-area-
mutagenesis (LAM) methodology to be implemented in this program is a systematic
strategy for engineering enzymes for insoluble synthetic polymer substrates. The
approach will: 1) establish the size of the binding region in cutinase that
influences its catalytic activity toward PET; 2) optimize the shape of the
extended binding region for PET, 3) increase the thermal stability of the enzyme
for use above the glass transition temperature of PET, where chain mobility is
higher, allowing better access of the enzyme to the polymer substrate. The
results of this program will be the engineering of an efficient, stable enzyme
with increased catalytic activity of at least 100-fold that may be suitable for
commercial PET recycling, which is an essential step to reducing plastic
pollution. This project is supported jointly by the Cellular and Biochemical
Engineering Program in CBET/ENG and the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in
CHE/MPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.