* 1930589
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Caleidoscope Research School in Computational Complexity (Caleidoscope)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Aleksandr Knop, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2020
* USD 5,000.00

This award will support student attendance at the Caleidoscope school, a one-
week summer school in computational complexity to be held in Paris, France, June
17-21, 2019. Caleidoscope is intended for graduate students as well as
established researchers who wish to learn more about neighboring areas. This
award will provide partial support to approximately 6 students to attend this
school. Efforts will be made to support students from under-represented groups
and geographic diversity among students will be taken into account. It will
contribute towards attracting more under-represented groups to computer science
research giving students an opportunity to engage in the important technical,
professional, and social exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational
complexity theory was born more than 50 years ago when researchers started
asking what could be computed efficiently. Classifying problems or functions
with respect to the amount of resources (e.g. time and/or space) needed to solve
or compute them turned out to be an extremely difficult question. This has led
researchers to develop a remarkable variety of approaches, employing different
mathematical methods and theories. The future development of complexity theory
will require a subtle understanding of the similarities, differences, and
limitations of the many current approaches. In fact, even though these
approaches study the same phenomena, they are developed today within disjoint
communities, with little or no communication between them (e.g. algorithms,
logic, programming theory, algebra, etc.). This dispersion is unfortunate since
it hinders the development of hybrid methods and more generally the advancement
of computational complexity as a whole. The goal (and peculiarity) of the
Caleidoscope school is to reunite in a single event as many different takes on
computational complexity as can reasonably be fit in one
week.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.