* 1930497
* Improving Undergraduate Engineering Students' Degree Attainment Through Innovative Residential and Transfer Support
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Ricky Castles, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 4,009,937.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Specifically, the project will support engineering students at East
Carolina University, Lenoir Community College, Pitt Community College, and Wayne
Community College. These institutions serve a rural region in Eastern North
Carolina in which the poverty rate in many surrounding counties exceed 20%. Over
its five-year duration, this project will fund four-year scholarships to 80
students who are pursuing associate's and bachelor's degrees in engineering.
This project will reduce the financial burden of attending college, provide
academic and social support, and guide students toward engineering careers to
help develop the STEM workforce of eastern North Carolina. This region has
historically had difficulty attracting and retaining engineering professionals.
Project activities include a summer bridge program, a living-learning
residential program, a textbook-lending program, tutoring, and career
preparation activities. The activities that will be developed and implemented as
part of this project are designed to be sustainable beyond the grant period. As
a result, the project has the potential to support future students, thus
achieving persistent increases in engineering retention and graduation rates at
each partnering institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project will recruit two
cohorts of 40 students, drawing primarily from a ten-county region in eastern
North Carolina. This project will adopt the Model of Co-Curricular Support,
built upon Tinto's model of institutional departure. It will conduct research to
determine which elements of institutional support are most effective for
attracting, retaining, and graduating low-income, high-achieving students.
Specific research questions are: (1) How do community college transfer students
experience academic, social, professional, and university integration at their
community college, during transition between institutions, and at their transfer
institution? (2) What effect does comprehensive co-curricular support have on
academic, social, professional, and university integration for transfer and non-
transfer students? (3) Do higher levels of academic, social, professional,
and/or university integration result in improved degree progress, academic
achievement, and/or career attainment than lower integration levels? The project
will be evaluated by collecting both quantitative data (e.g., numbers of
applicants; retention; graduation rates) and qualitative data (e.g., student
perspectives of the value of support mechanisms). Results of the project will be
disseminated through conferences such as the American Society for Engineering
Education annual conference the National Academic Advisors Association
conference. Results will be submitted for publication in education journals such
as the IEEE Transactions on Education Journal, the Journal of Engineering
Education, and the International Journal of Engineering Education. This project
is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.