* 1930803
* SG/LTREB Renewal:  Spatiotemporal Fitness Variation and Avian Group Size
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2025
* Charles Brown, University of Tulsa
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2025
* USD 206,515.00

Many social animals live in groups of different sizes. Individuals often seem to
survive or reproduce better in groups of particular sizes in a given year, and
ecologists have thus been puzzled as to why groups with less successful sizes
continue to exist. One possibility is that changes in ecological conditions such
as food availability or the presence of parasites, and/or climatic conditions
such as how wet a year is, lead to certain group sizes being most successful in
some years or in some areas, but different ones being most successful in other
circumstances. However, whether or not the advantages of different sized groups
fluctuate in this way over the long term and across broad geographic areas is
unknown. This can only be addressed with long-term research that measures the
success of animals in different groups in different years and geographic
regions. This research will address this by measuring the reproductive success
of individuals of a social bird, the cliff swallow, which breeds in colonies
ranging from 1 to 6000 nests. Cliff swallows are found throughout much of
western North America and are one of the most highly social land birds in the
world. The work is investigating whether the costs and benefits of particular
colony sizes change regularly enough among years to explain the long-term
persistence of variation in group size. This research involves undergraduate
students and offers them intensive research experience and training in field
ecology. Public outreach is conducted by giving annual lectures at the Swallows
Day festival at Mission San Juan Capistrano in California, appearance on
national media associated with that event, and maintenance of a web site about
the research and cliff swallows generally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
builds on a long-term study of a social bird, the cliff swallow, that lives in
colonies of widely different sizes, and is investigating whether fluctuating
selection on reproductive success can explain variation in group size. The data
gathered will be applied to study annual reproductive success in colonies of
different sizes from year to year. This is done by systematically collecting
data on fledging success at up to 40 cliff swallow colonies each year. The work
also focuses on the proximate ecological drivers of variation in reproductive
success by examining the extent of ectoparasitism, breeding phenology, and other
nest- and colony-based variables, allowing identification of climatic and other
factors that lead to annual variation in reproductive success in different
groups. The information gathered in this project, along with existing data on
annual survival of breeding adults and first-year birds, will enable estimation
of relative lifetime reproductive success of birds occupying different sized
colonies. This study will allow better understanding of how group size affects
fitness over the long term, assist in interpreting the extensive variation in
group size that is characteristic of most social animals, reveal the potential
influence of climatic variability on animal social behavior, and provide a test
of the importance of fluctuating selection in generating and maintaining
behavioral variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.