* 1930351
* STEM Community Building to Support Academic Success and Retention of Low-Income Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* John Barr, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2024
* USD 648,416.00

This S-STEM Track 1 project at Ithaca College will provide scholarship support
to fourteen students with financial need -- two cohorts of seven -- who are
majoring in computer science, mathematics, or physics/astronomy. Liberal arts
colleges such as Ithaca play a significant role in educating low-income, rural,
first-generation, and minority students. Ithaca College's project is designed to
create a welcoming and inclusive environment for them and to improve their
academic and social experience and feelings of belonging. Project faculty will
recruit Scholars from the surrounding area; reduce their financial need through
scholarships; and create a culture of improved faculty and peer relationships
and community in the scholar cohorts. Activities include a living/learning
community, peer tutoring and mentoring, faculty mentoring, research and
internships, and workshops designed to improve soft skills and interpersonal
relationships. These supports will contribute to the project's goals of reducing
attrition; increasing attainment of STEM career goals; and increasing Scholar
preparedness to contribute to the STEM workforce in high-demand fields locally,
regionally, and nationally. A research study that examines the benefits of
improved student-faculty and student-peer relationships and cohort supports will
benefit other liberal arts institutions that serve similar populations of rural
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of Ithaca College's S-STEM project are
to recruit low-income, academically talented computer science, mathematics, or
physics/astronomy students to the college; implement academic and social
supports to improve student-faculty and student-peer interactions and foster a
sense of belonging to the college and major; improve professional development
and soft skills (communication, problem-solving, teamwork, personal learning,
motivation, and initiative); and retain and graduate students who enter the STEM
workforce or STEM graduate programs. Evidence-based program elements include a
STEM living/learning community, academic support through peer tutoring and a
first-year STEM seminar, individualized support through faculty mentoring and a
peer success coach; soft skills and career development workshops; research and
internship opportunities; and cohort activities. The project will evaluate best
practices leading to improved student-faculty and student-peer relationships,
greater use of academic support resources, and professional development.
Specific research questions are (1) To what extent do increased student-faculty
interactions increase low-income students? connectedness to the college, their
STEM major, and their instructors? (2) To what extent do student-peer
interactions increase student connectedness to the college, their STEM major,
and their peers? (3) To what extent do low-income scholars feel valued by
faculty and other students in the classroom and believe that faculty accurately
perceive their abilities? The impacts of this study are aligned with the
college's institutional-level commitment to investigate and implement evidence-
based approaches to foster student success and retention. The project evaluation
will generate evidence that can be used to support sustained programming as well
as transferability to similar institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.