* 1930076
* Supporting Graduation of Undergraduate STEM Majors Through Scholarships, Mentoring, and Activities That Develop Students' Academic and Scientific Identity
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Zuzana Zajickova, Barry University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Barry University. The project will provide four-
year scholarships to a single cohort of up to 15 students. These Scholars will
pursue Bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, computer information science,
computer science, or mathematics. Scholars will engage in activities to help
them develop a greater sense of belonging. One of these activities is a summer
bridge program that includes developmental courses and community-building
activities. In addition, Scholars will have support from peer mentors and
faculty who are trained in practices that help students develop a greater sense
of belonging at the University and in STEM. The project will maintain industry
and workforce partnerships to provide Scholars with pathways into STEM careers.
The project includes an assessment plan to measure how well the activities have
improved the student experience at Barry University, which is a minority-serving
institution where more than 30% of students are first-generation, and up to 60%
receive Federal need-based loans. Previous studies have been done of similar
activities at highly selective universities. The studies show that these support
activities can reduce the gap in academic outcomes between students with higher
and lower financial need. Understanding whether the same effects can be achieved
at Barry University can guide efforts by other institutions to increase
recruitment, retention, student success, and graduation rates of students with
financial need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The specific aims are to: 1)
recruit at least twenty low-income students with academic potential from Title I
high schools in Miami-Dade and Broward counties to the Summer Bridge Program; 2)
award twelve to fifteen scholarships to students who demonstrate academic
achievement, persistence, and engagement; 3) train faculty and peer mentors in
practices shown to have positive outcomes for students with low-socio-economic
status (low-SES); 4) implement a learning community that encourages engagement
through evidence-based approaches proven to improve the university climate for
low-SES students; 5) provide Scholars with STEM-engagement opportunities, career
and research internships, and connections to industry; and 6) achieve retention,
graduation, and placement benchmarks (80% retention; 60% four-year graduation;
80% of Scholars in STEM jobs or advanced education within a year of graduation).
The project team will use a mixed-methods approach to examine the effectiveness
of the interventions at improving achievement, well-being, and retention of STEM
students from low-income backgrounds at a minority-serving institution. The
results of the study, along with iterative evaluations of programming, can help
to improve the success of this student population nationwide, thereby
contributing to a diverse, highly trained, globally competitive STEM workforce.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.