* 1930474
* Scholarship Opportunities Aimed at Retaining Science Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Gloria Thomas-Fuller, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2024
* USD 998,837.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Louisiana State University, a land-grant, sea-grant, and space-grant
research university. Over five years, this project will provide scholarships to
20 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in biological sciences,
chemistry, biochemistry, microbiology, mathematics, physics, geology and/or
mathematics. Scholars will receive up to four years of scholarship support. In
addition to scholarships, Scholars will have access to support systems that will
guide their academic and social integration into scientific and university
culture, and help them build the intellectual and social capital needed to
successfully enter a science or math career. The intellectual merit of the
proposed project lies in the use of evidence-based practices for supporting the
holistic development of the Scholars for increased academic success and science
persistence. The broader impacts include an increased number of well-prepared
and diverse graduates who enter the STEM workforce or graduate school.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project will focus on three objectives: 1)
Enhance and advance a comprehensive ecosystem of evidence-based curricular and
co-curricular practices to increase the recruitment, persistence, and success of
low-income, academically-talented students; 2) Investigate the effect of high-
impact, evidence-based retention and student success practices on an
intersectional population of low-income, academically talented students; and 3)
Promote ecosystem sustainability by increasing faculty and staff awareness and
confidence in supporting students from low-income backgrounds. The project's
research study will focus on social agency among diverse intersectional
identities within a low-income population, using quantitative and qualitative
methods. These results will inform institutional policies and practices that can
promote student persistence at a research university located in the southern
region of the United States. This project has the potential to strengthen
science education, contribute to the STEM workforce, and provide new insights
into practices to promote the success of undergraduates in science and math
degree programs. The results of the project will be disseminated at conferences
and in peer-reviewed research journals. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.