* 1930959
* Collaborative Research: Fluorinated Surfactants: Molecular Organization and Binding in Solution and on Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Paschalis Alexandridis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 282,227.00

Surfactants are molecules that contain both a water-insoluble (or oil-soluble)
component and a water-soluble component. Because of this property, surfactants
are used in a wide range of applications such as detergents, emulsifiers,
foaming agents, and dispersants. Fluorinated surfactants find a wide variety of
industrial and consumer applications because of their high chemical and thermal
stability and their unique abilities to render surfaces Teflon-like and to be
immiscible with both water and hydrocarbons. Due to their stability, fluorinated
surfactants also can be extremely resistant to degradation in the environment,
bioaccumulate, and cause adverse health effects. Two fluorinated surfactants,
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS), have been
phased out in the U.S. due to their toxicity and persistence in the environment.
Several new fluorinated surfactants are being introduced for which very little
information is available in the open literature about their properties. This
collaborative research project combines experimental and computational methods
to study the molecular organization of fluorinated surfactants in aqueous
solutions. The studies will focus on quantifying how such emerging surfactants
bind to other molecules or surfaces and how a fundamental understanding of such
interactions can be utilized for the removal of fluorinated surfactants from the
aquatic environment and biota. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has
three objectives: (1) To understand nanoscale organization of well-defined
fluorinated surfactants in aqueous solutions by using coordinated experimental
characterization and molecular modeling efforts. The focus is on advancing
computational capabilities to predict and match experimental results; (2) To
establish and quantify key driving forces responsible for fluorinated surfactant
molecular organization and interactions with other compounds (polymers, lipids,
cyclodextrins) present in aqueous solutions and at liquid/solid interfaces. The
focus is on emerging fluorinated surfactants and on interactions that are
relevant to environmental and health concerns; and (3) To design and develop
materials used in physical processes for the capture of fluorinated surfactants
and their removal from aqueous media. The ability to predict molecular
organization and interactions of fluorinated surfactants, and corresponding
structure property relationships, can enable the rational design of new
materials and methods for separating fluorinated surfactants. The results of
this research should permit the in-silico evaluation of new chemical designs for
potential replacements of fluorinated molecules in formulations and products.
The research project serves as a training ground for graduate students to
perform cutting edge research. The researchers also will engage undergraduate
students in research and integrate the project with outreach and curriculum
development activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.