* 1930605
* Enhanced Power System Stability using Fast, Distributed Power Electronics Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Brian Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The increasing penetration of inverter-coupled renewable generation is rapidly
changing the dynamics of large-scale power systems. As inverter-connected
generation displaces synchronous machines, electric grids lose inertia, voltage
support, and oscillation damping. These potential adverse impacts on system
stability have received significant attention from system operators, regulators
and the research community. System stability often limits power transfer between
areas of cheap resources and high load areas. For example, California imports
about 25% of its electrical energy from other states, of which significant
amount comes from the state of Washington through direct current (DC) interties.
In 2017, the average wholesale day-ahead price in Washington State was about 40%
lower than the prices in California. The reason for these price differences is
mainly due to the stability concerns that limit the amount of power transferred
between the two areas. This project proposes new approach that would have
substantial economic and environmental benefits by improving stability of
systems through more careful control of power electronics. The resulting
monetary savings could amount to hundreds of millions for allowing more
unconstrained power flow between different regions and higher utilization of of
renewable resources. The project will engage undergraduate and graduate students
in the proposed research activities and develop new courses integrating control
methods in power electronics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
novel control algorithms and hardware architectures for inverters so they can be
deployed in a "plug-and-play" manner and improve the stability of a grid with
both power electronic interfaced and synchronous generation. We will accomplish
this goal by ensuring that the algorithms and the hardware are robust,
completely decentralized and complement the dynamics of the synchronous
machines. We study both voltage and frequency controls for a system. In voltage
control, we diagnose the shortcomings of existing inverter control methods on
the grid today, and engineer novel controllers that preserve stability, avoid
adverse interactions, and leverage the algorithmic flexibility of digitally
controlled inverters. In frequency control, we adopt a robust control approach
to design the time domain response of inverters to explicitly optimize the
frequency response and enforce power and energy constraints coming from the
resources connected to the inverters. We will construct a testbed for validation
and experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.