* 1930417
* Rocky Mountain Scholars Program: Determining the Impact of Cohort-Based Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mark Brown, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2024
* USD 995,254.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Colorado State University, a public, Land Grant Institution. Over its
five-year duration, this project will fund two-year scholarships to 60 students
who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Mathematics and/or Biology. These
students will participate in research experiences under the direction of faculty
mentors to solve engaging, real-world problems. The project includes a research
study that will examine how different approaches to faculty-mentored research
experiences affect student performance, graduation rates, and career goals. The
broader impacts of this project include further developing the pipeline of high-
ability community college students who transition into leadership roles in their
fields. The research findings of this program will be widely disseminated for
the broad benefit of college educators throughout the nation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree
completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The Rocky Mountain Scholars Project will work with an alliance
of community colleges to: 1) Recruit four cohorts of 15 transfer students who
meet the financial need, high-ability criteria; 2) Provide the Scholars with
scholarship funding; 3) Engage Scholars in faculty-mentored research
assistantships; and 4) Provide Scholars with a support program centered on
student engagement. The project research plan includes an efficacy study
examining whether cohort-based mentored research experiences are more effective
than individual mentored-research experiences, with regard academic performance,
retention, STEM persistence, decision to enter graduate school, and decision to
enter STEM careers. Moreover, it will investigate how the quality and quantity
of student interactions with cohort mates and faculty mentors influence these
outcomes. The research will consist of a mixed methods approach including: 1)
statistical analyses using data obtained from program-generated variables as
well as data from Institutional Research and the Analytics Section of the Career
Center; 2) surveys and self-efficacy analyses to elicit a holistic picture of
students' perceptions of the program's efficacy. Results of this project will be
published in STEM education journals, posted on the program web site, and
presented at conferences. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.