* 1930451
* Graduate Student Scholarships to Advance Community Engaged Solutions to the Grand Challenge of Managing Nitrogen
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Mark Rains, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,966.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of South Florida (USF). USF is a large, urban, community-
engaged public university that provides STEM education to a diverse student
body. Over its 5-year duration, this project will fund 95 annual scholarships to
52 students who are pursuing master's degrees in environmental engineering,
geosciences, and biology. Students will receive 1.5- to 2-year scholarships. The
project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking
scholarships with important supporting activities including mentoring, research
experiences, community engagement, and participation in discipline-specific
conferences and workshops. Scholars will be assigned faculty mentors and
academic advisors, who will supervise student participation in project
activities and assure that scholars are achieving important transition
connections. The project will also support significant informal interactions
between scholars and alumni, and among scholars within their cohorts, to improve
retention, student integration, and professional networking. Of principal
significance, this project will enhance interdisciplinary training that links
geosciences, biology, and engineering to understand and co-design solutions to
nitrogen pollution of the environment, while teaching scholars the importance of
engaging local affected communities in their professional work. Because USF has
a high population of underrepresented students and receives a large number of
graduate applications from students of limited means, this project has the
potential to broaden participation in STEM fields and to advance understanding
of how mentoring, workforce development, and transition connections promote the
retention and graduation of this student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving graduate students with demonstrated financial need. Three
principle objectives will guide the project team. First, to prepare graduate
students for STEM employment by providing a broad scope of curricular and co-
curricular opportunities, team-building activities, and professional development
initiatives. Second, to foster capacity for interdisciplinary problem solving,
workforce readiness, and professional socialization. Third, to analyze the
effectiveness of activities implemented in this project on recruitment,
retention, student success, academic and career pathways, and degree attainment.
Student persistence in STEM fields is generally understood to be adversely
affected by transition barriers. Yet it can be bolstered through strong
mentoring that provides focused interventions, through professional development
activities and research experiences that stimulate interest in STEM, and through
initiatives and cultural wealth that professionally socialize students to their
disciplinary areas while allowing them to maintain cultural identities. However,
little is known about how these factors affect low-income students in graduate
degree programs. Accordingly, this project will investigate the effectiveness of
activities designed to strengthen mentoring relationships, professional
development, and transition connections for improving graduate students' success
and transitions into STEM career pathways. This investigation will reveal
whether students who succeed (high GPAs, persistence, conference participation,
degree completion, post-graduation placement) and who report feelings of
accomplishment, also report high levels of cultural wealth, measured as various
forms of capital. It will also identify specific mentoring, workforce-
development, and transition-connection activities that correspond with actual
indicators and perceived feelings of student success. This project has the
potential to advance understanding of how a broad scope of activities and
cultural attributes promote persistence in STEM graduate education. This project
will be evaluated with formative and summative approaches that use information
acquired through interviews and surveys with faculty mentors and students.
Results of this project will be made available by publicizing the findings in
both technical and popular communications from the participating academic units
and from the education- and community-outreach offices of USF that target
audiences such as other institutions of higher education, and the region's
public, professional, and scholarly organizations. This project is funded by
NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.