* 1930026
* Fostering a Diverse Community of Future Chemists through Scholarship Support, Peer Instruction, Mentoring, and Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Patrick Desrochers, University of Central Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 04/30/2025
* USD 650,000.00

This project will support the Nation’s need for a highly skilled and diverse
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce. It will do
so by increasing retention and graduation of chemistry majors at the University
of Central Arkansas. Before the start of their second year, more than half of
the first-year students at the University who declare a chemistry major have
changed their major or left the university. Institutional data suggest that the
primary reasons that first year students leave campus are financial needs,
inadequate preparation for the rigor of college, and limited connection to the
campus community. To address financial needs, the project will provide
scholarships to at least ten academically high-achieving, low-income students.
These scholarships will support students for up to four years as they pursue a
Bachelor of Science degree in chemistry. To support academic success, the
project will provide peer instruction to all students who are enrolled in
foundational chemistry courses. To support their sense of campus connection,
Scholars will also receive mentoring and opportunities for professional
development. These supports are expected to increase the retention and
graduation rates of chemistry students, reduce the achievement gap among student
populations, and prepare chemistry graduates for graduate school and STEM
careers. The project will generate knowledge by identifying aspects of the
project activities that best support the success of low-income, rural students
from underrepresented groups. Insights gained from this work can be applied to
other institutions and to other STEM majors, thus broadening the project’s
contributions to the national STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of the project is to increase degree completion of undergraduate chemistry
majors who are low-income, high-achieving students with unmet financial need. To
achieve this goal, the project will develop and evaluate evidenced-based
curricular and co-curricular programming that includes supplemental instruction,
a novel mentorship program, and elements adapted from the Meyerhoff Scholars
Program. It is expected that this combination of supports will improve retention
and graduation rates of chemistry majors at the University of Central Arkansas,
a primarily undergraduate institution with a large population of students from
rural high schools. A mixed-methods analysis will be used to evaluate program
components. Data will include course completion rates, survey responses, focus
group conversations, leader reflections, and retention and graduation rates.
Project evaluation will identify specific strategies that reduce the achievement
gap among student populations. The impact of project activities, including the
Meyerhoff-style elements and mentorship, will be evaluated to determine how well
they foster a science community and improve students' science self-efficacy and
literacy. Outcomes of this project have the potential to increase the diversity
of chemistry graduates entering the STEM workforce. In addition, project
outcomes can inform the design, implementation, and evaluation of practices at
other institutions or in other STEM fields to increase the success of
undergraduate STEM students. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.