* 1930514
* Educating Future Scientists and Mathematicians from Rural and Underserved Regions
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Aaron Zimmerman, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 02/28/2025
* USD 999,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Texas Tech University. Over its five-year duration, this project will
fund four-year scholarships to 38 students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science
degrees in biology, chemistry &amp; biochemistry, geosciences, mathematics &amp;
statistics, or physics &amp; astronomy. This project aims to improve retention
of STEM students from rural areas by combining best practices for retention with
the distinct features and strengths of the rural community. The project seeks to
reshape understandings of the responsibilities of institutions of higher
education with respect to rural communities. It also plans to provide models for
student success that are transportable to other institutions serving these
important communities. Because Texas Tech University is a Hispanic-serving
Institution, this project has the potential to broaden participation and
increase diversity in the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project focuses
on developing a community-based, cross-departmental scholarship program that
supports students from rural areas. It seeks to leverage the strengths of rural
communities through infusing foundational courses in mathematics and research
with examples drawn from rural experiences as well as creating and supporting
research, service-learning, and internship opportunities that are responsive to
rural issues. At the center of the project are case studies designed to capture
nuances of identity, including ethnicity, rurality, and attachment to place and
community, thus targeting the relatively neglected intersection of rurality and
higher education. A conceptual framework rooted in Social Cognitive Career
Theory (SCCT) and informed by Theory of Place is intended to create insights
into the changing demographic of rurality. Project evaluation will provide
formative feedback regarding the effectiveness of recruiting strategies and
program elements as well as summative evaluation of the extent to which the
project meets retention and graduation targets and successfully disseminates
transferable knowledge and strategies. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.