* 1930377
* Integrating Meaningful Practices with Access to Computational Thinking: Towards Increasing the Academic and Career Success of STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Katherine White, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

The Integrating Meaningful Practices with Access to Computational Thinking
(IMPACT) project at Rhodes College aims to increase the academic and career
success of low-income, academically talented students pursuing STEM majors. This
project will recruit and award scholarships to STEM-interested low-income
students. In addition to the scholarships, IMPACT will foster an environment
that promotes academic success, social inclusion, and professional community-
building through a suite of program components, including a first-semester
course on computational thinking and a first-year writing seminar tailored to
effective science writing. Computational thinking and scientific writing skills
are unique and broadly applicable skills that are in high demand in the STEM
workforce and are also highly transferable and broadly applicable to all STEM
fields. Many high school students, particularly those who are from
underrepresented communities, do not have access to computer science learning
opportunities. IMPACT seeks to bridge this gap and generate new knowledge by
determining whether computational thinking skills and training in scientific
writing early in the college career will influence STEM motivational beliefs,
retention rates, persistence in STEM, and post-graduation job placement success.
We expect that the insights gained from the IMPACT program will inform
institutions of higher education across the U.S. about the value of implementing
STEM writing and computational training in their STEM
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMPACT project will recruit and provide
scholarships to eighteen undergraduate students and promote STEM success through
academic coursework and experiences. In addition, the project will build on best
practices, including peer mentoring, tutoring support, living in designated
residential housing, undergraduate research experiences that incorporate
computational thinking, networking events with potential employers, personalized
STEM faculty advisors who use computation in their research, and a variety of
other activities designed to facilitate cohort-building. The aim is to create a
learning community of academically talented students, primarily drawn from the
large pool of low-income, underrepresented high school students in the Memphis,
Tennessee area. IMPACT Scholars will be targeted for recruitment through
multiple creative and engaging outreach events. IMPACT will strengthen the
connection between Scholars and regional employers while exposing them to career
options and opportunities. IMPACT will also provide a replicable, comprehensive,
and supportive network of activities and services aimed at improving academic
achievement, self-efficacy, retention, completion, and employment of students
who traditionally face significant barriers to academic
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.