* 1930415
* Developing Next Generation Leaders in Engineering: Understanding the Role of Engineering Identity Formation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Judy Vondruska, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at South Dakota State University. Over its five-year duration, this project
will fund four-year scholarships to 20 students who are pursuing bachelor's
degree in Civil Engineering, Electrical Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering.
This project aims to improve students' engineering leadership skills while
increasing retention, graduation rates, and diversity among engineering
students. The university will focus recruitment efforts on high school visits
and college fairs, contact with college counselors, outreach programs through
the College of Engineering, and personal contacts between college faculty and
prospective scholars. Each scholar will earn a certificate in engineering
leadership through an engineering leadership seminar series, which begins with a
first-year, one-week summer bridge course and continues each semester through
graduation. Additionally, the project places students in peer mentor groups and
uses faculty mentoring and industry networking to build students' competency and
confidence as engineers and in their career paths. The project will prepare
participating students as role models in the College of Engineering.
Furthermore, it will prepare them to enter the workforce as engineers or pursue
graduate studies. The project addresses the need to develop a diverse and
skilled national STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project will focus on two
questions: How does participation in S-STEM scholar activities affect
'engineering identity' formation in student participants, and how does that
identity affect student persistence? Research questions associated with this
focus are two-fold. First, how do the factors influencing engineering identity
of the supported scholars evolve over time and what contributing factors lead to
this evolution? Second, how do factors influencing development of engineering
identity of the supported scholars compare across the sub-disciplines of
mechanical, electrical and civil engineering? The research will address whether
engineering identity is a measure that can be used to evaluate long-term effects
based on short-term interventions. It will inform the design of engineering
student support activities that influence student persistence and success in
engineering. Additionally, this study will provide evidence of the relationships
between engineering identity and persistence in engineering, and how engineering
identity may be developed specifically in 3rd or 4th year undergraduates.
Differences in the way female and male students develop engineering identity
will be studied with the intent of better defining the specific intervention and
student support activities that are successful in attracting and retaining
female students. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.