* 1930828
* Jitter-Tolerant Multi-Carrier ADC-Based Serial Link Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Sebastian Hoyos, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2023
* USD 390,000.00

The proposed multi-channel schemes in conjunction with the novel reconfigurable
analog-to-digital-converter (ADC) architecture will lead to revolutionary
relaxation of the clock variations and uncertainty caused by induced noise from
the system electronics. The research will produce a broad and long lasting
impact in the design and implementation of communication systems. The result
will be a key to enable future transformative communications and signal
processing applications such as portable fast imaging, wireless networks of
handheld and wearable computing receivers, software-defined radios, cognitive
radio spectrum sensing, millimeter-wave radios for safety (e.g., automotive
collision avoidance radar), homeland security, and national defense. This
project will include an interdisciplinary educational program involving training
of graduate students and outreach activities to foster the representation of
students from underrepresented groups. These activities will also include local,
national, and international short courses and workshop presentations on topics
related to the multidisciplinary research activities. The results of the
proposed research activities will be disseminated broadly in national and
international conferences and publications, and locally via the Trans-Texas
Videoconference Network, which is a system that serves numerous colleges
including eleven campuses of Texas A&amp;M University and K-12 school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever-increasing data rates of modern serial
link transceivers call for innovative architectures capable of overcoming
several critical impairments, such as limited channel bandwidth and clock
jitter, while complying with tight power budgets. Classical mixed-signal and
ADC-based architectures took advantage of semiconductor technology scaling, but
could only provide incremental improvements not able to satisfy the demand of
much higher data rates in future wireline communication systems. This proposal
will investigate a receiver architecture based on a frequency-domain ADC
topology, a special class of analog-to-digital converters that makes an analog-
domain transformation to frequency-domain before realizing quantization. Such
transformation provides a simulated six-time relaxation in clock jitter
requirements and a scalable solution that channelizes the receiver front end in
analog domain. This allows easy reconfiguration to accommodate different data
rates and modulation standards. Such a receiver architecture requires a well-
matched transmitter topology to alleviate the impact of transmitter jitter
across channels and modulation formats. The proposed ADC-based high-speed serial
link design techniques aim to significantly improve jitter robustness and reduce
ADC resolution and digital equalization complexity by utilizing a power-optimum
frequency-channelized ADC-based receiver for symbol detection. The project will
investigate three topics: (1) A novel energy-efficient multi-carrier transmitter
architecture and a new serial link receiver architecture capable of providing
baseband jitter robustness and coherent multi-tone modulation applications,
based on the novel reconfigurable frequency-domain ADC. (2) Novel techniques to
improve the speed and efficiency of a pipeline successive-approximation-register
(SAR) sub-ADC, including a design that utilizes open-loop correlated level-
shifting residue amplification to enable per-channel operation with a scalable
resolution. (3) Efficient digital reconstruction, equalization, and inter-
channel interference filters for symbol detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.