* 1930990
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: STEM PUSH (Pathways for Underrepresented Students to Higher Education) Network
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jan Morrison, University of Pittsburgh
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 9,233,773.00

Diversity in the STEM workforce is essential for expanding the talent pool and
bringing new ideas to bear in solving societal problems, yet entrenched gaps
remain. In STEM higher education, students from certain racial and ethnic groups
continue to be underrepresented in STEM majors and fields. Colleges and
universities have responded by offering precollege STEM programs to high school
students from predominantly underrepresented groups. These programs have been
shown to positively affect students' analytical and critical thinking skills,
STEM content knowledge and exposure, and self-efficacy through STEM-focused
enrichment and research experiences. In fact, salient research suggests that
out-of-school-time, precollege STEM experiences are key influencers in students'
pursuit of STEM majors and careers, and underscore the value of precollege STEM
programs in their ability to prepare students in STEM. This NSF INCLUDES
Alliance: STEM PUSH - Pathways for Underrepresented Students to Higher Education
Network - will form a national network of precollege STEM programs to actualize
their value through the creation, spread and scale of an equitable, evidence-
based pathway for university admissions - precollege STEM program accreditation.
Building on several successful NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch
Pilots, this Alliance will use a networked improvement community approach to
transform college admissions by establishing an accreditation process for
precollege STEM programs in which standards-based credentials serve as
indicators of program quality that are recognized by colleges and universities
as rigorous and worthy of favorable consideration during undergraduate
admissions processes. Given the high enrollment of students from
underrepresented groups in precollege STEM programs, the Alliance endeavors to
broaden participation in STEM by maximizing college access and STEM outcomes in
higher education and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM PUSH Network is a
national alliance of precollege STEM programs, STEM and culturally responsive
pedagogy experts, formal and informal education practitioners, college
admissions professionals, the accreditation sector, and other higher education
representatives. The Alliance will establish a formidable collaborative
improvement space using the networked improvement community model and a "next
generation" accreditation model that will serve as a mechanism for communicating
the power of precollege programs to admissions offices. Framing this work is the
notion that the accreditation of precollege STEM programs is an equitable
supplemental admissions criterion to the current, often cited as a culturally
biased, standardized test score-based system. To achieve its shared vision and
goals, the Alliance has four key objectives: (1) establish and support a
national precollege STEM program networked community, (2) develop a standards-
based precollege STEM program accreditation system to broaden participation in
STEM, (3) test and validate the model within the networked improvement
community, and (4) spread, scale, and sustain the model through its backbone
organization, the STEM Learning Ecosystem Community of Practice. Each objective
will be closely monitored and evaluated by an external evaluator. In addition,
the data infrastructure developed through this Alliance will provide an
unprecedented opportunity to advance scholarship in the fields of networked
improvement community design and development, the efficacy of STEM precollege
programs, and effective practices for broadening participation pathways from
high school to higher education. By the end of five years, the STEM PUSH Network
will transform ten urban ecosystems across the country into communities where
students from underrepresented groups have increased college access and
therefore, entree to STEM opportunities and majors in higher education. The
model has the potential to be replicated by another 80 STEM ecosystems that will
have access to Alliance materials and strategies through the backbone
organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is funded by NSF
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national
initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing
on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at scale. It is
also co-funded by the NSF Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers program and the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.