* 1930744
* Symposium SICB 2020:  How plants vs. animals solve physical problems, Austin, Texas,  January 3-7, 2020
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Ulrike Muller, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award will help defray travel expenses for participants in a symposium and
workshop at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology in Austin, Texas, in January 2020. Plants and animals each have unique
solutions for mechanical problems, including sticking to surfaces, folding,
dispersal, and responding to mechanical loads. Several of these solutions have
been sources for bio-inspiration, such as self-cleaning surfaces inspired by the
lotus leaf. The symposium brings together plant and animal researchers that
tackle similar problems in different systems under the unifying theme of
"biological solutions to mechanical problems that might lead to engineering
applications." A diverse group of researchers will exchange ideas that cross
scales at an exciting frontier of trans-disciplinary research. As part of this
symposium, conference participants will have the opportunity to consult with
science communication experts to showcase their research to the general public
and other stakeholders through effective press releases and social media posts.
Pre-conference and on-site meetings among the symposium presenters will
facilitate collaborations and preparation of scientific manuscripts. This
symposium will result in the publication of original research papers, research
reviews, and perspectives in a special issue of a scientific journal. The
special journal issue will be complemented by a lesson plan for college
instructors to facilitate the use of symposium special issues as textbooks or
supplementary instructional material in their
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants and animals evolved often complex solutions
to the same physical problems. Transferring those solutions into biomimetic
materials and processes comes with new challenges, such as scalability. To
understand and transfer biological solutions to physical problems, an inter-
disciplinary approach that combines research in biology, engineering, and
physics has been used. A road less travelled is to explicitly compare the
evolved solutions of animals and plants, as well as the experimental approaches
used by researchers in these fields, which are two goals of the symposium. The
symposium will foster intellectual exchange among scientists who share a given
research question, yet address it from different angles, using different model
systems and approaches, with a focus on the topics of adhesion, locomotion and
dispersal, and response to mechanical loads. The symposium offers a synthesis of
ideas while highlighting the work of diverse, emerging investigators from the US
and abroad. The symposium will include a workshop on public outreach, which will
help scientists to promote their research to the public. Additional engagement
opportunities will be provided during online breakout discussions and networking
sessions. Professional networking and collaborations will be facilitated as
scientists produce career-relevant deliverables, such as scientific publications
(original articles, a more historical review article and a forward-looking
perspective article focusing on remaining challenges and urgent areas of
inquiry) and products that support dissemination to the public (press releases,
blog posts, podcasts, social media posts). Additionally, the symposium
organizers will collaborate with educational experts to develop an educational
module based on using the symposium publications as a textbook or textbook
supplement in courses on comparative physiology, comparative biomechanics,
biomimetics, and integrative biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.