* 1930014
* Investigating formation and modification of the continental lithosphere in eastern North America - integrating seismic and geologic data sets
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 503,620.00

The Wilson cycle paradigm is central to many models for the growth and
modification of continental lithosphere (the crust and mantle parts of the
tectonic plates) on Earth. The cycle involves the closing of ocean basins,
collision of continents, rifting of continents, and formation of new ocean
basins. Eastern North America provides a complete record of the eastward growth
of the continent from the breakup of supercontinent Rodinia through the assembly
of supercontinent Pangea to the formation of the modern Atlantic Ocean. The
region provides a superb opportunity to advance our understanding of continental
growth and evolution through geologic time, and has been used as a type section
and model of plate tectonics for decades. Although the surface boundaries
between former continental fragments are increasingly well known, a persistent
question involves the timing and processes involved with the growth and
stabilization of the deeper parts of the continental lithosphere. The overall
goal of this project is to integrate high-resolution geophysical and geological
data in order to build a truly four-dimensional (space and time) model for the
growth of continental crust and mantle lithosphere in this classic region. The
density and distribution of seismic stations are excellent, including the
EarthScope Transportable Array, the Eastern North American Margin Community
Seismic Experiment, and many long-running permanent seismic stations. This
proposal aims to investigate the characteristics of continental lithosphere in
eastern North America, to identify boundaries of distinct tectonic units
(microplates), and to address long-standing open questions about the tectonic
history of this region. New models and hypotheses developed in this project will
have wide implications for character of the North American continent, the nature
of the deep crust and mantle, and our understanding of continental growth and
evolution in general. The project will support the career development of an
early-career female geoscientist and help the development of a new seismology
group at UMass Amherst. Expansion of seismology research and teaching has
outstanding potential to attract undergraduate and graduate students at the
Five-College Geology Consortium. It will support training of undergraduate and
graduate students at UMass. More broadly, the outcome of this project will be
integrated into a two-week Summer Seismology Education Workshop, targeting for
the five-college undergraduate students. Findings from this project will be
introduced to 8th-12th grade girls through the Girls Inc. Eureka! Program (a
national organization), a strong STEM-based collaboration between Girls Inc. of
Holyoke, MA and UMass. Surficial geologic compilations will be uploaded and made
available to schools, colleges, and universities throughout the east coast for
critiques, collaboration, and educational use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to associate the interior structure of the eastern North American
lithosphere with its tectonic history, and to draw broad inferences for the
nature of continental assembly and modification. Specifically, this proposal
will address the following scientific questions: (1) What is continental
lithosphere? Can we identify distinct lithospheric blocks and intra-lithospheric
boundaries? What are the origins of the boundary structures? (2) What/where are
the major crustal terrane boundaries and can these be interpreted in terms of
collision (thickening) and extension/exhumation of the orogen? To what extent
can geological boundaries be extended to depth? When were the major terranes
added to the North American continent? To address these questions, the project
will develop a comprehensive seismic model of the crust and mantle lithosphere
in eastern North America. An advanced wave propagation simulation and inversion
will provide a powerful way to constrain the three-dimensional seismic features
of the continental lithosphere. Teleseismic receiver function analysis will be
used to identify and delineate sharp velocity/density discontinuities. Laterally
variable and depth-dependent anisotropy will be resolved with receiver
functions, and used to highlight patterns of lithospheric deformation.
Compilation and synthesis of existing geological data sets, and collection of
new surface rock samples will complement the seismic component. A systematic
integration of geological, geochronological and geochemical data sets will
inform a re-assessment of the tectonic framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.