* 1930093
* A Multiscale Computational Analysis of Defect-assisted Ionic Transport in Plastically Deformed Solid Oxides
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,04/30/2023
* Liming Xiong, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2023
* USD 488,250.00

Solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) directly converts fossil fuel into electricity
introducing no pollution but water into the environment. This technology has
been developing rapidly but is still limited in practical use due to its high
operating temperature. Reducing the SOFC operation temperature towards its
widespread applications has triggered an intensive search of super ionic
conducting solid oxides. Introducing defects, such as dislocations, into certain
oxides has been demonstrated to be promising in achieving a considerably high
ionic conductivity at low temperature but this technique is still in a "trial
and error" stage due to lack of knowledge on how ions hop under the effects of
the defect-induced stress field in plastically deformed solid oxides. To meet
this need, this award supports fundamental research on computer simulations of
ions hopping in defected solid oxides, across a wide range of length scales. The
gained knowledge may be utilized in the development of not only low temperature
SOFCs, but also lithium/sodium-ion batteries, perovskite solar cells, corrosion-
resistant materials for medical implants, and radiation-resistant materials for
nuclear power plants. This project is multidisciplinary in nature. The
participating students will be exposed to a broad range of scientific knowledge,
methodology, and skills. A mentoring program that links the education of
graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students will be fostered.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high operation temperature in SOFC stems from the high
ion migration barrier (~1eV) in solid oxides. Distinct from traditional
approaches that overcome this barrier by exposing the materials to an elevated
temperature, this project presents a plan on promoting ionic transport using
severe stress localizations in plastically deformed solid oxides. The local
stress's contribution to the ion migration barrier reduction will be quantified
through a series of concurrent atomistic-continuum (CAC) simulations.
Polycrystalline strontium titanate and multilayered strontium titanate
/magnesium oxide containing a high density of grain boundaries (GBs) and phase
boundaries (PBs) will be chosen as the model materials. The CAC simulations will
bridge the relevant length scales through resolving the GBs and PBs at an
atomistic resolution while the dislocations away from them will be dealt in a
coarse-grained description. This will enable a prediction of the microscopic-
level ionic transport in strained solid oxides without smearing out the
atomistic nature of ion hopping near the material defects. Data and insights
regarding diffusion under stress, which controls the kinetics of phase
transformations, oxidation, creep, and many other engineering processes in solid
materials, will be generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.