* 1930277
* Cellulose Nanocrystal-enabled Manufacturing of Carbon Nanotube/Carbon fiber Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Lisa Perez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 10/31/2024
* USD 515,435.00

Composite material systems are manufactured by mixing and binding reinforcement
materials into a matrix to realize desirable properties such as lightweight and
high strength. There are many processing methods to incorporate reinforcement
materials, such as carbon fibers and carbon nanotubes, into polymer matrices but
most result in lower-than-expected properties due to poor dispersion and weak
adhesion. This research establishes a new manufacturing process, based on
cellulose nanocrystals, that integrates pristine nanomaterials into the polymer
matrix without the need for extensive chemical or processing efforts. The new
process enables the production of nanostructured hybrid polymer matrix
composites at large scale with desired structure and performance with fewer
processing steps, leading to economic manufacturing of these structures with
impact to the U.S. aerospace, automotive, marine and defense industries. This
research is an interdisciplinary effort that involves processing and
manufacturing science, materials science, and chemistry and trains the next
generation of highly skilled engineers for the U.S. workforce and provides
unique research opportunities for women and underrepresented minority groups in
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to their superior properties, carbon
nanotubes (CNTs) and carbon fibers (CFs) have been extensively used to create
nanostructures in polymer matrix composites (PMCs). There are various synthesis
and processing techniques to integrate CNTs/CFs in PMCs. However, these
techniques generally face a number of hurdles such as poor dispersion, weak
interfacial and interlayer adhesion, lack of control on structure formation and
lack of scalability. Particularly, the current lack of understanding in
nanoscale interactions and lack of capability to tailor these interactions have
decelerated manufacturing of hybrid nanostructured PMCs with tailorable
performance. This project aims to fill this knowledge gap by providing
fundamental understanding of how nanostructures are formed from molecular-level
interactions and how they are translated into interfacial bonding and
interlaminar strength in nanostructured hybrid PMCs. The new knowledge generated
in this research leads to a new processing science where assisting
nanomaterials, i.e. cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs), are employed to harness the
architecture of hybrid composites without the need for costly and time-consuming
processing. The research team performs density functional theory and molecular
dynamics calculations in conjunction with experimental spectroscopy and
characterization to test the hypothesis that CNCs dictate the molecular
interactions and determine the formation of microstructure at micro- and meso-
scales in nanostructured CNT/CF polymer composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.