* 1930886
* Collaborative Research: The aerodynamic and metabolic costs and benefits of flow interactions in bird flight
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Tyson Hedrick, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 12/31/2023
* USD 339,437.00

Recent field studies of flight mechanics in birds of several types and sizes
have revealed more use of environmental energy (e.g. gusts, wakes and updrafts)
to power flight than was previously believed to be the case. However, because
the detailed studies of the aerodynamics, flight costs and flight mechanics of
birds have been carried out in wind tunnels with smooth, steady air flow, little
is known about how birds take advantage of unsteady flow patterns. In this
project the researchers will fill this gap in understanding by measuring the
energetic cost of flight, the aerodynamics, and the flapping motion of birds in
a wind tunnel, comparing smooth flow conditions to 4 different unsteady flow
cases. This study will also test the use of body-mounted accelerometers to serve
as a proxy measure of the energetic cost of flight over the same wide range of
flow conditions, enabling more accurate field studies. This research will add to
basic understanding of aerodynamics in unsteady flows and the ecology and
evolution of small birds. Pursuing this project requires an interdisciplinary
combination of biology and engineering. To further the educational goals of this
project, it includes a Research Experience for Undergraduates component. In this
sub-program, Biology and Engineering undergraduates from around the nation apply
for a summer research fellowship to work on the project. Selected students will
assist with the main project and pursue a sub-project of their own design with
the assistance of the rest of the project team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project the PI and Co-PIs will apply state-of-the-art metabolic aerodynamic and
accelerometry measurements to understand the energetic costs or benefits for
interactions between birds and potentially beneficial flow structures, along
with the underlying aerodynamic mechanisms that give rise to the metabolic
outcomes. Flow patterns will be generated using an actuated airfoil capable of
producing organized non-steady flows with independently variable frequency,
magnitude and direction, allowing us to precisely delineate potentially
beneficial environmental flows. Accelerometry results will be compared to
aerodynamic and metabolic results to investigate the feasibility of using
accelerometry as a proxy for energy expenditure in flight across a wide range of
flight speeds and airflow patterns. Broader impacts from this study focus on a
Research Experience for Undergraduates program whereby nationally recruited
Biology and Engineering or Physics undergraduates will be trained in
interdisciplinary research and collaboration while they assist with the main
project goals and, in consultation with the rest of the team, design and execute
their own sub-project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the BIO-
IOS-Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the ENG-CBET-Fluid
Dynamics Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.