* 1930308
* Pathway to Professions in the Biosciences: A Community College and University Partnership for STEM Degree Completion
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Kimberly Babbitt, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 11/30/2024
* USD 999,558.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Great Bay Community College and the University of New Hampshire. Over
its five-year duration, this project will provide two-year scholarships to 30
students who transfer from Great Bay Community College to the University of New
Hampshire. The scholarships will support the students during the final two years
of their Bachelor of Science degree programs in life sciences. The project aims
to increase student persistence in life sciences by connecting scholarship
support with other support mechanisms including mentorship, an academic learning
community centered on professional development, and an experiential learning
component related to students' career interests. The project will also further
knowledge about how different learning experiences and supports affect the self-
efficacy and career decisions of low-income community college students. This
project has the potential to contribute to improving the national bioscience
enterprise and increasing the diversity of the bioscience
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in STEM fields.
The project aims to increase the number of students who complete their associate
degree at the community college level, matriculate to the four-year university,
and complete their bachelor's degree in a life sciences field. Self-efficacy and
professional development experiences are known to increase student persistence
in STEM degrees. However, little is known about how these factors affect
transfer students, especially those from non-traditional academic backgrounds.
This project will investigate how the activities of this project affect
development of students' self-efficacy. Specifically, this project has the
potential to advance the understanding about how a professional learning
community and formal mentorship influence community college transfer students'
academic self-efficacy, their perceptions of the social supports related to
degree completion and their career goals, and how a study abroad experience
influences low-income students' academic self-efficacy and career goals. This
project will be evaluated using adaptive, formative and summative mixed-methods
with information from interviews and surveys, and quantitative data collected
from students, faculty, and the leadership team. Results of this project will be
made available through three mechanisms: 1) locally within the University and
Community College communities at local annual research conferences, and through
invited seminars; 2) regionally through STEM education research groups in
northern New England through seminars, webinar events, and annual gatherings;
and 3) nationally, to the broader STEM education research community through
presentations at conferences such as the annual Association of American Colleges
and Universities Transforming Undergraduate STEM Education meeting, and the NSF
S-STEM conference. Results will be submitted for publication in peer-reviewed
journal such as Life Sciences Education and the Journal of Biology Education.
This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.