* 1930184
* Navigating Pathways to Success: Improving Outcomes for Rural Community College STEM Scholars through Mentoring and Comprehensive Interventions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Lukas Winfield, Cape Cod Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 649,997.00

Millions of STEM jobs are projected to go unfilled in the future. For low-
income, rural, diverse students, a community college can be the only accessible
entry point for higher education, a gateway to STEM careers. Unfortunately,
these students face complex barriers that decrease their ability to pursue and
successfully complete STEM programs. Over five years, Cape Cod Community
College's S-STEM program will fund over fifty scholarships to academically
talented students with demonstrated financial need in its engineering, computer
science, mathematics, and science programs. In addition to financial support,
the STEM Scholars program will employ evidence-based strategies of effective
mentoring, academic support, cohort-building, and other interventions to help
Scholars persist, transfer to four-year degree programs, and prepare them for
STEM careers. To achieve program goals, the college will work with regional high
schools and transfer universities. The project will focus on increasing access
and entry for low-income, rural, and diverse students initially into STEM
programs and then into well-paid, in-demand STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals are to increase recruitment,
retention, completion, and transfer rates in STEM programs among students who
are academically talented and have demonstrated financial need. Evidence-based,
comprehensive interventions will be used to promote student success. Students
will start by attending a cohort-based orientation designed to develop a shared
sense of purpose and community. Faculty mentors will have frequent meetings with
students to provide career-focused advising, connect students with resources,
and discuss any academic or personal issues that may put student success at-
risk. In addition, students will participate in scheduled study groups,
tutoring, and supplemental instruction. Transfer advising and visits to transfer
universities will be initiated during each student's first term. To support STEM
profession exploration, the project will offer industry partner mentoring,
industry speaker panels, visits to industry job sites, internship and job
shadowing opportunities, and attendance at professional conferences. To create a
cohort and a sense of connection, the project will offer opportunities for
students to socialize and participate in group identity-building activities.
Finally, this project will fund scholarships to address student need. As part of
their efforts, the project team will seek to determine which activities have the
most impact on student retention, completion, and transfer in STEM programs,
particularly among rural students, and why. Dissemination of results will take
place in publications, online, and through conferences. This project furthers
the goals of the NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program by increasing the number of low-income academically talented
students who earn degrees in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.