* 1930221
* Increasing Retention and Graduation of Students in Civil Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Vellore Gopalaratnam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/2024
* USD 959,547.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated engineers by
supporting the recruitment, retention, and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. Over its five-year duration,
the project will provide two-year scholarships to 24 undergraduate and 8
graduate (Masters) students at the University of Missouri. Scholars will pursue
Bachelor or Master of Science degrees in Civil Engineering. During their first
and second years, undergraduate Scholars will receive comprehensive support in a
set of eight required foundational courses, including calculus, basic sciences,
and engineering analysis. The Missouri Department of Transportation, HDR
Engineering, Inc., and Kiewit Construction will provide Scholars with
internship, co-op, and job-shadowing opportunities to expand students' workforce
training and experience. Scholars will receive additional institutional support
during their junior and senior years. Optional research with faculty mentors
will create opportunities for scholars to transition to University of Missouri
graduate programs in civil engineering. Graduate Scholars will work with faculty
advisors on research projects that study smart and sustainable infrastructure
systems. As a component of its broader impact, this project will build a lasting
institutional infrastructure and networks that will continue to generate new
knowledge about how to support the success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
entry of students into the STEM workforce or graduate study. The intellectual
merit of this project includes its development of a comprehensive approach for
early, active support of undergraduates in foundational engineering courses.
This approach is expected to result in increased persistence and timely
graduation of students with degrees in civil engineering, thus preparing
students to excel in the STEM workforce or graduate studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need to obtain degrees in civil engineering and enter the workforce or
graduate programs in STEM fields. The recruitment effort will emphasize first-
time-college students, underrepresented minorities, females, and transfer
students, thus providing a diverse cohort with the opportunity to enter and
successfully graduate with an ABET-accredited civil engineering degree. Specific
objectives include: (i) providing undergraduates with early intervention and
comprehensive support in foundational courses; (ii) generating knowledge to
advance the understanding of how factors and evidence-based curricular and co-
curricular activities affect student success, retention, transfer,
academic/career pathways, and graduation in STEM; (iii) mentoring undergraduate
scholars to matriculate into the Universityâ€™s graduate civil engineering
program; and, (iv) sustaining all of the objectives beyond the award period by
building institutional capacity for support of academically high-performing
students from low-income backgrounds. The project intends to implement a
synergistic strategy for student success that builds on existing institutional
resources and develops new project-specific support mechanisms, including early
assessment and timely intervention. Knowledge generation efforts will advance
understanding of self-efficacy, cognitive and non-cognitive aspects of student
experiences and success measures, and "sense of community" indicators. The
project will include an investigation of how these evidence-based practices and
synergistic strategies affect student outcomes. Both internal and external
evaluations include formative and summative assessments to enable ongoing
project improvement and to determine the effectiveness of the approaches used.
This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need to earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.