* 1930371
* Supporting Undergraduate STEM Degree Completion Through a Learning Community/Cohort Model that Develops Belonging, Mindset, and Purpose
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Carol Pride, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,997.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, the project will support 30 students at
Savannah State University, a Historically Black College/University. Two cohorts
of 15 students will receive four-year scholarships to pursue baccalaureate STEM
degrees in natural sciences, mathematics, and STEM technology. By linking
scholarships with early support and community building, the project aims to
increase student persistence and graduation in their STEM major through building
students' academic mindset, purpose, and belonging within STEM. The project will
implement a Learning Community/Cohort Model to engage Scholars within the STEM
and University communities. These intentional efforts to engage Scholars will
begin in their first-year of college and continue through graduation. Learning
community activities will include shared classes, residence halls, study halls,
tutoring, workshops, and social activities. Personalized activities to provide
individual support will include early immersion in STEM courses, mentoring,
intrusive advisement, undergraduate research experiences, and participation in
discipline-specific conferences. With guidance from mentors, the students will
develop Personal Development Plans outlining their career goals and the
necessary steps to achieve those goals. Because more than 90% of students at
Savannah State University are from underrepresented groups, this project has the
potential to broaden participation in STEM fields and to learn how early cohort-
based interventions support retention and graduation of this student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in STEM fields.
There are two specific objectives: 1) recruit, retain, and support 30
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need; and 2) develop
an academic support program that has been validated by evaluation of program
outcomes and findings from the research study. While the efficacy of First-year
Learning Communities and Early Engagement are well established, less is known
about how these practices build belonging, purpose, and a productive mindset in
STEM students, including those from underrepresented groups. The project will
build on preliminary data from University's coordinated efforts with the
University System of Georgia's "Complete College Georgia Momentum Year
Initiative," which focuses on first-year curricular reforms to improve
undergraduate retention and graduation rates. The project will measure the 30
scholars' academic and extracurricular milestones and outcomes against program
objectives, and growth in the scholars' mindset, purpose, and belonging. The
Scholars' results will be compared to a randomly selected control group of non-
Scholars who have similar characteristics. Results of this project will be made
available through scholarly publications, as well as local, regional, and
national presentations. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.