* 1930149
* Next-generation, feedback-responsive cell factories for recombinant protein manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 386,866.00

Proteins are used to treat a wide variety of diseases. These include several
cancers, kidney failure and rheumatoid arthritis, to name a few. Production of
therapeutic proteins has increased dramatically over the last decade and is
expected to continue to rise for the next decade as treatments are developed for
a larger number of diseases. Most of these proteins are produced from mammalian
cells, which are the most capable of producing proteins with activity in humans.
However, they are also limited in their ability to manufacture protein at large
scale. This project will evaluate a number of strategies designed to increase
protein production in mammalian cells. Education and training opportunities will
target high school teachers and students from the Greater Houston area. This
will enhance and diversify the pipeline of a STEM-ready
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many complex recombinant proteins are
manufactured in mammalian cells. The yield depends both on cell productivity and
cell growth. Overexpression of recombinant proteins causes the accumulation of
misfolded proteins and proteotoxic stress. These, in turn, lead to activation of
a global response that may ultimately inhibit protein synthesis and reduce cell
viability. This response culminates in the stimulation of protein degradation.
The fate of the cell depends on the relative rates of activation of the
signaling pathways involved in the response. The project team will use a
recently-developed in-house technology to monitor gene expression with high
sensitivity and dynamic resolution. Expression of markers of the protein quality
control system upon overexpression of representative recombinant proteins will
be profiled. Results will be used to generate strategies to remodel the stress
response pathway, enhance quality control, and delay cell death in cells
expressing high levels of recombinant proteins. Because of the fundamental role
of the stress response in maintaining cellular homeostasis, results from this
study will impact the design of a variety of cell engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.