* 1930374
* Collaborating to Support the Success of Community College Transfer Students in Engineering, Mathematics, and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Audrey Meador, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,978.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over five years, this project will fund two-year scholarships to 45
community college transfer students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Computer Science, Engineering, or Mathematics. This project will collaborate
with community college leadership, faculty, and advisors to recruit transfer
students, particularly women in computer science. Through strategies such as
advising and peer-led team learning, the project expects to decrease the time to
graduation of students who transfer from community colleges to the University.
The project's research and evaluation will contribute to the body of knowledge
regarding how to support the success of community college transfer
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project has three objectives: (i) recruit Computer Science,
Engineering, or Mathematics students at community colleges to transfer to West
Texas A&amp;M University; (ii) increase the academic achievement of these
students following transfer; and (iii) develop efficient pathways from community
college into four-year institutions. Student recruitment will be accomplished
through personal contact at community college campuses, engaging community
college students in co-curricular opportunities, and collaborative professional
development between University and community college faculty. Scholars will be
engaged in a peer-led team learning program, which will help to integrate the
Scholars into the University's pre-professional STEM communities. Scholars will
have the opportunity to be involved with interdisciplinary research projects
under the guidance and mentorship of faculty and industry professionals. In
addition, the project will provide continuous academic advising of Scholars,
from community college enrollment through graduation with a Bachelor of Science
degree. This project intends to increase understanding of the factors that
influence pathways to graduation for community college transfer students in
Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics. The models developed through
this project have the potential to be used by other universities to recruit,
retain, and increase academic success of community college transfer students in
STEM fields. Consequently, results will be broadly disseminated locally and
nationally through existing partnerships, peer reviewed publications in STEM
education journals, and presentations at professional conferences focused on
transfer student success. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.