* 1930402
* Urban Sustainability Engineering Fellows: Catalyzing Cultural Transformation in Matriculation Pathways from Community College to Bachelor's Degree Completion
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Michelle Maher, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2024
* USD 996,899.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund four-year scholarships
to 56 students at the University of Missouri-Kansas City and Metropolitan
Community College. The scholarships will support the Scholars' pursuit of
bachelor's degrees in mechanical or civil engineering. The project will seek to
offer a well-rounded scholarship program that supports successful transition of
students from Metropolitan Community College into the Department of Civil and
Mechanical Engineering at the University of Missouri-Kansas City. The program
will be designed to develop a culture of inclusive participation within the
Department of Civil and Mechanical Engineering and enhance the success of urban
students in obtaining bachelor's degrees in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. This program will include three integrated
components focused on issues related to the urban core of Kansas City, which
includes Metropolitan Community College, the University of Missouri-Kansas City,
and the Kansas City Public School District. The curricular component will
include Mindset Calculus Labs I and II, Introduction to Engineering Research,
Cornerstone Design to Renew the Urban Core, and Capstone Design to Renew the
Urban Core. The co-curricular support component will include research and
leadership experiences. The cultural support component will include student-led
governance, close collaboration with industry and urban community stakeholders,
inter- and intra-cohort shared experiences, and faculty reflection on student-
centered pedagogies. The individual program components will be organized around
a unifying them of supporting the urban core of Kansas City. Data will be
collected to conduct a longitudinal, mixed-method analysis of change in
departmental culture from the student, faculty, staff, and administrative
perspective. The change in persistence, engineering identity, engineering career
aspiration, and academic motivation of urban community college engineering
transfer students will also be analyzed. Matriculation of engineering students
from community colleges to four-year institutions is a pathway with great
potential to increase equity in STEM higher education. The comprehensive
strategy developed in this project may provide a model for sustaining successful
matriculation and graduation of transfer students that could be adopted by other
urban institutions of higher learning. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.