* 1930387
* Preparing Academically Talented Students with Financial Need to be the Next Generation of Engineering Professionals by Fostering Innovation and Leadership Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Bala Ram, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,844.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need in the College of Engineering at North Carolina A&amp;T State University.
An HBCU, NC A&amp;T is the largest producer of African-American undergraduate
engineers and fifth in the nation for the percentage of undergraduate women
engineering graduates. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund four-
year scholarships to 22 students who are pursuing one of nine undergraduate
engineering programs in the College of Engineering. These include architectural,
bio(medical), biological, civil, chemical, computer, electrical, industrial
&amp; systems, and mechanical engineering, and computer science. The project
will expand the current pipeline of students with a focus on rural areas. A
structured process will develop innovation and leadership in students beginning
in the early stages of their academic careers. Cohort-based creative learning
experiences will connect to the nationally recognized Engineering Grand
Challenges Scholars Program and leadership development. Authentic experiential
learning will be promoted through mentoring and interdisciplinary experiences.
The project will provide training in innovation and leadership and will
encourage global and cross-cultural perspectives. It will also foster the
development of social consciousness through service learning. An Engineering
Leadership belt recognition system will be formalized and extended to impact a
broad range of students at NC A&amp;T and support other funded student
development efforts. Coupled with the national trend in engineering colleges
toward innovation and entrepreneurship, this project has the potential to
develop leaders and broadly introduce a shared core leadership competency to
students nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. This combination of innovation and leadership
is expected to promote academic motivation and performance. It is also expected
to stimulate entrepreneurship knowledge and interest in socially relevant
solutions. This premise is rooted in published research regarding under-served
populations as well as nationally changing student personas. An adaptable model
termed "Learn-Do-Lead" will be structured and evaluated. The model will
facilitate the execution of any student growth initiative, in our case
innovation, within a consistent leadership development context. The project will
strive to identify the content and pedagogy that will most impact innovation and
leadership. It also seeks to understand impact on student performance,
motivation, and entrepreneurial knowledge, as well as assess institutional
integration methods for sustainability. Results will be disseminated through
professional conferences and engineering education professional journals, as
well as workshops, seminars, and other training opportunities. This project is
funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.