* 1930777
* Research: Practices of Engineers in Rural Schools Involving Students and Teachers (PERSIST) in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kathleen Hill, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 402,164.00

A more diverse group of engineers must be recruited and retained in order to
address complex global challenges in the future. Students from rural areas often
acquire STEM skills as they play, work on farms, or design solutions to day-to-
day problems, but the current educational system often fails to help these
students make connections between the engineering they do and engineering as a
potential career. Rural students, therefore make up a significant population
that can add to the diversity and numbers of engineers able to address these
problems, but teachers in these schools rarely have experience with engineering,
and struggle to teach engineering to students. In response to recent reforms in
STEM education, including mandates for elementary classrooms to teach
engineering, curriculum and professional development opportunities are being
developed to help schools in these reforms. But the ways teachers learn about,
and subsequently teach, engineering has been understudied. The findings of this
project will be used to make specific and generalizable recommendations to
teacher educators about facilitating engineering professional development
workshops for rural, middle-level teachers and to teachers about how to use
locally relevant problems and classroom projects to help students learn about
engineering and view engineering as a viable and fulfilling career
option.&lt;br/&gt; Engineering studies suggest that content and practices are
learned through social interactions among students and teachers participating in
engineering projects situated within a complex classroom culture. Faculty from
the Center for Science and the Schools and a STEM-education graduate student
will systematically follow three case study teachers from one small, rural
school district in situ as they learn and do engineering projects in two teacher
workshops and then in their classrooms as they implement these projects in their
classrooms, using local funds of knowledge and focusing on engaging students in
the epistemic practices of engineers to increase student learning, interest and
excitement. A mixed-methods approach is being used to synthesize the findings of
both qualitative and quantitative data. Quantitative methods are employed to
better understand science and engineering learning and student interest using
psychometric instruments developed through other funded projects. However, the
sociocultural perspective requires qualitative methods of interactional
ethnography to study these processes in situ. Between and within case
qualitative analyses of classroom and workshop video, interviews, reflective
journals, and work artifacts will be used to drive dissemination to precollege
engineering educators, practitioners, state government officials, and
participants in a STEM ecosystem for rural areas in Pennsylvania. In addition to
the three case study teachers, 42 teacher from rural, underserved schools will
be invited to participate in the workshops and will form an online community of
practice aimed to support their ongoing implementation of engineering projects
in their middle level classrooms, potentially impacting thousands of students
over the next several years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.