* 1930532
* Multidisciplinary Data Science Education to Prepare STEM Students for Data Science Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Bryan Hill, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Arkansas. Over its five-year duration, this project
will fund three-year scholarships to 30 students who have an interest in data
science and are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in the following STEM
disciplines: Data Science; Biological Sciences; Biomedical Engineering; Computer
Science and Computer Engineering; Geological Science; Industrial Engineering;
and Mathematics. The project takes a novel, multidisciplinary approach that
focuses on building data science skills among cohorts of students who have
different STEM majors. Scholars will participate in project activities designed
to develop data science skills and prepare them for careers in the field,
including a summer data science boot camp and a data innovation challenge. The
project aims to benefit low-income STEM students and contribute to the data
science workforce in Northwest Arkansas. Arkansas is currently ranked 45th per
capita in Bachelor of Science degrees in scientific and engineering fields and
is unable to meet the State's STEM labor needs. This project aims to help fill
workforce gaps, as well as to support Arkansas' goal of becoming a new regional
STEM technology center for economic development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Scholars
will have access to peer mentoring, a weekly social event, and a bi-monthly
speaker series will provide opportunities for networking, support, and
professional development. In addition, they will participate in a two-week
summer boot camp to introduce the academic foundations of data science and take
a set of courses designed to develop professional data science skills. Scholars
will further develop and apply their data science skills in a data innovation
competition, in internships or summer research opportunities, and in a knowledge
rotation that allows Scholars to shadow faculty who are using data science in
their work. The project includes an educational research study that aims to
determine the academic, personal, and/or psychological factors that are most
related to program enrollment, retention, graduation time-to-completion, and
career outcomes in the field of data science. In addition, the project will
study the following two research questions: (1) Do students' perceptions of
their math-related ability, data science utility value, interest in data
science, and their theory of intelligence beliefs predict enrollment,
performance, retention, and graduation in the data science coursework series?
and (2) Does participation in project activities account for improved retention,
course success, graduation rates, and career/advanced study outcomes? To better
understand who enrolls in the program and who persists to completion, the
project will assess Scholar interest, perceived ability, utility value, and
theory of intelligence. The results obtained in this project will be used to
develop a model that can account for variability in retention and graduation of
low-income Scholars versus other low-income STEM students. These models can then
be applied to develop additional retention programs for low-income STEM
students. The knowledge generated by this project has the potential to inform
the growing number of data science programs in colleges and universities across
the nation and world. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.