* 1930295
* Increasing Enrollment, Retention, Graduation, and Job Placement by Supporting the Connections of Commuter STEM Undergraduates to Faculty, Peers, and Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2024
* Darryl Aucoin, Caldwell University Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 11/30/2024
* USD 650,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for highly skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. To do so, it will support the
retention and graduation of eighteen high-achieving, low-income undergraduate
students with demonstrated financial need at Caldwell University. The project
focuses on supporting the needs of STEM students who live off campus and commute
to college. The project will provide two-year scholarships to two cohorts of
nine undergraduates who major in biology, chemistry, or mathematics. In addition
to scholarships, the project will provide the Scholars with enhanced academic
supports and increased opportunities to interact with faculty and peers, as well
as with practicing STEM professionals. The project team will study how well
these opportunities help commuter students develop meaningful relationships with
resident students and with faculty. The project will generate new knowledge
about the impact of supplemental instruction on commuter students' science
identity, retention, degree attainment, and career choices. These findings may
help other colleges and universities across the country better support the
success of STEM undergraduates who commute to campus.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
project has three objectives: 1) increase the number of students enrolled in
biology, chemistry, or mathematics by enrolling a total of eighteen Scholars; 2)
provide additional academic student support for Scholars, and increase and
enhance interactions between faculty and Scholars; and 3) graduate 78% of
Scholars in four years and have 90% of Scholars accepted into STEM graduate
programs or professional positions within six months of graduation. The project
will build on Caldwell University's current recruitment, outreach, and summer
programs, as well as on existing industry connections. Faculty will support
Scholars through mentoring relationships and weekly virtual office hours.
Industry will support Scholars through an extended weekly first-year seminar and
internships. Peers will support Scholars through weekly supplemental
instruction, peer mentoring, and a collaborative learning space designed to help
commuter students meet other like-minded students. The program will investigate
how supplemental instruction enhances the development of students' science
identity by examining student attendance, student reflections, and semi-
structured interviews with supplemental instruction leaders. Results of the
project will be broadly disseminated, thus contributing to current knowledge
about how to support the success of undergraduate STEM commuter students. This
project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.