* 1930099
* REU Site: Tropical Ecology and Evolution at El Verde Field Station, Puerto Rico
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Luis Ramirez-Ulate, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2023
* USD 245,459.00

This REU Site award to the University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, PR, will support
the training of eight students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2016 - 2020.
Research is conducted at El Verde Field Station, located at El Yunque National
Forest in Puerto Rico. The program focuses on Tropical Ecology and Evolution --
the study of plant population biology, stream ecology and aquatic insect
dynamics, forest ecology, arthropod biology, and coevolution in tropical
rainforest. El Verde is the base of operations of the program and of many
tropical researchers and the Luquillo LTER program. Students develop independent
projects under the advice of faculty mentors, spending most of their time
conducting research and attending seminars and workshops on scientific data
analysis and techniques to study tropical systems. The program also provides
workshops on relevant topics, such as graduate school application process. A
responsible conduct in science component is also provided to discuss issues
commonly encountered by students during their careers. Student selection is
based on their research interest, academic record, and potential for outstanding
research in biological sciences. The project PI makes a short list and mentors
make the final selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of
40 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, will be
trained in the program. This program focuses on students with interest in
ecological research and in pursuing graduate studies. Students will learn how
research is conducted, many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences, and some will publish their work in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A common web-based assessment tool used by all
REU programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure (Directorate
for Biological Sciences) will be used to determine the effectiveness of the
training program. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine student career paths. Students will be asked to respond to an
automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. Applications are accepted
starting in December every year. More information is available by visiting
http://reu.ites.upr.edu/ or by contacting the PI (Dr. Ramirez at
reu@ites.upr.edu).