* 1930196
* Developing STEM Leaders
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Charisse Nixon, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, this project will provide four-year
scholarships to 40 students and three-year scholarships to 20 students. This
funding will support students' pursuit of B.S. degrees in natural and physical
sciences, computer science, engineering, engineering technology, and
mathematics. This project aims to improve retention and graduation rates of
students in these STEM fields by revising introductory mathematics courses,
providing access to a living learning community and mentoring, and providing
multi-year support for goal setting and career planning. The project also seeks
to generate new knowledge regarding strategies the promote STEM students'
academic achievement, resilience, and mindset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. It seeks to assist
students throughout their college-to-career trajectory. Initially, the project
aims to provide accurate placement into introductory mathematics courses that
are to be redesigned to promote a growth mindset. Project activities are
informed by social cognitive career theory and include career-focused seminars,
a course in leadership development, and annual reflection on and revision of
personal and career goals. The project also seeks to draw upon a large alumni
network of STEM professionals and an existing pool of undergraduate STEM leaders
to create a structured mentoring program aligned with a growth mindset approach.
The knowledge generation component of the project involves a quasi-experimental
longitudinal research design to investigate links between key outcomes (academic
achievement, persistence in STEM major, growth mindset, resilience, self-
efficacy and sense of belonging) and participation in program elements. Data
will be collected via surveys, focus groups, and institutional records. The
project specifically acknowledges the pivotal role of mathematics in the STEM
curriculum and aims to examine mathematical resilience and mathematics self-
efficacy in the context of the revised mathematics courses. Project evaluation
will provide formative feedback and summative assessment via tracking the degree
to which the project activities are implemented according to plan and benchmarks
for recruiting and retention are reached. The evaluation will also provide
independent oversight for the research study. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.