* 1930406
* Improving Professional and Scientific Competencies of Undergraduate Biological Sciences Students to Increase Graduation and Career Readiness
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Mariel Perez-Velez, Sistema Universitario Ana G. Mendez, Incorporado
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2024
* USD 649,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by supporting the
retention and graduation of students at the Universidad Ana G. Mendez - Carolina
Campus, a Hispanic Serving Institution in Puerto Rico. Over five years, the
project will provide four-year scholarships to twelve students who will pursue
Bachelor of Science degrees in Biology, Biotechnology, and Microbiology. This
project intends to increase the retention and graduation of the Scholars by
developing a learning community to support student academic performance. In
addition, it focuses on helping the Scholars develop the professional, research,
and other competencies they need to succeed in college and in STEM careers. The
project will analyze which strategies and psychosocial factors are most
successful at supporting students in STEM fields. Given that nearly all students
enrolled in the College are Hispanic, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in the biological sciences workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This
project will provide a cohort experience based on the Community of Inquiry
theoretical model. The experience will include student-centered academic and
non-academic support embedded in a multi-tiered system, together with
professional development and experiential learning activities. It is expected
that the cohort experience will increase the scholarsâ€™ competitiveness and
readiness for STEM careers. In addition, this project will generate new
knowledge about effective practices that lead to STEM persistence in low-income
Hispanic students. A collective case study and a phenomenological study will be
conducted to answer the following research questions: (1) What psychosocial
factors promote the development of an academic self-concept (science identity)
in low-income Hispanic STEM students? (2) To what extent does science identity
predict persistence of low-income Hispanic students in STEM career pathways? (3)
What elements of the scholarship experience contribute to the persistence of
low-income Hispanic students in STEM career pathways? Project evaluation will
include both formative and summative assessments using a mixed-methods approach
that includes quantitative and qualitative techniques. The results of the study
will be shared with the College community through a seminar series and
newsletter. Broader dissemination to the biological sciences community will
occur through presentations in professional conferences such as the American
Society of Microbiology Conference for Undergraduate Educators and publications
in peer-reviewed STEM education journals. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.