* 1930041
* SaTC: TTP: Medium: Collaborative: Exposing and Mitigating Security/Safety Concerns of CAVs: A Holistic and Realistic Security Testing Platform for Emerging CAVs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Zhuoqing Mao, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 825,796.00

Connected and Automated Vehicle (CAV) technologies enable real-time information
sharing and driving automation, with the potential of significantly improving
safety and efficiency of the transportation system. However, cyber-security
threats may compromise the efficiency of infrastructure operations and the
safety of passengers, posing a significant challenge for CAV deployment. This
collaborative project develops a novel CAV testing platform to address the
critical needs for assessing the security and safety concerns of the CAV system
in an effective and realistic manner. Hardware manufacturers, software
developers, and security service providers in the CAV industry can all leverage
such a platform to conveniently and holistically test their products. Moreover,
the testing platform can be used for training and education in both academia and
industry, and facilitate the development of security best practices and
standards in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testing platform provides both
offensive and defensive testing services covering three parts of the CAV
ecosystem: (1) transportation infrastructure, (2) connected vehicle
communication channels, and (3) in-vehicle software platform. It is the first
CAV security testing platform supporting cross-component offensive and defensive
testing services designed to capture the inter-relationships among the three key
components. The project develops testing support by effectively combining
techniques in optimization, statistical modeling, machine learning, network
emulation, program analysis, and model checking, while supporting innovative use
of known defense solutions, including trusted computing hardware, access control
policy enforcement, and anomaly detection. The project implements and deploys
the testing platform in real-world CAV testbeds and collaborates with industry
partners for early adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.