* 1930629
* Co-evolution of Anthropogenic Stressors and Regional Urban Hydroclimate through Multiscale Land-Atmosphere Interactions
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2019,11/30/2022
* Zhihua Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates how human activities in urban areas interact with
regional hydroclimate via land-atmosphere interactions. Over past decades, human
activities are drastically transforming the Earth system, giving rise to global
changes at unparalleled rates and scales. Among these changes, urbanization has
emerged as the most irreversible and human-dominated form. This study quantifies
the emission and transport of heat, moisture, and greenhouse gases due to human
activities in cities and examines their interplay with changes in regional
hydrometeorology. Understanding the emergent hydroclimatic patterns due to
future development of cities leads to improved predictive skills of urban
environmental modeling, and is of broad interest for city planners, policy
makers, and the general public. This project actively engages stakeholders,
especially those from local cities, for project evaluation and outreach
activities through regular meetings, climate briefings, and annual workshops.
This project recruits one graduate student in research, education and outreach
activities. In addition, this project contributes to the education of
participating pre-college and undergraduate students via summer research
programs to cultivate their interest in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities focus on
characterizing anthropogenic dynamics arising in U.S. cities and its co-
evolution with regional hydrometeorology, using Phoenix Metropolitan as a
specific study area. Specific research objectives include: (1) quantify
population dynamics, anthropogenic heat, moisture, CO2 emission, and their
nonlinear interactions, (2) incorporate anthropogenic dynamics into a new urban
modeling system; (3) perform scenario analysis of urban land use and future
climate changes in the study area. The major scientific outcomes of this project
include a new urban land surface model incorporating the parameterization
anthropogenic stressors, and improved skill of numerical weather prediction over
U.S. urban areas. The scenario study in this project that embraces a wide
spectrum of urban expansion and climate change storylines is informative to
researchers and urban planners in finding sustainable solutions to pressing
urban environmental issues. The project also helps to better prepare the general
public for climate-sensitive development of future
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.