* 1930793
* Climatic Controls on Continental Erosion and Sediment Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Peter Clift, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2020
* USD 32,964.00

Although tectonic forces are known to exert a strong primary control over the
generation of sediment, mostly through driving bedrock uplift, global and
regional climate also play a dynamic role in controlling the production,
transport, and distribution of sediments. How does climate mediate the
sedimentary record and under what conditions can erosional signals be observed
and interpreted unambiguously in terms of paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic
change? The primary goals of this Geological Society of America (GSA) Penrose
conference are i) to redefine the current state of research and identify the
remaining key questions within this scientific community, ii) to present and
discuss recent advances in understanding erosional records mediated directly and
indirectly by paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental change, iii) to enhance the
training of early career researchers (ECRs), especially from traditionally
underrepresented communities, through networking and discussion among
international scientists, and iv) to produce a GSA Special Publication following
the proceedings of this conference. This award supports the participation of 15
student and ECRs, and three mid-career U.S. female scientists who lack support
and are essential for critical mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
it has long been recognized that bedrock erosion is increased by glaciation and
heavier precipitation, the relationship among climatic, erosional, and sediment
transport processes is more complex than that defined between erosion and
tectonics. It has become clear that these relationships are rarely linear and
furthermore vary across timescales of observation and within different tectonic
settings. While climate-tectonic-erosion interactions have been the subject of
numerous past workshops the influence of climate on erosion and sediment
transport, especially on shorter timescales, has received less scrutiny. This
GSA Penrose conference will address these issues with a group of 70-80 attendees
in early August 2019. The group will be drawn from a variety of subdisciplines
to further define and quantify the interrelationships amongst these processes.
This is an especially opportune time to redefine community goals and undertake
this synthesis because of the wealth of new climate records and long-term
sedimentary records collected through international initiatives, most notably
speleothem and the recently acquired monsoon records from IODP. Advances in
techniques for dating erosional products, in tracing sediment sources, and
modelling coupled climate-landscape systems now allow for much improved
correlations to be made with greater confidence and further our fundamental
understanding of the driving and reactive physical processes. This award was
jointly funded by the Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics (GLD) Program, the
Sedimentary Geology and Paleobiology (SGP) Program, the Tectonics (TE) Program,
and the Paleoperspectives on Climate Change (P2C2) Program in the Division of
Earth Sciences, as well as the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR) in the Office of Integrative
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.