* 1930216
* Scholarships, Academic, and Co-curricular Supports to Increase Access to Graduate Degrees and Careers in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Sylvanus Wosu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income STEM students with demonstrated
financial need. Over five years, the project will provide two-year scholarships
to 30 students to pursue Master of Science degrees from the University of
Pittsburgh's Swanson School of Engineering. These degrees span ten engineering
programs: Chemical, Petroleum, Bioengineering, Civil, Environmental, Electrical,
Computer, Industrial, Materials Science, and Mechanical Engineering. In addition
to scholarships, this project will provide students with academic and co-
curricular supports to help them gain the knowledge and skills needed for
success in the workforce and in entrepreneurial pursuits. The project aims to
increase the number of low-income students who graduate with a master's degree
in engineering, as well as provide the students with opportunities to earn
industry-recognized credentials. The project will advance understanding of
strategies for eliminating barriers that interfere with the ability of low-
income students to transition to graduate school after they earn a Bachelor of
Science degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase graduate degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
in STEM fields. The specific aims of the project are to 1) create access to
Master of Science degrees through scholarships and 2) create bridges into
professional careers through activities such as curricular improvements,
mentoring, and industry internships. Strategies to accomplish these aims include
building capacity for students to do research and be involved in innovation,
mentoring students through faculty-structured apprenticeships, and providing
graduate student-centered community activities. The assessment and evaluation
plan will use both direct (e.g., behavioral observations; policy changes) and
indirect measures (e.g., surveys) to evaluate the project's success in providing
access/scholarships, increasing success in graduate school, and developing
successful bridges to professional careers. The project will also address key
research questions, including whether scholarship incentives increase the
enrollment of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated
financial need in engineering graduate programs and whether reduction or
elimination of financial barriers increase the interest and motivation of low-
income students to pursue advance degrees. A mixed-methods research approach
will include a qualitative analysis of information from participant interviews
and surveys. Results of this project will be disseminated through short
communications, newsletters, brochures, peer-reviewed journal publications, and
presentations at conferences such as the American Society of Engineering
Educators Conference. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.