* 1930019
* I-Corps: Technology-Facilitated Intervention System for Improving Child Mental Health
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2021
* Adela Timmons, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop
and test digital mental health interventions for children and families delivered
through wearable devices. A first goal in developing this technology is to
increase the effectiveness of traditional therapeutic modalities, resulting in
increased psychological wellbeing of children and families. A second goal is to
decrease barriers in access to health care by creating innovative health care
service delivery models. Child and family mental health problems are
economically and socially costly, resulting millions of dollars in lost revenue
in each year. Developing mobile mental health interventions could help decrease
health care costs and create viable health care delivery models by providing
cost-effective mental health services to larger segments of the population.

This I-Corps project is an artificial intelligence-assisted digital therapy
designed to improve child mental health and family functioning. It is a software
platform that runs through commercially available hardware devices, such as
smartphones and smartwatches. The software collects multimodal data on clients'
activities. Machine learning algorithms are then used to detect psychological
states and the quality of interpersonal interactions in everyday life. This
monitoring system then provides responsive and tailored feedback and support.
For example, the system aims to detect negative mood states and send
interventions designed to improve mood. This project is based on previous
research using data collected from smartphones and wearable devices. Using these
data, the developed machine learning algorithms are capable of automatically and
passively detecting mood states and interpersonal conflicts with high levels of
accuracy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.