* 1930728
* Collaborative Research:  RoL:  The rules of life were made to be broken -  Connecting physiology, evolutionary ecology, and mathematics to identify a Growth Rate Rule.
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Yang Kuang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2023
* USD 444,999.00

All organisms are made up of the same set of chemical elements such as carbon
(C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus (P), although there are differences in the
proportions of these elements among species. Such diversity affects the roles
organisms play in key ecosystem services such as carbon sequestration and
nutrient cycling. However, scientists don't yet have a complete understanding of
the biological rules that dictate the proportions of C, N, and P in living
things. One hypothesis is that C:N:P proportions are a function of how fast an
organism grows because, to grow fast, organisms must produce P-rich structures
to drive rapid construction of cellular materials. While various data support
this view, other studies do not and so researchers do not yet know when this
"growth rate rule" holds and when it doesn't. This project will subject three
species (a bacterium, an alga, and a crustacean) to a variety of environmental
and evolutionary conditions to see when C:N:P proportions of each organism
follow this "growth rate rule" and when they don't. The research team will also
build mathematical models of these processes to predict what happens when
organisms that do (or do not) follow the growth rate rule interact with each
other. The proposed research will advance scientific understanding how food webs
and ecosystems work and improve predictions of how they respond to
perturbations, including increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations
and inputs of nitrogen and phosphorus pollution from agriculture and sewage.
Furthermore, to help develop a broadly trained scientific work force, the
project will partner with local tribal communities to engage Native American
undergraduate students in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
to establish the conditions under which there is or is not a close coupling
among growth rate, C:N:P ratios, and cellular allocation to P-rich ribosomes in
three taxa: Pseudomonas putida (a heterotrophic bacterium), Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii (a photosynthetic alga), and Daphnia pulicaria (a crustacean
consumer). First, Pseudomonas, Chlamydomonas, and Daphnia will be grown under
limitation by key non-substitutable resources (energy, N, P). Associations among
growth, biomass, excretion and remineralization C:N:P stoichiometry, cellular
RNA and protein contents, and metabolic rates will be quantified. These
measurements will be used to develop mathematical models of these cellular
processes. Next, the project will complete a series of evolution experiments,
subjecting Pseudomonas, Chlamydomonas, and Daphnia to selection under limitation
by different resources. The resulting descendants will be assessed as in the
first component of the project. Then, the descendants will be used in ecological
experiments to evaluate how evolutionary responses affect ecological processes.
Finally, results from these experiments will be used to develop and test new
mathematical models of ecological and evolutionary dynamics. The proposed work
will produce several resources for use by the scientific community, including
data on physiological and transcriptomic responses of three model organisms to
ecological challenges as well as a repository of selected lines that will be
shared with colleagues. The project will produce uniquely trained postdoctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduates with expertise in many
disciplines, including genomics, physiology, ecology, evolution, and
mathematics. If successful, the project will advance our understanding of
biological systems from genes to ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.