* 1930502
* Increasing Degree-completion for Engineering and Computer Science Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Michael Thompson, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 02/28/2025
* USD 995,733.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Baylor University. Over its five-year duration, this project will fund
four-year scholarships to 22 students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science
degrees in Engineering, Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering and Computer Science. Activities designed for Engineering and
Computer Science (ECS) Scholars include an orientation, a monthly seminar
series, and required faculty mentoring. Scholars will also participate in
existing support services and activities including peer mentoring, study abroad
opportunities, alumni mentoring, support and training for undergraduate
research, professional development workshops, and tutoring support from the ECS
Learning Resource Center. A distinguishing feature of the project is the use of
EAB's Navigate, a web-based software platform for tracking student progress,
coordinating student care, and employing predictive analytics. The knowledge
generated by this project is expected to identify best practices for using
predictive analytics to provide timely interventions and improve retention and
graduation rates for STEM students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project will use the
Navigate predictive analytics platform to track and document ECS Scholar
progress in the areas of retention, graduation, internships, undergraduate
research experiences, and job placement. The use of predictive analytics has
significant potential to improve student success, however best practices for
using computer-based predictions and tools to support students are not well
developed. This project will investigate whether student and faculty/mentor
perceptions of the factors that influence student success align with those
identified by the predictive analytics dashboard. The project will also
investigate perceptions about the extent to which predictive analytics are
helpful for identifying factors that inhibit and promote student success. The
project will conduct yearly interviews with students and faculty/mentor focus
groups. The discussions will be transcribed and encoded for analysis by
qualitative research software. The resulting longitudinal study will generate
insights for using predictive analytics to improve student outcomes. Results of
the project will be disseminated at regional conferences, national conferences,
and among other users of the Navigate platform. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.