* 1930971
* Developing Technological Pedagogical Content Knowledge of Pre-Service Math Teachers by Enhancement of a Methods Course Using Instrumental Orchestration and Lesson Study Strategies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Gloriana Gonzalez Rivera, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 93,218.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by establishing practices to help pre-service secondary
mathematics teachers (PSTs) learn how to lead classroom discussions with
interconnectivity technology. The proposal's main goal is the development of
PSTs' technological pedagogical content knowledge (TPACK). To do this, the
project will adapt Lesson Study, which employs a cycle of planning, teaching,
and reflecting. Thus, PSTs will learn to design technology-based lessons that
support students' development of mathematical proficiency. In addition,
university teacher educators (TE), cooperating teachers (CTs = experienced in-
service teachers with whom PSTs have their initial clinical experiences) and
PSTs will work together utilizing Lesson Study in the service of advancing
TPACK. Thus, this project aims to grapple with a challenge that often exists in
pre-service education, that is the relationship of what PSTs experience in
methods courses to what happens in their clinical practice. This TE, CT, PST
collaboration in Lesson Study will thus create what this project refers to as a
"hybrid space" in which the project acknowledges and leverages the knowledge
that the PSTs, CTs, and TEs each bring to the instructional enterprise. In doing
so, it is intended that coherence will be brought between clinical experiences
and methods courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty members at the University of
Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras (UPRRP) and the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign are collaborating on this project. It aims to revise one of the
methods courses at UPRRP to integrate Lesson Study strategies and create a
hybrid collaborative space to advance TPACK. Interconnectivity technology allows
students to share their work and represent mathematical ideas through multiple
representations. The methods course will target algebra and geometry concepts in
the secondary mathematics curriculum using Desmos or GeoGebra. Both are open
source software packages with interconnectivity capabilities. Desmos is an
online graphing calculator and GeoGebra integrates algebra and dynamic geometry.
Through adaptation of Lesson Study, this project employs a theory of
instrumental orchestration to promote PSTs' use of technology to develop
students' mathematical proficiency. Instrumental orchestration consists of three
elements: didactic configuration, mode of exploitation, and didactic
performance. PSTs will use the technology tools and tasks, which are part of the
didactical configuration, and descriptions of the exploitation modes in the
lessons. The didactical performance will be the outcome of the planning and will
be observed in the implementation phase of the Lesson Study. It is expected that
the hybrid space collaboration among the TE, CTs, and PSTs will support co-
construction of new knowledge and skills in teaching through Lesson Study
leveraging the mathematical technology tools for instruction. The research
questions the project will explore include the following. In what ways do PSTs
learn to apply the principles of instrumental orchestrations planning and
implementing mathematics lessons for promoting students' mathematical
proficiency? What supports from Coordinating Teachers enable PSTs to apply
instrumental orchestrations in their lessons? And, how does the modified Lesson
Study model enable opportunities for creating hybrid spaces that connect methods
courses and clinical experiences? Through the analysis of videos, student
journals, and interviews, the project will construct an evidence-based case that
examines the integration of methods courses and clinical experiences. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.