* 1930582
* EAGER: Transforming Additive Nanomanufacturing with Machine Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Andres Gomez, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 316,121.00

Optoelectronic substrates form a critical component in a variety of functional
devices where the substrate functions to allow light to pass through and, at the
same time, protect the device from the ambient environment. Applications include
displays, solar cells, smart phones, tablets, light emitting diodes (LEDs), as
well as emerging flexible versions of these optoelectronic devices such as radio
frequency identification (RFID) tags, artificial skin, and e-paper. The
availability of high performance, optoelectronic devices greatly impacts
technologies such as wearables, the Internet of Things, and more, thus
contributing to the nation's economy and security. Currently, rigid glass
substrates are typically used with an antireflection layer. However, these
coatings do not provide for antireflection across a wide range of wavelengths or
angles and lack other desired multi-functionality. This EArly-concept Grants for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) program award supports research to create a
framework for applying machine learning methods to nanomanufacturing processes.
A specific goal is to utilize the machine learning and optimization approach to
design and construct nanophotonic structures on surfaces to achieve different
optical properties such as anti-fogging and anti-bacterial. Additive
nanomanufacturing is a versatile method to create complex 3D structures with
nano-scale features. Since many surface engineering designs and functions are
possible, a machine learning approach is needed. The project studies
nanomanufacturing approaches involving maskless and scalable etching and
deposition processes that are commonly used in the semiconductor device
fabrication industry. This research activity is highly multidisciplinary and
exemplifies the unique role that industrial engineering and materials
engineering play in the future of nanomanufacturing research and in training the
future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates a framework that
integrates nanomanufacturing methods, such as reactive ion etching, with machine
learning and optimization tools, physical simulations, and multi-functional
characterizations to demonstrate durable and flexible nanostructured
optoelectronic substrates with high performance photon management properties,
such as antireflection and haze management. Most of the recent work in surface
engineering of multi-functional nanostructure coatings for a wide variety of
rigid and emerging flexible optoelectronic devices has involved traditional
trial-and-error approaches that offer, at best, fragmented and limited
systematic studies of small regions of the parameter space absent any embedded
historical knowledge. Major challenges exist in demonstrating the scalability of
manufacturing processes. This research seeks to test the hypothesis that a
machine learning and optimization framework can be utilized to more rapidly
design and engineer optoelectronic substrates compared to current incremental
approaches. Machine learning methods are integrated to fit experimental data,
predict the performance of new structures, and provide heuristics for additional
experiments. Current limitations are overcome through the creation of new
machine learning methods that succinctly learn nanostructure-additive
NanoManufacturing-property relationships with the ability to generalize across
domains. Machine learning models are developed to determine how to manufacture
3D nanostructured surfaces on glass and plastics using additive
nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.