* 1930380
* Increasing Accessibility to the Sciences through Mentoring Networks, Research Experiences, and Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2025
* Erika Barthelmess, Saint Lawrence University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 999,910.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at St. Lawrence University. Over its five-year duration, this project will
provide four-year scholarships to 24 students who are pursuing Bachelor of
Science degrees in chemistry, computer science, geology, mathematics,
statistics, physics, and/or a non-clinical track of biology. Project activities
include a network of faculty and alumni mentors, cohort courses that span the
first two college years, and a guaranteed summer research experience. Project
recruitment will encourage applications from first-generation college students,
and the project activities will emphasize the importance of participating in
research early in the academic career. Nationally, low-income and first-
generation college students have lower retention and graduation rates than those
of their better-resourced peers and their peers with family members who are
college graduates. This project has the potential to broaden participation in
STEM and to generate knowledge on the effectiveness of early undergraduate
research experiences for low-income and first-generation college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project intends to emphasize participation of low-income
students who are also first-generation college students. Specific project goals
are to 1) Implement student support activities that span the first two college
years; 2) Improve recruitment, retention, and degree attainment for academically
talented, low-income students; 3) Ensure faculty and staff are able to address
the needs of academically students from low-income and first generation in
college backgrounds; and 4) Conduct research on initiatives to improve
belonging, academic success, and persistence among low-income students. Typical
causes of student attrition from STEM fields can be broadly classified as
lacking a sense of belonging, lack of interest, and capacity gaps. Authentic
undergraduate research experiences can combat these barriers for students from
diverse backgrounds. This project will investigate the effects of early,
authentic, mentored undergraduate research experiences on the sense of
belonging, persistence, retention, and academic success of low-income and first-
generation college students. The project has the potential to identify which
characteristics of research experiences are most impactful and for whom.
Existing instruments such as the Classroom Undergraduate Research Experience,
Survey of Undergraduate Research Experiences, and Persistence in the Sciences
surveys will be used to relate research experiences to persistence and
belonging. Project results will be disseminated through conference presentations
and publications in open-access journals. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.