* 1930829
* Investigating mechanisms and costs of increased temperature variation in tropical and temperate dung beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Kimberly Sheldon, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 504,772.00

Temperature profoundly impacts animal physiology, thus temperature fluctuations
has major consequences for survival and reproduction of species. Temperature
fluctuations may be particularly challenging for animals that have evolved in
relatively constant thermal environments, like tropical regions, compared to
those that have evolved in thermally variable environments, like temperate
regions. To understand how temperature fluctuations affect species from
different thermal environments, this project will expose tropical and temperate
dung beetles to increased temperature fluctuations and integrate data across
levels of biological organization. Specifically, the researchers will quantify
gene expression and physiological responses of tropical and temperate dung
beetles to increases in temperature fluctuation and then investigate how species
responses affect survival and reproduction. The results of this work will
support a greater understanding of sensitivity of animals from different
latitudes to environmental challenges. Broader impacts of the research include
training of graduate and undergraduate students in physiology and ecology in the
USA and at international field sites, thus strengthening the students' global
networks. To communicate research to the public, the team will use a YouTube
channel, to post research videos that are accessible to non-scientists. Team
members will continue to host the annual Rocky Top BioBlitz at the University of
Tennessee to help citizens learn about biodiversity in urban environments.
Lastly, the research will add insect specimens to collections in the USA and
Ecuador for teaching and research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory predicts that
temperature fluctuations should have greater impacts on physiology and fitness
than shifts in mean temperature alone, and these impacts should vary with the
evolutionary history of the organism. This project applies transcriptomic and
physiological data from tropical and temperate dung beetles to transform current
understanding of energetic responses and fitness costs associated with increased
temperature fluctuations for species separated by latitude. Specifically, the
researchers will measure gene expression and physiological (i.e. metabolic rate)
responses to increased temperature fluctuations. Energetic consequences of
increased thermal fluctuations will then be quantified. Finally, fitness-related
variables in response to increased temperature fluctuations will be evaluated.
This project will lead to a better understanding of trade-offs between energy
allocated to stress responses versus energy allocated to reproduction, providing
a foundation for a more realistic model of the impacts of temperature
fluctuations across latitude that can be replicated for other species. In
addition, the research will provide key information on molecular mechanisms in
tropical species and non-model organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.