* 1930530
* Fostering Student Success and Diversity in STEM by Combining Scholarship Support with Mentoring and Research Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Orion Ciftja, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Prairie View A&amp;M University. Prairie View A&amp;M University is an
historically black college/university with a reputation of serving the
economically disadvantaged and underserved population of Texas. Over its five-
year duration, this project will fund four-year scholarships to twenty students
who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Physics, or
Mathematics. This project aims to increase student enrollment, retention, and
persistence and improve 4-year graduation rates by linking these scholarships
with effective supporting activities, such as cohort-building, undergraduate
research experiences, mentoring, graduate school preparation, and participation
in discipline-specific conferences. In so doing, the institution is taking a
holistic approach to preparing its students for entrance into the workforce as a
biologist, chemist, physicist or mathematician. As Prairie View A&amp;M
University has a high population of underrepresented students, this project will
broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities in STEM fields.
Additionally, this project will advance understanding of effective evidence-
based strategies and activities that promote student participation and success
in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need at Prairie View A&amp;M University. Three objectives
guide the project. First, to increase enrollment in the STEM disciplines of
Biology, Chemistry, Physics and Mathematics. Second, to improve 3-year
retention/persistence figures and 4-year graduation rates by engaging students
in a multidimensional mentorship program. Third, to create a cross-discipline
intellectual learning community that promotes advancement of project scholars to
a STEM graduate program or into the STEM workforce. This project will also
examine the role(s) of cohort-building, mentoring, and research engagement in
fostering STEM student retention/persistence and high graduation rates, through
the use of "intersectionality" as a theoretical approach. In particular, this
project will provide an empirically informed perspective on how to meet the
needs of STEM students who manifest more than a single primary identity status
at a time; a status that embraces multiple equally weighted markers, such as
socio-economic status, gender, and ethnicity. Additionally, an empirically-based
and adaptable model for promoting student success will be developed that is
dynamic, generalizable, and transferable to historically black colleges and
universities, and other post-secondary institutions. Evaluation of this project
will be performed, using a mixed-methods approach. Qualitative assessments will
determine the effectiveness of mentoring, research experiences, and cohort
building on increased enrollment, retention/persistence, and improved graduation
rates of STEM students. In turn these qualitative methodologies will inform
subsequent quantitative assessments. Results of this project will be
disseminated through a variety of media, including a project website, social
media, education journal publications, conference presentations and outreach
activities. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.