* 1930263
* Promoting Success of Undergraduate STEM Students Through Scholarships, Mentoring, and Curricular Improvements in First-year Mathematics Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Darlene Olsen, Norwich University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2025
* USD 650,000.00

This project will help meet the nationâ€™s need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by providing
scholarships and other supports to help undergraduate students earn a STEM
degree. Over five-years, the project will award four-year scholarships to
twenty-two students at Norwich University, a private military college that
serves both Corps of Cadets and civilian students. These Scholars will pursue
bachelor's degrees in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, mathematics,
neuroscience, or physics. The project team will also implement and study the
effects of evidence-based curricular and extracurricular activities, such as
peer tutoring, mentoring, and community building. Participation in these
activities is expected to support the Scholars to graduation and prepare them to
enter the workforce or graduate STEM programs. Through these efforts, the
project expects to help meet the national need for qualified STEM professionals
in both the military and civilian workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project team
recognizes that students who enter college with less experience in mathematics
are less likely to graduate with a degree in a STEM discipline. Based on that
knowledge, the research aims of this project are to: 1) measure the benefits of
corequisite implementation of precalculus and calculus to help students complete
the required calculus sequence by the end of their first year; 2) implement and
assess a leadership training program to improve the communication and leadership
skills of peer tutors in mathematics courses; and 3) measure the effect of
improved academic, financial, and career support for the Scholars across their
academic career at the University. Research on these practices will contribute
to the knowledge base about effective supports for increasing recruitment,
retention, and graduation of STEM majors, particularly among low-income
students. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics Program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.