* 1930362
* Scholars Program for Environmental Challenges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Xiaoping Sun, University of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 648,409.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Charleston (UC), an independent, co-educational,
residential university located in Charleston, West Virginia. Over its 5-year
duration, this project will fund four year scholarships to 12 students who are
pursuing baccalaureate degrees in data science, computer science, biological
sciences, chemistry, and dual biology-chemistry B.S. programs. This project will
examine innovative ways to attract and retain students in STEM fields at UC who
can be successful in the STEM workforce, and determine what institutional
factors promote students' engagement and achievement in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The specific goals of this project are to: (1)
recruit 12 academically talented students who demonstrate financial need to
major in STEM disciplines, (2) improve retention and graduation of the STEM
scholars, (3) place 90% of graduating scholars in a STEM-related job,
internship, or graduate program within one year of graduation, and (4) generate
new knowledge in the field of undergraduate STEM education by examining the
effects of novel recruitment strategies and determining whether an evolving
faculty mentoring approach featuring mentor-guided, mentor-student-guided and
finally student-guided research opportunities helps to develop science identity
and retain students in STEM. Research questions addressed in this project are:
(1) to what extent does a non-traditional recruitment and selection method
increase the number of underrepresented students entering STEM majors, and (2)
to what extent does an evolving faculty mentoring approach featuring mentor-
guided, mentor-student-guided, and finally student-guided research opportunities
retain students in STEM? The study will collect and analyze institutional data
to determine what effects (if any) this project has on recruitment and retention
of STEM students. A mixed methods approach will be used for both the formative
and summative evaluations of the project. The results of the study will be
shared at the regional, state and national levels through venues such as the
Appalachian College Association, West Virginia Academy of Sciences, Campus
Contact, as well as archived journals in STEM education. This project is funded
by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.