* 1930645
* Developing Evidence-based Data Sharing and Archiving Policies
* SBE,SMA
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Andrea Thomer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 11/30/2022
* USD 498,643.00

Access to original research data supports innovative, interdisciplinary, and
integrative research, and enables replication and review of prior work.
Consequently, a growing number of funding agencies, journal publishers, and
scientific societies now require that original research data must be shared and
archived promptly after its collection or publication. However, there are still
many unanswered questions about the best way to share and archive research data.
For instance: how can data repositories best allocate their limited resources
for different aspects of data archiving and processing? What is the most
effective way of making data usable by the broadest audience? What data sharing
policies most effectively achieve stakeholders? transparency and innovation
goals? This project answers these questions by studying the impact of different
"curatorial actions" (e.g., standardizing variables, improving documentation) on
the reuse of data archived by the Inter-university Consortium for Political and
Social Research (ICPSR). As one of the largest social science archives in the
world and a leader in digital data curation practice, ICPSR is well-suited as a
site for this project. ICPSR is also well-positioned to provide funding agencies
and policy makers recommendations for data sharing policies that articulate the
metrics needed in evaluating the appropriateness of data sharing and curation
plans and their associated costs. This project achieves broader impacts by (1)
recommending evidence-based data sharing policies to funders, repository staff,,
and researchers and (2) improving research data curation practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine the impact of various curatorial activities
on data reuse, the project first defines the different kinds of "curatorial
actions" and "impact," and then explains the relationships among actions and
impact. To identify curatorial actions and other features of datasets and ICPSR
services that influence reuse, the project examines ICPSR's legacy curation logs
and use records (such as downloads and citations). Curation logs contain data
about specific data transformations or preservation steps. By connecting
curation logs to data usage records, the actions are associated with higher
rates of reuse or access will be identified. The project examines the utility of
two measures of impact--secondary impact and diversity--by comparing use logs to
the ICPSR Bibliography of Data-Related Literature. The ICPSR Bibliography links
over 80,000 research publications to the ICPSR data on which they are based.
"Secondary impact" is a measure of how many times the reuse publications have
been cited and is constructed by gathering citation data for all items in the
bibliography that are not the original PI's publications. "Diversity" measures
the breadth of disciplines that use the data and can similarly be constructed
from the bibliography. The project employs multivariate regression analysis and
structural equation modeling to determine the relationships among curatorial
actions, metadata, the dataset itself, ICPSR services, and reuse and impact.
This analysis enables the development of cost models and metrics that allow
repository managers to evaluate the return on investment of specific curatorial
actions. The project will use these models to inform evidence-based data sharing
and archiving policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.