* 1930492
* Integrating Scholarships, Academic Assistance, Professional Development, and Wellness to Increase Undergraduate Retention in Engineering and Computing
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2025
* Jed Lyons, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2025
* USD 998,243.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Over its five-year duration, the project will fund four-year scholarships
to 27 students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees Engineering,
Computer Information Systems, Computer Science, or Integrated Information
Technology at the University of South Carolina at Columbia. Engineering
disciplines include Aerospace, Biomedical, Chemical, Civil, Computer,
Electrical, and Mechanical Engineering. By providing an integrated set of
academic supports, social supports, and professional development opportunities,
including support for career planning and for wellness, the project aims to
improve retention of STEM students in engineering and computing fields. It also
seeks to generate new knowledge about academic persistence of low-income, first-
generation STEM students to support broadening participation in STEM education
and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. It aims to deliver an integrated suite of
evidence-based retention strategies to increase persistence and retention, with
a campus living/learning community approach at the center. The project includes
a comprehensive wellness intervention across the four years of the project, with
a focus on four key areas: grit/resiliency, loneliness, imposter syndrome, and
general health &amp; well-being. These key areas will also be central for
training faculty and peer mentors to support the Scholars. Career pathways
support includes workshops and seminars from local industry, interactions with
the campus Career Center, and access to internships and undergraduate research
opportunities. A mixed methods convergent parallel research design is planned to
examine the impact of project elements on Scholars' self-efficacy, sense of
belonging, and persistence, relative to a comparison group constructed via
propensity score matching. Project evaluation will provide formative feedback
regarding the effectiveness of program elements and collaborative partnerships,
as well as summative evaluation of the extent to which the project meets
retention and graduation targets. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.