* 1930008
* Scholarships with Integrated Academic, Mentoring, Career Development, and Wellness Supports to Increase STEM Degree Attainment of  Rural Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Dana Harriger, Wilson College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2024
* USD 355,441.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists
by supporting the education, retention, and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need at Wilson
College. Most students at Wilson College are from the rural and highly
industrialized region within and surrounding Franklin County Pennsylvania. Over
its five-year duration, this project will provide four-year scholarships to 21
rural students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in Biology,
Biochemistry, Chemistry, and/or Environmental Science. In addition to financial
support, this project will provide Scholars with additional, evidence-based
supports, including: (1) academic support through the introduction of new weekly
STEM recitation classes taught by peer mentors, workshops offered by the
Academic Success Center, and focused class periods dedicated to improving test-
taking skills and reducing stress and anxiety; (2) peer-to-peer mentoring and
interactive cohort building; (3) job/career development, alumni mentoring, and
internship opportunities; and (4) an emphasis on wellness and stress reduction.
This project will generate knowledge about how incorporating wellness, stress-
reduction techniques, and time-management skills affects the educational
outcomes of academically-talented, rural STEM undergraduates with unmet
financial need. The significance of this project is its potential to recruit and
better educate STEM students from rural Pennsylvania to be effective science
professionals with healthier life management skills. Effective strategies will
also be disseminated throughout the College, thus strengthening the institution
and informing other small, private research institutions across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need who originate from a rural, highly-industrialized region of
Pennsylvania. This project will examine how integration of wellness and stress-
reduction activities as a weekly component of the STEM educational experience
for rural undergraduates affects: (1) overall and academic-related self-reported
stress or anxiety over the short (semester) and long (year) terms; (2) academic
performance (overall GPA and STEM major GPA); (3) one-year retention and four-
year persistence in the chosen STEM field; and (4) career choice and placement
after graduation. The research study will use qualitative and quantitative
metrics collected from students, faculty, mentors, and other stakeholders,
comparing results of Scholars to results of other STEM and non-STEM students.
This project aims to advance understanding of how to better develop STEM
undergraduate programs to educate highly-trained STEM graduates with a deep
appreciation for a work-life balance and who are adept at managing stress
throughout their lifetimes. Lessons learned will be disseminated to other
institutions of higher education, particularly those that face similar
challenges with recruiting and retaining undergraduate rural STEM students. This
project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.