* 1930835
* RUI: Reconstructing ancient terrestrial landscapes of the southeastern Columbia Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Nicholas Bader, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 333,148.00

Landscapes change over geological time as water, wind, and volcanic activity
reshape Earth’s surface. In southeastern Washington State, today’s landscape
reflects two events of unimaginable size: mammoth eruptions of molten lava and
much later, Ice Age mega-floods that scoured and reshaped the landscape. This
project focuses on the missing interval between these two events and uses
ancient soils to learn about the environment when these ancient landscapes
formed. Twelve undergraduate students will be engaged in research experiences
that will incorporate field and laboratory techniques that are in wide use in
the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
characterize terrestrial environments following the eruption of the Columbia
River Basalts in southeastern Washington and northeastern Oregon, and to
reconstruct the geological processes that shaped the landscape in this area.
This will be accomplished by creating a network of field sites across the
southeastern Columbia Basin that expose weathered basalt contacts and paleosols.
At each site the morphology of the contact and underlying basalt will be
characterized, and samples will be collected for lab analyses of
micromorphological features and bulk chemical abundances. Lava flows are exposed
throughout the region at different elevations, allowing for the study of
precipitation gradients and their influence on basalt weathering, and to measure
differences in pedogenesis caused by exposure time or thermal diagenesis. These
analyses will provide the ability to (i) better understand the timing of Cascade
uplift and the subsequent aridification of the Columbia Basin, (ii) reconstruct
the landforms caused by periods of glacial outburst flooding that predate the
most recent Ice Age floods and (iii) distinguish original soil weathering from
post-burial processes. This research will increase understanding of the complex
tectonics of the Pacific Northwest and provide insights into the impact of
megafloods in shaping the terrestrial landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.