* 1930427
* Recruiting,  Retaining, Graduating, and Transitioning Undergraduates into Successful Engineering Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Renee Butler, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 997,704.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial.
Over five-years, the project will provide up to four years of scholarship
support to 32 students majoring in Civil, Construction, Computer, Electrical,
Environmental, Mechanical, Mechatronics, or Industrial and Systems Engineering.
The project will highlight the public benefits of engineering and Scholars will
begin to make societal contributions while they are still undergraduates. The
project aims to achieve its goals by using existing student support structures
and implementing new activities that are known to increase retention of
engineering students, particularly female engineering students. Such activities
include undergraduate research experiences, living learning communities, STEM
outreach efforts, and peer mentoring and tutoring. Industry partners, advisors,
and faculty researchers who are committed to the success of this project will
serve as mentors. It is expected that Scholars will gain an increased
understanding of the importance of diversity in engineering, including the
participation of women. The project has the potential to create a larger pool of
female professionals in engineering disciplines. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Through
its activities, the project aims to achieve four major objectives: 1) to provide
students with scholarships to mitigate financial-challenges that impede
successful academic progress; 2) to engage students with an engineering faculty
mentor and industry partner mentors; 3) to create a community of students who
participate in activities with a service or outreach emphasis; and 4) to
facilitate student participation in undergraduate research projects that address
societal concerns. Although all low-income, high-achieving engineering
undergraduates at Kennesaw State University will have an equal opportunity to
receive scholarships, this project emphasizes efforts to increase the
participation of women. Women are underrepresented in engineering nationally,
and female undergraduate enrollment and degrees awarded in engineering at
Kennesaw State University are below the national average. Research has shown
that one important precursor to gender disparities that favor men in STEM
education is a sense of belonging, or the feeling of fitting in and feeling like
a legitimate member of a community. The project will examine whether the
implementation of project activities leads to a more inclusive academic
environment and heightened feelings of belonging among the Scholars. The program
intends to answer three research questions that are aligned with the project
objectives: 1) Does mentorship positively influence Scholars' feelings of
intellectual belonging? 2) Does community building positively influence the
Scholars' subjective experiences of connectedness and social belonging? and 3)
Does participation in socially relevant research activities positively influence
the Scholars' intent to persist in engineering? The project will be evaluated
using a longitudinal, mixed methods, concurrent triangulation design.
Dissemination of project results will occur locally, via the University website
and local workshops, and nationally, at conferences such as the American Society
for Engineering Education and in professional publications. This project is
funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.