* 1930293
* Learning Experiences and Progression Support for Community College Students Pursuing  Biological Sciences Degrees
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Stephen Summers, Seminole State College of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 11/30/2024
* USD 621,344.00

This project will contribute to the national need for skilled scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. It will do so by providing
scholarships and other supports to twenty high-achieving, low-income
undergraduate students at Seminole State College. The Scholars will pursue
Associate of Arts degrees in biology-related fields. The project will provide
Scholars with supports to increase their success in introductory and higher-
level biology courses. Scholars will also receive a customized guided pathway of
coursework that is aligned with their academic and career goals. Other supports
include research opportunities and mentoring by faculty who have cultural
responsiveness training. The project expects that these supports will decrease
the amount of time Scholars need to achieve a transferrable Associate of Arts
degree. It also expects that Scholars will be more likely to successfully
transfer to four-year institutions, where they will earn four-year degrees.
Seminole State University has an ethnically and racially diverse student body,
as well as a high proportion of first-generation and lower-income students. By
increasing academic success of a diverse group of Scholars, this project will
contribute to building a stronger and more capable STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The specific aims include increasing the: 1.
Success of Scholars in first semester biology; 2. Enrollment and success of
Scholars in upper-division biology courses; 3. Retention and graduation rate of
Scholars; and 4. Successful transfer and post-transfer success of Scholars.
Beyond the impact on Scholars, the project expects the proposed project
activities will improve the STEM learning environments at Seminole State, thus
benefiting many students at the college, particularly those from
underrepresented groups. The project will generate new knowledge through program
evaluation and through replication of a 2014 research study by Harackiewicz and
colleagues, which focused on increasing the achievement of first-generation
students in college biology. Data collected through these efforts will
contribute to the body of knowledge about the complexities of implementing high
impact education practices that help diverse STEM students succeed. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.