* 1930734
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Algorithmic Game Theory (AGT) Mentoring Workshop Co-Located with Economics and Computation (EC)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Seth Weinberg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support students to attend the Algorithmic Game Theory (AGT)
Mentoring Workshop and the 20th Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)
Conference on Economics and Computation (EC), June 24 - 28, 2019, in Phoenix,
AZ. The field of Algorithmic Game Theory is at the intersection of theoretical
computer science and economics. This makes it most suitable to handle
foundational issues posed by tremendous growth in economic and social systems on
the Internet, and therefore the field has been thriving in the past few decades.
Economics and Computation is the leading conference in this area, with the main
aim of strengthening the field by bringing together both computer scientists and
economists. The investigators are organizing a one-day AGT mentoring workshop to
be co-located with EC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will help to mentor
and train students pursuing research careers in the field of AGT. Travel funds
from NSF will facilitate participants' attendance at the mentoring workshop and
EC, where they will learn about current research and interact with leaders in
the field. The award will cover travel, lodging and registration fees for
approximately 8 to 10 carefully selected students who otherwise would find it
difficult to attend. The selection criteria for the travel award and the
workshop program will aim to encourage participation by underrepresented
minorities and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.