* 1930650
* Collaborative Research: BEE: Understanding Evolutionary Rescue
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Ruth Hufbauer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2023
* USD 706,011.00

This research will explore how evolution can rescue a population from extinction
due to drastic changes in the environment. When those changes are rapid, the
plants, animals, and other organisms living in a place can go extinct,
particularly when populations are small and movement between them is difficult.
Under some circumstances, rapid adaptation to altered conditions can allow those
small populations to grow and avoid extinction. This project focuses on the
factors that determine whether populations adapt and persist or go extinct
including: the size of the place, the size of the population, the amount of
genetic variation a population has, and whether movement between places is
possible or not. Given rapid environmental changes that are occurring worldwide,
the information gained will be crucial for successful management of both
endangered species and invasive pests. Undergraduate and graduate students will
be involved in the research, and outreach to the public through the Colorado
State University Bug Zoo will enhance societal understanding of conservation and
species management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory and experiments show that
adaptation can be rapid enough to prevent or delay extinctions: the process of
evolutionary rescue. Most empirical studies of evolutionary rescue use haploid
microorganisms. However, the species most at risk of extinction are larger
diploid organisms. In these species, the standing genetic variation of
deleterious alleles is high, and populations are often small, favoring drift and
inbreeding relative to selection. Theoretical and empirical studies of rescue
often fail to account for randomness in ecological processes or for processes
that can inhibit population growth, such as density dependence, genetic drift,
and inbreeding, which counter the effects of adaptive evolution. Using a model
biological system (Tribolium castaneum flour beetles) the researchers will
conduct experiments that manipulate population history, size, density, dispersal
rate, and dispersal source, compared to non-evolving controls, and will examine
consequences for fitness, extinction, and genomic diversity. The experiments
will be paired with new, combined ecological and evolutionary models that will
facilitate quantifying experimental results and allow the research to be
generalized to other species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.