* 1930461
* Connecting Mentor Partners for Academic Success of Undergraduates in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Arthur Heinricher, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. The project will support students who enter Worcester Polytechnic
Institute from the Worcester Public School system. Over its five-year duration,
this project will fund four-year scholarships and provide academic support to 20
of these students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in STEM fields,
including Engineering, Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, Biology and
Biotechnology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Data Sciences, Mathematical
Sciences, and Physics. The project intends to use an assets-based framework that
builds upon students' strengths rather than deficits. The expectation is that
this approach will promote the Scholars' sense of belonging, self-efficacy,
identity, well-being, academic success, degree completion in STEM, and entry
into the workforce or graduate school. Several existing and new high-impact
strategies at Worcester Polytechnic Institute will contribute to the project
success. Examples include optional pre-summer "bridge" courses, pre-orientation
bonding activities, a common first-year Great Problems Seminar course,
individual development plans, professional development workshops, industry
explorations, and on-campus paid research opportunities. This project will
enhance the Institute's ability to recruit, support, and graduate students from
low-income, first generation, and/or underrepresented groups in STEM and thus
broaden participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project has three specific
aims: 1) To increase the number of low-income, academically talented, and first
generation students from Worcester Public Schools who apply, enroll, and
graduate with a STEM BS degree from Worcester Polytechnic Institute; 2) To
financially, academically, and emotionally support Scholars with holistic,
research-backed programming designed to help them adapt over time from starting
college to succeeding in college to becoming a STEM professional; 3) To develop,
implement, and investigate an assets-based framework with a mentor network
(e.g., peer, faculty, and campus champion) and workshops that will lead to
sustainable institutional change to support all students. Traditional models of
co-curricular student support utilize a deficit model whereas this project will
use an assets-based approach to examine new ways to broaden participation in
STEM. The project's approach focuses on the well-being of individuals and takes
an assets-focused perspective that explores intersecting identities in a STEM
focused environment. This project will investigate 1) which assets-based
institutional support structures aid successful transition to college and
graduation; 2) how students and institutional assets flow through student
networks to support attainment of a STEM BS degree; and 3) whether there are
attitudinal shifts and adoption of culturally responsive practices inclusive of
low-income, first generation and/or underrepresented students by Worcester
Polytechnic Institute faculty, staff, and administrators who have contact with
the mentor program. The project has the potential to advance the understanding
of different pathways through which these assets flow to and from students of
traditionally underserved populations during their participation in college
experiences. The project will be assessed through information from focus groups
and surveys, to determine how students are progressing through their college
experience. Results of this project will be made available through presentations
and publication in conference proceedings at conferences such as the American
Association of Engineering Education Conference and the Collaborative Network
for Engineering and Computing Diversity Conference. This project is funded by
NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.