* 1930038
* 8th Midwest Workshop on Control and Game Theory; St. Louis, Missouri; 27-28 April 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Jr-Shin Li, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 03/31/2020
* USD 19,640.00

Systematic modeling, analysis, and design of social, economical, and
technological systems require confluence of ideas from diverse scientific
disciplines, including control theory, optimization, economics and game theory.
These systems often involve multiple decision-making agents interacting over a
network and form a subset of so-called cyber-physical-human systems. Examples of
such systems include smart grid, connected and autonomous vehicles, smart
manufacturing, and mixed human-automata systems. Recent advances in technology
have made these systems increasingly pervasive in a broad range of applications.
Effective design of these systems requires interactions among experts from
engineering, economics, and social sciences as well as industry. This forms the
basis for organizing the 8th Midwest Workshop on Controls and Game Theory on
April 27 - 28, 2019 in St. Louis, Missouri, where leading experts on controls,
optimization, game theory, economics and computation from the Midwestern states
are brought together to facilitate interdisciplinary and cross-disciplinary
research interactions and collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
the workshop is to facilitate and enhance research discussions and
collaborations among experts in a broad range of disciplines, including biology,
economics, and engineering. The invited speakers are leading experts in the
areas of controls, game theory, applied probability, computation, dynamical
systems, economics, and optimization. The four themes of this workshop are: (i)
complex networks and large-scale control systems, (ii) game theory for economic
and societal systems, (iii) optimization, learning, and computational methods,
and (iv) emerging applications and technologies. These themes will ensure the
workshop focuses on both the theory and application of cyber-physical-human
systems. The workshop also includes a poster session in which students and
postdoctoral researchers will present their current research. The feedback and
mentoring of their research from leading experts in the field will tremendously
benefit these young researchers. The invited speakers are selected to ensure a
broad representation of research areas and substantial participation from
underrepresented groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.