* 1930757
* 48th Annual Orthopedic Research Society (ORS) Musculoskeletal Biology Workshop; Sun Valley, Idaho; July 24-28, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Alexander Robling, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

The Sun Valley Workshop on Musculoskeletal Biology emphasizes active
participation of junior faculty and students/fellows. Funds from this award will
support competitive travel awards for junior investigators who will be able to
present their research to a multidisciplinary audience and network with leaders
in the field. Travel award recipients will also participate in one-on-one
mentoring with senior investigators. The workshop will be organized around
problem solving and extensive discussion, rather than just presentation. The
meeting will include a program to highlight posters presented at the workshop:
"Blue Ribbon Sun Valley Posters." Ten posters will be chosen for 3 minute
summary presentations by the authors. The intent is to highlight the most
significant posters, in many cases young investigator posters, and generate
interest in visiting the posters. Career and professional development sessions,
including "Navigating the FDA" and "Career Transitions: Planning and Negotiating
for Career Advancement," are planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The musculoskeletal
system (muscles, tendon, bone) is highly sensitive to mechanical load, and many
younger investigators from previous Sun Valley meetings have submitted
applications to the Biomechanics and Mechanobiology program. This workshop
continues as one of the important training venues for future scientists in the
area of mechanobiology of the musculoskeletal system based on its unique problem
solving focus and the multidisciplinary group of
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.