* 1930392
* Creating Opportunities for Student Retention and Degree Attainment in Engineering and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Brian Abela, West Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 993,348.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at West Hills Community College (WHCC), a Hispanic Serving Institution.
Over its 5-year duration, this project will fund 200 scholarships to at least 50
students who are pursuing associate's degrees in Biology, Chemistry,
Engineering, Geology, Mathematics or Physics. Each student will receive up to
four semesters of scholarship support. The project aims to increase student
enrollment and persistence in STEM fields by supplementing scholarships with
comprehensive support services, including mentoring, supplemental instruction,
enhanced academic and career counseling, and enrichment opportunities. The
project will implement a comprehensive data collection mechanism to document and
disseminate best practices. Because WHCC has a high population of
underrepresented students, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM fields and advance knowledge of the relationship between
student support services and retention and graduation of students
underrepresented in STEM degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income high
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Three objectives
guide this project. First, to increase the recruitment, retention, student
success, and graduation (or transfer to four year programs) of eligible students
pursuing associate degrees. Second, to adapt, develop, implement, and study
evidence-based practices that support student success. Third, to contribute to
the documentation and dissemination of evidence-based curricular and co-
curricular activities for students underrepresented in STEM fields of study.
This project will use qualitative and quantitative data analysis to study STEM
identify formation and the impact of the program on student success by
ethnicity, race, gender and disability status. An external evaluator will
provide formative and summative feedback, and the project team will disseminate
results at national conferences. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.