* 1930042
* Developing Undergraduate Students' Science Identity through Scholarships, Teams, and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Robby Petros, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,794.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. It will support students at Texas Woman's University, a Hispanic-serving
institution the largest university primarily for women in the United States.
Over its five-year duration, this project will provide up to three years of
scholarship support to 35 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
Biochemistry, Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Informatics, or Math. Rather
than basing project activities on a deficit model focused on barriers to
success, activities will be based on supports to success. In addition to
providing Scholarships, the project will engage Scholars in a multidimensional
mentoring model that drives co-curricular activities to support student success.
The project will also generate new knowledge, intended to not only increase
retention and STEM graduation rates locally, but also to inform the higher
education community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is
to increase STEM degree completion by low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project seeks to increase STEM engagement,
retention, and graduation through three strategies: 1. provide S-STEM
scholarships to 15 students annually; 2. provide Scholars with co-curricular
supports including living-learning communities, mentoring, and research
experiences; and 3. examine factors related to participant science identity and
success, and disseminate results to expand the impact of the project activities
to institutional communities and beyond. Helping students develop a science
identity is a goal of the projects' co-curricular support strategies and,
consequently, the research questions focus on how each of these strategies
impact students' science identity. Research questions include how each project
activity, including scholarships and research experiences, strengthen students'
science identity. A mixed-methods, qualitative and quantitative research
approach will be used, and data analyzed to identify potential differences in
the success of different groups of students. These findings can contribute to
equipping institutions of higher education with strategies for assisting and
retaining students, including those from groups that have traditionally not had
access to or sufficient preparation for STEM programs. The long-term expected
outcomes of the project include increased student retention in STEM programs,
reduced time to graduation, increased graduation rates, and increased job
placement or entry into graduate school. The results from this project will be
presented locally and at professional conferences, and submitted for publication
in peer reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.