* 1931088
* P-type Oxides for CMOS Devices: Thermodynamics-based In-situ Synthesis and In-Situ Integration
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/02/2019,08/31/2023
* Sunghwan Lee, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 268,289.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;Silicon metal oxide semiconductors have been the
industry standard in electronic devices for decades. However, new non-silicon
thin film semiconducting metal oxides have gained prominence in recent years.
They are a promising new technology for electronic devices, particularly next
generation displays. Oxide electronics have high carrier mobility, allowing them
to conduct current efficiently, and can be fabricated at low-temperatures. This
makes them compatible with flexible electronics. Doped semiconductors are n-type
or p-type, depending upon if the majority charge carriers are electrons or
holes. The vast majority of thin film oxide semiconductors are n-type, which
limits their applications to unipolar devices. The development of more
sophisticated circuits using complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
technology requires both p- and n-type devices. The goal of this project is to
resolve the scientific questions that prevent the realization of high
performance p- and n-type oxide semiconductors. This in turn will enable the
development of low-temperature processed flexible CMOS inverters and other
circuits. Fundamental device physics together with thermodynamic and kinetic
considerations are the key components to enable in-situ synthesis of the oxides
and fabrication of CMOS devices. The combination of fundamental materials
processing and device fabrication has educational impacts in and out of the
classroom at Baylor University. Low cost metal oxide technology is ideal for a
prototype fabrication lab in an undergraduate course on electronic materials and
devices. Strong connections between the PI and local industry will further
enhance the value of the professional training experience for students. The
project also includes outreach to local schools, such as The Annual Central
Texas Science and Engineering Fair for middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The recent development of
several wide bandgap oxide semiconductors and the fabrication of basic thin film
transistor (TFT) structures have garnered attention for applications in flexible
electronics and high performance TFTs. However, research efforts of these oxide
TFT devices are currently limited to n-type oxide TFTs. Recently, promising
p-type oxides have emerged providing the opportunity to explore applications in
oxide-based complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) devices. The
development of reproducible p-type oxide semiconductors and their TFT devices
will greatly accelerate flexible electronics and will pioneer the development of
new oxide CMOS devices. A simple binary oxide (SnOx, 1&lt;x&lt;2) is an emerging
candidate for a p-type semiconductor due to the possible formation of ns2 hybrid
orbitals. However, the growth conditions for p-type SnOx are believed to be
narrow, due to the formation of SnO2 (n-type) and the precipitation of metallic
Sn. This research suggests reproducible approaches to synthesize p-type oxide
semiconductors at low temperatures (T) below 200 ?C. Low-T (&lt;200 ?C) in-situ
synthesis of p-type SnOx (1&lt;x&lt;2) is a consequence of the thermodynamic
instability of the metallization material in contact with SnO2. The same
metallization material must be thermodynamically stable with n-type In(Ga)ZnO.
This unique in-situ approach offers simple solutions to the complex challenges
of synthesizing p-type oxides: the metallization of both p- and n-type oxide
TFTs, and the low-T annealing processes (necessary for improving TFT
performance). As a result, oxide CMOS devices will be fabricated in situ. This
project also contains strategies for controlling hole carrier densities. The use
of high pressure oxidation relates carrier density to the oxygen fugacity (i.e.,
effective reactivity), and the results will identify the defect-based doping
mechanisms for p-oxides. The information obtained from these investigations will
be carefully correlated with TFT and CMOS device performance in order to
understand the relations between synthesis, composition, material properties and
device characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.