* 1931867
* CPS: Small: Robust and Efficient Perception System for Autonomous Vehicles (REPAVE)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Mooi-Choo Chuah, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 514,190.00

The goal of this project is to advance the science of designing efficient and
robust perception systems for complex cyber-physical systems such as autonomous
vehicles (AV). Industries in the US, especially AV-related industries, must be
competitive in terms of innovations in computer vision and security issues
related to deep learning models deployed in complex cyber-physical systems. This
project provides these innovations and prepares new generations of computer
scientists that can join the industry workforce. The solutions created in this
project will ensure safer operations of autonomous systems which benefit the
society overall. Finally, hands-on training sessions will be organized at top
computer vision conferences to provide opportunities to members of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores innovative
solutions for efficient deep learning models in computer vision which are
suitable for resource constrained devices and smarter sensors which can improve
the robustness of the perception systems in complex cyber-physical systems.
First, a more robust deep learning based perception system utilizing a
combination of a color camera and cheaper sensors with lower cost but with
better accuracy and efficiency will be created. Second, autonomous systems
typically operate under dynamic environments. A more robust decision making
module which utilizes context information involving interactions among nearby
moving agents to make quick and accurate predictions of their future movements
will also be designed. Complex cyber-physical systems are subjected to
cyberattacks, and smarter sensors with unique signatures will be designed to
allow such perception systems to be more resilient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.