* 1931837
* Membrane-Mediated Interactions between Anisotropic Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Mohamed Laradji, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 309,367.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles have great potential in many
biomedical applications including biosensing, diagnostics, gene therapy, drug
delivery, magnetic hyperthermia and photothermal therapy. There are, however,
also concerns associated with potential environmental and health hazards of many
types of nanoparticles. Biomedical applications of nanoparticles and their
potential toxicity necessitate their adhesion on a thin envelope encapsulating
living cells known as the plasma membrane, and eventually their cellular entry.
The plasma membrane, which is mainly composed of lipids, is an important
component of all living cells. It is fluid and highly flexible. As a result, the
adhesion of nanoparticles leads to deformation of the plasma membrane, which in
turn leads to the aggregation of nanoparticles. While there have been studies on
the effect of lipid membranes on the aggregation of spherical nanoparticles, the
understanding of the effect of lipid membranes on interactions between
nanoparticles with complex geometries or surface properties, and their resulting
aggregation, remains lacking. This is despite nanoparticles with complex
geometries or surface properties having more promising biomedical applications
than spherical ones. This project aims at understanding the effect of membranes
on interactions between nanoparticles with complex geometries or surface
properties. During the course of this research, the principal investigator will
train graduate and undergraduate students in various computational approaches,
which will prepare them for careers in STEM fields. High school students will
also be engaged in some aspects of the research through a summer program run by
the Department of Physics and Materials Science at the University of Memphis.
Aspects of the research will be integrated is some courses at the undergraduate
and graduate levels that are taught by the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports an investigation of the two-body interaction and self-assembly of
anisotropic nanoparticles induced by membrane deformations resulting from
nanoparticlesâ€™ adhesion on lipid membranes. The research will be carried out
through systematic and large-scale molecular dynamics simulations of an
efficient coarse-grained model. The efficiency of this approach stems from the
treatment of the solvent implicitly, softening the pair-wise interactions
between beads, and the treatment of the nanoparticles as hollow tessellated
surfaces. Two main types of anisotropic nanoparticles, corresponding to sphero-
cylindrical nanoparticles and Janus nanoparticles, will be considered in this
research. In the first part of the proposed research, the dimerisation threshold
between anisotropic nanoparticles and the modes of dimerisation will be
determined systematically as a function of the geometry of the nanoparticles and
their surface heterogeneities. The modes of dimerisation of the nanoparticles
will be investigated both in the case of planar tensionless lipid membranes and
in the case of tensionless cylindrical membranes and closed vesicles, with the
nanoparticles adhering either to the inner or outer side of the membrane. In the
second part of the research, multi-body effects and self-assembly of the
anisotropic nanoparticles will be investigated for varying parameters of the
sphero-cylindrical nanoparticles and Janus nanoparticles and for varying values
of the adhesion strength. The stability of the self-assemblies will be
investigated by free-energy calculations of the results in conjunction with the
Helfrich Hamiltonian.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.