* 1931001
* Workshop: Culturally Relevant Enterprise Development (CRED) for Tribal Colleges Listen and Learn
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Shawn Jordan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2020
* USD 48,570.00

We propose a "listen and learn" workshop to facilitate partnerships between NSF
and Native American/Alaska Native (NA/AN) communities in the US to develop an
innovation and STEM/STEAM-based entrepreneurship curriculum and incubator
program. The goals are to collect, understand, and document best practices among
existing entrepreneurship incubator programs in NA/AN communities as well as
envision what an entrepreneurship incubator program could look like. Workshop
participants will come away with knowledge of community needs, existing,
existing successful models for NA/AN entrepreneurship programs, NSF
entrepreneurship, lean launchpad, and the business model canvas; skills
including: Customer discovery process; STEM, social, and community-based
culturally-relevant entrepreneurship; positive attitudes around defining
individual entrepreneurial mindsets and imagining a future NA/AN
entrepreneurship incubator program. The activity will help advance understanding
of best practices among existing entrepreneurship incubator programs in NA/AN
communities and to help develop a vision for what an NSF-sponsored program for
NA/AN STEM entrepreneurs could look like. It will lay a ground work for a pilot
cohort of NA/AN entrepreneurs to participate in a culturally relevant I-Corps
variant, Culturally Relevant Enterprise Development (CRED) program that could
ultimately be expanded to other communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.