* 1931905
* A Pre-Equilibrium Single-Molecule Digital Counting Biosensor for Near-Patient Precision Medicine of Life-Threatening Illnesses
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/29/2024
* USD 354,500.00

Precision medicine is the emerging approach to treat human diseases by targeting
therapy towards the underlying basis of the disease for individual patients.
While testing and therapeutic plans for cancers and other chronic diseases are
formulated over days to weeks, a potentially life-saving treatment for patients
suffering an immediate acute attack must be delivered in minutes to hours,
requiring fast diagnostic technologies near the patient. This research aims to
meet this need by developing an innovative diagnostic biosensor platform that
overcomes the time-consuming requirements of conventional biomarker analysis
technologies, with the potential of saving patient lives undergoing crises such
as organ failure. This proposed platform will simultaneously achieve higher
speed, higher sensitivity, and lower instrumentation cost, while permitting
concurrent analyses of multiple blood biomarker proteins at the patient's
bedside. The technology developed in this research may enable future biomarker-
guided precision treatment of life-threatening illnesses. Additionally, this
program will allow the research team to participate in conferences organized by
Science-Technology-Engineering-Mathematics (STEM) societies, such as the Society
of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE), Advancing Hispanics, Chicanos, and
Native Americans in Science (SACNAS) Society, and Society of Women Engineers
(SWE), to stimulate the interests of underrepresented minority students in
engineering and nanotechnology-based biological sensor device development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this study is to develop a point-of-care
(POC) digital immunoassay biosensor platform to address urgent needs for
unconventional diagnostic approaches to precision medicine of severe life-
threatening illnesses. The proposed platform is built upon innovative
immunoassay technology, which involves (i) confining antibody-conjugated
magnetic beads into an array of femtoliter-sized microwells on a microfluidic
chip, each forming a fluorescent 'pixel' activated when the target analyte is
bound, and (ii) counting the number of fluorescence signal-activated pixels from
a 'snapshot' image of the entire microwell array taken for pre-equilibrated
analyte binding events. With its high performance and robustness, our new
microfluidic digital biosensing technology may enable near-real-time, near-the-
patient concurrent quantification of circulating blood cytokine biomarkers. What
makes our approach innovative and unique is the unprecedented ability to
simultaneously achieve speed (&lt; 10 minutes in total with 30seconds of
incubation), sensitivity leading to limit of detection (LOD) of 0.1 - 1 pg/mL,
which achieves clinical thresholds, a large linear dynamic range, and
multiplexity (up to 24 samples) all together in the same platform. This research
will involve the development of a multiphysics model to provide a theoretical
foundation and optimization guideline for the proposed biosensor, construction
of a self-contained lab-on-a-disk system for portable, semi-automated microarray
biosensing of cytokine biomarkers, and validation of the system performance
under an intensive care unit setting. The receptor types used in this technology
may be further extended to employ a wide variety of antibodies, peptides, and
oligonucleotides. This could allow an expansion of this technology for other
biological assays including receptor-ligand assays, enzyme assays, and DNA
assays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.