* 1931045
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: STEM Opportunities in Prison Settings (STEM-OPS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jannette Carey, Education Development Center
* Cooperative Agreement
* Adrienne Dixson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,171,928.00

Potential STEM talent is lost each day for some of the most underserved and
underrepresented populations in our nation's incarcerated men, women, and youth.
With years devoid of quality STEM education and opportunities while in prison,
incarcerated individuals are often significantly underprepared in STEM and for
the STEM workforce. This educational debt exacerbates the pattern of
marginalization for these vulnerable populations. Their STEM literacy,
employability and potential for earning sustainable wages upon release are
stifled. This deficit in opportunity is especially stark for underrepresented
groups in the United States. Roughly 61% of the prison population is non-white,
which far exceeds the national average of 35%. The U.S. also has the highest per
capita incarceration rates in the world, incarcerating 698 men, women, and youth
for every 100,000 people. Equally unsettling, for the first time in American
history the population growth rate for incarcerated women has outpaced men by
almost 2 to 1 for the past 25 years. While there are many contributing factors
to the high rate of incarceration in the U.S., high quality prison STEM
education programs have been shown to help counter socio-economic and education
debts through greater STEM knowledge attainment, successful societal
integration, and increased wage and advancement potential, which increase the
likelihood that formerly incarcerated individuals and their children can live
productive lives. The NSF INCLUDES STEM Opportunities in Prison Settings (STEM-
OPS) Alliance endeavors to build a national network aimed at providing and
supporting viable pathways to STEM for the incarcerated and formerly
incarcerated. Using a collective impact approach, the Alliance will work
collaboratively with key stakeholders and the target population to advance
extant and untapped knowledge on high quality prison STEM education and
opportunities. This work builds on efforts supported by the National Science
Foundation, including exploratory work piloted by two NSF INCLUDES Design and
Development Launch Pilots. If successful, this Alliance has the potential to
significantly transform the face of the STEM workforce and the narrative
regarding the incarcerated and formerly incarcerated and their potential to
succeed in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM-OPS Alliance is comprised of
partner organizations committed to ensuring that STEM preparation during and
post incarceration is commonplace and successful. During its first year, the
Alliance will focus on establishing its national network through a shared vision
and goals and a collective impact approach. It will conduct systems ecology
mapping to inform the supports and resources needed for the target population to
succeed in STEM. Focus groups and interviews will be conducted with incarcerated
middle/high school aged youth to better understand their experiences in K-12
schools and with STEM education prior to and during incarceration. The results
of the mapping and youth study will be used to inform the future work of the
Alliance. Affordances the network endeavors to achieve include: (a) creating
accessible STEM opportunities for the target populations through STEM courses,
in-prison laboratories, research experiences for undergraduates (REUs),
internships, and mentoring, (b) a culturally responsive platform to connect
formerly incarcerated job seekers with STEM employment opportunities, (c) an
evidence-based toolkit for effective STEM in-prison program design and
implementation, (d) an annual convening of key stakeholders and representatives
from the target populations to share learnings, disseminate findings and
resources, and support the growth and development of the Alliance, and (d)
leveraging connections to the greater NSF INCLUDES National Network. A formative
and summative evaluation will be conducted by an external evaluator. Through its
network, the STEM OPS Alliance is well poised to directly impact 700-880
incarcerated and formerly incarcerated men and women and reach a significant
number of organizations working to improve STEM opportunities and outcomes
within prison contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is
funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of
Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in
STEM at scale. Significant co-funding has also been provided by the NSF
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program and
the NSF Advancing Informal STEM Learning Program
(AISL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.