* 1931363
* Frameworks: Collaborative Proposal: Software Infrastructure for Transformative Urban Sustainability Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jay Breidt, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,032,338.00

The United States is highly urbanized with more than 80% of the population
residing in cities. Cities draw from and impact natural resources and ecosystems
while utilizing vast, expensive infrastructures to meet economic, social, and
environmental needs. The National Science Foundation has invested in several
strategic research efforts in the area of urban sustainability, all of which
generate, collect, and manage large volumes of spatiotemporal data. Voluminous
datasets are also made available in domains such as climate, ecology, health,
and census. These data can spur exploration of new questions and hypotheses,
particularly across traditionally disparate disciplines, and offer unprecedented
opportunities for discovery and innovation. However, the data are encoded in
diverse formats and managed using a multiplicity of data management frameworks
-- all contributing to a break-down of the observational space that inhibits
discovery. A scientist must reconcile not only the encoding and storage
frameworks, but also negotiate authorizations to access the data. A consequence
is that data are locked in institutional silos, each of which represents only a
sliver of the observational space. This project, SUSTAIN (Software for Urban
Sustainability to Tailor Analyses over Interconnected Networks), facilitates and
accelerates discovery by significantly alleviating data-induced inefficiencies.
This effort has deep, far-reaching impact. It transforms urban sustainability
science by establishing a community of interdisciplinary researchers and
catalyzing their collaborative capacity. Hundreds of researchers from over 150
universities are members of our collaborating organizations and will immediately
benefit from SUSTAIN. Domains where spatiotemporal phenomena must be analyzed
benefit from this innovative research; the partnership with ESRI and Google
Earth amplify the impact of SUSTAIN, giving the project a global reach and
enabling international collaborative initiatives. The direct engagement with
middle school students in computer science and STEM disciplines has well-known
benefits and, combined with graduate training, produces a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUSTAIN targets
transformational capabilities for feature space exploration, hypotheses
formulation, and model creation and validation over voluminous, high-dimensional
spatiotemporal data. These capabilities are deeply aligned with the urban
sustainability community's needs, and they address challenges that preclude
effective research. SUSTAIN accomplishes these interconnected goals by enabling
holistic visibility of the observational space, interactive visualizations of
multidimensional information spaces using overlays, fast evaluation of
expressive queries tailored to the needs of the discovery process, generation of
custom exploratory datasets, and interoperation with diverse analyses software
frameworks - all leading to better science. SUSTAIN fosters deep explorations
through its transformative visibility of the federated information space. The
project reconciles the fragmentation and diversity of siloed data to provide
seamless, unprecedented visibility of the information space. A novel aspect of
the project's methodology is the innovative use of the Synopsis, a
spatiotemporal sketching algorithm that decouples data and information. The
methodology extracts and organizes information from the data and uses the
information (or sketches of the data) as the basis for explorations. The project
also incorporates a novel algorithm for imputations at the sketch level at
myriad spatiotemporal scopes. The effort creates a collaborative community of
multidisciplinary researchers to build an enduring software infrastructure for
urban sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.