* 1931354
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Designing Next-Generation MPI Libraries for Emerging Dense GPU Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* William Barth, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2023
* USD 383,161.00

The extremely high compute and communication capabilities offered by modern
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) and high-performance interconnects have led to
the creation of High-Performance Computing (HPC) platforms with multiple GPUs
and high-performance interconnects per node. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art
production quality implementations of the popular Message Passing Interface
(MPI) programming model do not have the appropriate support to deliver the best
performance and scalability for applications on such dense GPU systems. These
developments in High-End Computing (HEC) technologies and associated middleware
issues lead to the following broad challenge: How can existing production
quality MPI middleware be enhanced to take advantage of emerging networking
technologies to deliver the best possible scale-up and scale-out for HPC and
Deep Learning (DL) applications on emerging dense GPU systems? A synergistic and
comprehensive research plan, involving computer scientists from The Ohio State
University (OSU) and Ohio Supercomputer Center (OSC) and computational
scientists from the Texas Advanced Computing Center (TACC), and San Diego
Supercomputer Center (SDSC) and University of California San Diego (UCSD), is
proposed to address the above broad challenges with innovative solutions. The
proposed framework will be made available to collaborators and the broader
scientific community to understand the impact of the proposed innovations on
next-generation HPC and DL frameworks and applications in various science
domains. Multiple graduate and undergraduate students will be trained under this
project as future scientists and engineers in HPC. The proposed work will enable
curriculum advancements via research in pedagogy for key courses in the new Data
Science programs at OSU, SDSC and TACC. The established national-scale training
and outreach programs at TACC, SDSC and OSC will be used to disseminate the
results of this research to XSEDE users. Tutorials and workshops will be
organized at PEARC, SC and other conferences to share the research results and
experience with the community. The project is aligned with the National
Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI) to advance US leadership in HPC and the
recent initiative of the US Government to maintain leadership in Artificial
Intelligence (AI.)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed innovations include: 1)
Designing high-performance and scalable point-to-point, and collective
communication operations that fully utilize multiple network adapters and
advanced in-network computing features for GPU and CPU buffers within and across
nodes; 2) Designing novel datatype processing and unified memory management to
improve application performance; 3) Designing CUDA-aware I/O subsystem to
accelerate MPI I/O and checkpoint-restart for HPC and DL applications; 4)
Designing support for containerized environments to better enable easy
deployment of proposed solutions on modern cloud environments; and 5) Carry out
integrated development and evaluation to ensure proper integration of proposed
designs with the driving applications. The proposed designs will be integrated
into the widely-used MVAPICH2 library and made available. The project team
members will work closely with internal and external collaborators to facilitate
wide deployment and adoption of released software. The proposed solutions will
be targeted to enable scale-up and scale-out of the driving science domains
(molecular dynamics, lattice QCD, seismology, image classification, and fusion
research) on emerging dense GPU platforms. The transformative impact of the
proposed development effort is to achieve scalability, performance, and
portability out of HPC and DL frameworks and applications to take advantage of
emerging dense GPU platforms and hence, leading to significant advancements in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.