* 1931469
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Machine learning and FPGA computing for real-time applications in big-data physics experiments
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Philip Harris, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2023
* USD 904,179.00

The cyberinfrastructure needs for gravitational wave astrophysics, high energy
physics, and large-scale electromagnetic surveys have rapidly evolved in recent
years. The construction and upgrade of the facilities used to enable scientific
discovery in these disparate fields of research have led to a common pair of
computational grand challenges: (i) datasets with ever-increasing complexity and
volume; and (ii) data mining analyses that must be performed in real-time with
oversubscribed computational resources. Furthermore, the convergence of
gravitational wave astrophysics with electromagnetic and astroparticle surveys,
the very birth of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics, has already provided a glimpse
of the transformational discoveries that it will enable in years to come. Given
the unique potential for scientific discovery with the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) and the combination of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory (LIGO) and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST) for Multi-
Messenger Astrophysics, the community needs to accelerate the development and
exploitation of deep learning algorithms that will outperform existing
approaches. This project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's
mission, by promoting the progress of science. It will push the frontiers of
deep learning at scale, demonstrating the versatility and scalability of these
methods to accelerate and enable new physics in the big data era. Because these
methods are also applicable to many other parts of our national and global
economy and society, this work will positively impact many fields. The students
and junior scientists to be mentored and trained in this research will interact
closely with our industry partners, creating new career opportunities, and
strengthening synergies between academia and industry. The team will share the
algorithms with the community through open source software repositories, and
through our tutorials and workshops the team will train the community regarding
software credit and software citation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
PIs will build upon our recent work developing high quality deep learning
algorithms for real-time data analytics of time-series and image datasets, as
open source software. This work combines scalable deep learning algorithms,
trained with TB-size datasets within minutes using thousands of GPUs/CPUs, with
state-of-the-art approaches to endow the predictions of deterministic deep
learning models with complete posterior distributions. The team will also
investigate the use of Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs) to accelerate low-
latency inference of machine learning algorithms to minimize the demands of
future computing, which is a central goal for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics and
particle physics. The open source tools to be developed as part of these
activities will be readily shared with and adopted by LIGO, LHC, and LSST as
core data analytics algorithms that will significantly increase the speed and
depth of existing algorithms, enabling new physics while requiring minimal
computational resources for real-time inferences analyses. The team will
organize deep learning workshops and bootcamps to train students and researchers
on how to use and contribute to our framework, creating a wide network of
contributors and developers across key science missions. The team will leverage
existing open source and interactive model repositories, such as the Data and
Learning Hub for Science (DLHub) at Argonne, to reach out to a large cross-
section of communities that analyze open datasets from LIGO, LHC, and LSST, and
that will benefit from the use of these technologies that require minimal
computational resources for inference tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate
for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of
Physics in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.