* 1931483
* Collaborative:Elements:Cyberinfrastructure for Pedestrian Dynamics-Based Analysis of Infection Propagation Through Air Travel
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Sirish Namilae, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2023
* USD 163,500.00

When people congregate - for example, at entertainment events, in crowds, and
airplanes - they come into close contact with each other and can spread
infectious diseases. The Disney World measles outbreak in 2016 is a prominent
example. Air travel, in particular, is a leading factor in the spread of
infections, and there have been several outbreaks of serious diseases that
spread during air travel, such as SARS, H1N1 influenza, and tuberculosis. Public
health policies and procedures for crowd management, boarding airplanes, etc.
can help in mitigating the spread of disease, if these policies are science-
based. The spread of directly transmitted diseases is governed by the movement
patterns of people because the movement can bring an infected person close to
others. The science of "pedestrian dynamics" provides mathematical models that
can accurately simulate the movement of individuals in a crowd. These models
allow scientists to understand how different policies, such as boarding
procedures on planes, can prevent, or make worse, the transmission of
infections. This project seeks to develop a novel software that will provide a
variety of pedestrian dynamics models, infection spread models, as well as data
so that scientists can analyze the effect of different mechanisms on the spread
of directly transmitted diseases in crowded areas. The initial focus of this
project is on air travel. However, the software can be extended to a broader
scope of applications in movement analysis and epidemiology, such as in theme
parks and sports venues. The project team is working closely with decision
makers in airports, public health agencies, and the airline industry. This
collaboration will lead to practical applications of this science that will
improve public health. This project and the software will educate a wide range
of scientists as well as students, in particular, students from under-
represented groups, as well as professionals working in the public health
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a novel software that
will provide a variety of pedestrian dynamics models, infection spread models,
as well as data so that scientists can analyze the effect of different
mechanisms on the spread of directly transmitted diseases in crowded areas. The
initial focus of this project is on air travel. However, the software can be
extended to a broader scope of applications in movement analysis and
epidemiology, such as in theme parks and sports venues. Development of the
proposed software will involve several innovations. It will include a novel
phylogeography model that links fine-scale human movement data with virus
genetic information to more accurately model geographic diffusion of viruses.
New models for pedestrian movement will enable modeling of complex human
movement patterns. A recommendation system for the choice of pedestrian dynamics
models and a domain specific language for the input of policies and human
behaviors will enhance usability by researchers in diverse fields. Community
building initiatives will catalyze inter-disciplinary research to ensures the
long-term sustainability of the project through a critical mass of contributors
and users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.