* 1931681
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Non-invasive measurement of kinematics and rheology in a non-equilibrium drying complex fluid
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* James Gilchrist, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2023
* USD 304,023.00

Coatings impact many applications, including consumer products, medicine, food,
and engineering applications, typically serve one of three purposes: to protect
and extend the life of a product, to improve aesthetics, or to add new
functionality. Small defects that form during solidification of a fluid film
coating can harm the ultimate functionality of the coating. In a single
automotive plant, painting accounts for 60% of the energy consumption, and
refinishing to repair defects can cost more than $10 million/year. There are few
methods capable of non-invasive tracking of the coating properties during
drying. The objective of this project is to develop the capability to measure
the transient viscosity and flow of a drying coating with time- and space-
resolved optical measurements. The underlying knowledge gained via this project
in relation to how transient rheology affects fluid flow will be applicable to a
multitude of coating manufacturing processes. The project will have significant
impact on coatings design and processing, help to bridge the gap between
academia and industry, and include outreach to the science, technology,
engineering, and math communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective
of this proposal is to measure the transient rheology and kinematics of a drying
complex fluid. Traditional macroscopic rheological techniques require physical
contact with the coating during the measurement (i.e. the technique is invasive
and alters drying) and are unable to spatially resolve rheological changes
within the coating. This project will be enabled by non-invasive, high temporal
and spatial resolution optical techniques to measure the time- and space-
resolved rheology and flow in model complex fluids. Specifically, the research
goals are to (1) measure the spatial dependence of rheology in a drying thin
film with varied viscosity, (2) to determine and implement a suitable method of
convection correction for thin films of drying viscoelastic fluids, and (3) to
measure the impact of formulation and substrate angle on the transient
convection cell structure and related microstructure formation in thin films of
drying viscoelastic fluids. The proposed work on model ~0.100 mm thin films will
be applicable to a broad set of applications and will complement ongoing work
the industrial partner, PPG. When successful, this research will significantly
enhance the design and processing of coatings for a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.