* 1931871
* CPS: Medium: A Secure, Trustworthy, and Reliable Air Quality Monitoring System for Smart and Connected Communities
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Xinwen Fu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,198,111.00

A critical application of smart technologies is a smart, connected, and secured
environmental monitoring network that can help administrators and researchers
find better ways to incorporate evidence and data into public decision-making
related to the environment. In this project, the investigators will establish a
secure, trustworthy and reliable air quality monitoring network system using
densely deployed low-cost sensors in and around the city of Orlando, Florida, to
better inform development of pollution mitigation strategies in the region.
Access to the urban-scale air quality sensor data and forecasts can have a
positive social impact on environmental justice, public health, and
sustainability initiatives. The investigators will incorporate the outcome of
the project into courses on computer and network security and privacy, mobile
computing, environmental sciences and engineering, and social science. The
proposed work will provide hands-on exercises, research, and educational
opportunities for undergraduate, graduate students and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project include performing
remote low-cost sensor calibration, drift and malfunction detection. An
innovative modeling method will be developed to perform remote calibration for
low-cost PM2.5 sensors. A triple-sensor system will be developed, employing an
operational statistical method that cross-evaluates sensor measurement data
every hour to identify potential sensor drifts and malfunctions. The project
team will build a trustworthy air quality monitoring network. A trusted boot
strategy will be developed to ensure the sensor firmware is genuine at
bootstrapping, performing dynamic analysis of states of the system, sending the
measurement to a verifier for remote attestation, and accepting commands from
the verifier to act on violations. The team will also create an accurate deep
learning-based air quality prediction system based on a novel two-stage semi-
supervised learning framework from noisy and mixed-labeled sensor big data.
Social scientists on the team will conduct a social behavioral study of air
quality monitoring and prediction. This project emphasizes sustainable
empowerment of residents through processes of education on air quality and
training on data utilization and advocacy. The project goes beyond passive
citizen science to enable citizens to become advocates for their interests to
increase not only outside air quality but also the overall quality of life of
citizens in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.