* 1931261
* Collaborative Research: AccelNet: An International Network of Networks for Well-being in the Built Environment (IN2WIBE)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Zheng O'Neill, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 168,750.00

1931261 (O'Neill), 1931226 (Bercerik-Gerber), 1931238 (Wen), and 1931254 (Wu).
This AccelNet Catalytic level project will facilitate collaborative research,
education, and outreach through an International Network of Networks for Well-
being In the Built Environment (IN2WIBE). At the core of IN2WIBE is a shared
understanding that well-being is strongly dependent on the links between the
built environment and the personal, cultural, economic, and social forces that
drive health, productivity, satisfaction, and comfort. Research networks on
well-being in the built environment exist, however, they are shaped by their
institutional, regional, or social contexts and are mostly locally convergent.
Well-being in the built environment is a broad research area, and there exist
myriad approaches and solutions that emerge from different disciplinary
perspectives. These efforts need to be integrated to foster effective, robust,
and widely-applicable solutions. IN2WIBE will connect and educate future
building scholars on well-being in buildings while informing better building
design, construction, operation, and use. This will be achieved through
leveraging resources from 34 existing networks and partners in 5 continents (N.
America, Africa, Europe, Australia, and Asia), comprising a total of 17
countries. Through strategically designed activities, IN2WIBE will cultivate and
foster connections through the development of community consensus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IN2WIBE provides an opportunity to unite disciplinarily,
culturally, and geographically diverse networks around the world. Four
objectives of IN2WIBE are to: 1) facilitate new forms of collaborations by
integrating disciplines and networks in building and health fields; 2) engage
networks at multiple stages and scales, including networks in South Asia, North
Africa, and the Middle East; 3) promote innovative human-centric building design
and operation strategies that will benefit the larger community of scholars and
practitioners; and 4) prepare next generation building professionals with a
diverse background. Led by multidisciplinary teams, IN2WIBE will foster
collaborative research opportunities by coordinating the networks through a
series of focused, cross-disciplinary global activities, including roundtable
discussions, scholarly retreats, industry showcases, hackathons, TEDx talks,
design charrettes, and research workshops and conferences with focused themes.
IN2WIBE is targeted to benefit users by improving productivity, cognition,
convenience, comfort, health, and energy conservation. Ultimately, this network
of networks will promote awareness of healthy, resilient, and sustainable
environments. IN2WIBE outcomes will be disseminated via peer-reviewed
publications and international talks. The IN2WIBE team, led by female PIs, will
empower future researchers with knowledge in building engineering and science,
information science, social science, and public health through an
interdisciplinary educational program that includes a student exchange program
and a career development roundtable. IN2WIBE will also leverage various outreach
activities to facilitate minority student recruitment and retention and to
engage existing K-12 education and community outreaching
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts. This project is co-funded by the Environmental Sustainability
(ENG/CBET) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.