* 1931600
* Decentralized optimal control of cooperating networked multi-agent systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Sean Andersson, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 407,828.00

Multi-agent systems encompass a broad spectrum of applications, ranging from
connected autonomous vehicles and the emerging internet of cars, where the
spatial domain may be hundreds of miles with time horizons over hours of days,
to micro-air vehicles which operate over meter length and minute time scales,
and down to nano-manipulation with nanometer spatial microsecond time
resolution. This project seeks to address five key challenges in networked
multi-agent systems: (1) scalability, necessitated by the increasing large-scale
nature of the networked systems being designed, (2) autonomy at the individual
level, required to ensure a resilient and secure system, (3) communication that
is secure and efficient, particularly crucial in wireless settings where the
agents have limited energy resources, (4) avoiding local optima that arise from
the complex nature of the system interactions and which may yield poor
performance, and (5) exploiting real-time data, taking advantage of the modern
reality of data-rich environments. While the core of the project is centered on
a theoretical approach that extends over the diverse length and time scales
needed, it also includes experimental validation using robotic platforms that
will provide a platform to showcase and communicate results to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of the proposed project is captured
through a general optimization (both static and dynamic) framework which
encompasses the vast majority of interesting problems faced by researchers and
practitioners. Within this framework, we will pursue three specific tasks: (1)
Develop on-line solutions for dynamic optimization problems in networked multi-
agent systems, (2) Determine when decentralization without sacrificing the
performance of a centralized solution is possible and develop explicit
decentralized control algorithms even in cases where some performance
degradation is needed, and (3) Address the challenge of multiple local minima in
the optimization through the use of boosting functions to escape those local
optima. The intellectual merit of these tasks lies in three conceptual
cornerstones: (1) Replacing the traditional time- driven paradigm with an event-
driven approach, allowing for algorithms whose complexity grows with the number
of such events, not the state dimensionality of the network, (2) Using a data-
driven approach to optimization, allowing for an approach which can handle the
increasing complexity of real-world systems where traditional approaches based
on elegant but often inadequate classical models fail, and (3) Escaping local
optima in distributed optimization, where the use of novel mechanisms for
escaping those local solutions overcomes the limitations inherent to gradient-
based approaches. The project is built upon a framework for networked multi-
agent systems that is extremely broad, encompassing sub-problems such as
coverage control, consensus, persistent monitoring, and optimal formation
control, and application domains from connected automated vehicles down to nano-
manipulation. As such, our research will advance the state-of-the-art in all
domains that rely on networked systems. In addition, specific tasks on education
and outreach will be pursued, including hosting rising high school seniors in
the labs of the PIs for a summer research internship, showcasing the results to
middle and high-school students through demonstrations with mobile robots, and
engaging undergraduate students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.