* 1931136
* Symposium on Undergraduate Research - at the APS September 16, 2019
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Harold Metcalf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2020
* USD 9,000.00

This award provides travel support for undergraduate student participation in
the Symposium on Undergraduate Research. This Symposium will be held at the
annual meeting of the American Physical Society Division of Laser Science (DLS),
in conjunction with the annual meeting of the Optical Society of America. The
conference program includes many of the research topics central to Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics. The support of students through this award makes
a substantial contribution to the education and training of future scientists.
Students who graduate with a background in laser science acquire a broad range
of knowledge and skills that enable them to contribute to progress in many areas
of science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is scheduled to be
held Washington DC on September 16, 2019. It offers an opportunity for
undergraduate students to present their research results and to interact with
senior scientists primarily from the United States, but also the broader
international community. Support is provided only for US students (students
enrolled in US universities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.