* 1931657
* RoL: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: EXTREME ENVIRONMENTS, PHYSIOLOGICAL ADAPTATION, AND THE ORIGIN OF SPECIES
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Michael Tobler, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 12/31/2023
* USD 783,069.00

Extreme environments allow for the investigation of life's capacity and
limitations to cope with far-from-average environmental conditions. Springs rich
in hydrogen sulfide represent some of the most extreme freshwater environments
because hydrogen sulfide halts energy production in animal cells. Nonetheless,
some fish have colonized sulfide springs throughout the Americas and have
evolved into new species in the process. This project will investigate how the
genetic changes that mediate the fish's ability to tolerate hydrogen sulfide
impact their ability to successfully interbreed with related fish that live in
adjacent freshwater streams. It involves the identification of genetic
differences between hydrogen sulfide-tolerant and susceptible populations,
particularly in genes associated with pathways affected by hydrogen sulfide
toxicity. In addition, it will be tested how hybrids between tolerant and
susceptible populations differ from their parents. Specifically, the function of
mitochondria and whole organisms will be compared between parents and hybrids in
presence or absence of hydrogen sulfide. This project will yield new insights
into how adaptation to environmental stress leads to genetic incompatibilities
that represent barriers for interbreeding between populations, and thus, into
how new species form. This project provides training opportunities in
integrative biology for participants at all levels of higher education. It will
also contribute to science education and public outreach by training scientists
to become effective science communicators and reach non-expert audiences in
collaboration with informal education institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural selection drives adaptive evolution and can cause
speciation. However, the potential role of intrinsic genetic incompatibilities
during speciation with gene flow remains largely unknown. Investigating
speciation with gene flow in the context of physiological adaptation allows
closing existing gaps of knowledge. This is possible through integrated analyses
of how selection shapes genomic divergence, how recombination of divergent
genomes in hybrids affects physiological function, and how these functional
consequences affect the speciation process. This project tests a priori
predictions about the links between physiological adaptation to toxic hydrogen
sulfide and the emergence of reproductive isolation. It will focus on components
of a highly conserved metabolic pathway, oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS),
which plays a central role in adaptation to hydrogen sulfide. Because OXPHOS
components are encoded by both the mitochondrial and the nuclear genomes, theory
predicts that adaptive modification of OXPHOS should give rise to mitonuclear
incompatibilities and contribute to the speciation process. This project
investigates the mechanistic links between physiological adaptation and
speciation by testing a priori predictions about (1) how OXPHOS adaptation
affects genomic divergence between populations living in different environments,
(2) the functional consequences of mitonuclear incompatibilities at the
biochemical, physiological, and organismal levels, and (3) the relative role of
mitonuclear incompatibilities during speciation. The project employs an
integrative approach that combines population genomics, assays of enzyme,
organelle, and whole organism function, as well as field and laboratory
experiments for the quantification of multiple pre- and postzygotic mechanisms
of reproductive isolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by
BIO/Emerging Frontiers, DEB/Evolutionary Processes, and IOS/Integrative
Ecological Physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.