* 1931391
* Frameworks: Collaborative Research: Extensible and Community-Driven Thermodynamics, Transport, and Chemical Kinetics Modeling with Cantera: Expanding to Diverse Scientific Domains
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Steven Barrett, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 507,708.00

Modeling and simulation play key enabling roles in aiding and accelerating
discovery connecting to energy and chemical research. In applications such as
energy storage and conversion, atmospheric chemistry, and catalytic chemical
processing, modeling and simulation software helps facilitate technological
advances. However, in recent years the available software has not kept pace with
the increasing chemical complexity and interdisciplinarity of advanced
technology solutions. This project addresses this gap by developing and
promoting new state-of-the-art modeling capabilities for diverse scientific
fields in the existing Cantera software platform. Cantera is an extensible,
open-source framework that enables researchers to study basic science and
support new technology development and enables teachers to demonstrate concepts
and applications in their classrooms. This project extends Cantera to provide
new cross-disciplinary research capabilities and provides a foundation for
further community-driven improvements to the Cantera framework. Simultaneous
development of the open-source platform and outreach to new user communities
will facilitate both fundamental scientific insight and practical technology
design and analysis, train the next generation of researchers in both software-
development best practices and scientific knowledge, and generate reusable and
open educational materials. In addition to work on the framework development,
the project includes training of graduate students as well as education,
outreach and scientific community engagement
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will develop the Cantera
software platform in service of three objectives: (i) extend Cantera?s
scientific capabilities to support the development of transformative
technologies; (ii) expand Cantera?s user base in fields including
electrochemistry, heterogeneous catalysis, and atmospheric chemistry; and (iii)
broaden participation in the software?s development and management to improve
Cantera?s sustainability and usability. These will be achieved by developing new
scientific modeling capabilities, conducting outreach to new user communities,
and improving Cantera?s architecture and software development practices. The new
scientific modeling capabilities will focus on four content areas:
thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, transport, and multi-phase capabilities.
Outreach activities, including publications and presentations, conference
workshops, and domain-specific software toolkits with examples to demonstrate
Cantera operation and functionality, will engage new and existing communities.
The project will establish a scientific advisory board, consisting of experts
from diverse fields and backgrounds who will help guide software development and
outreach. Finally, the architectural and software engineering changes in this
work will improve extensibility and interoperability and implement advanced
numerical algorithms to enable the application of Cantera to new types of
problems. These changes will also make it easier for users to contribute to
Cantera, ensure software correctness, and provide new ways of accessing
Cantera?s functionality. The resulting software framework will aid in scientific
discovery and development of key enabling technologies with broad societal
impacts. These impacts include next-generation batteries and fuel cells for
clean energy storage and conversion, catalytic and membrane reactors for
electrolysis, novel fuel generation, chemical processing, environmentally
conscious combustion applications, and understanding and addressing
anthropogenic challenges in atmospheric chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.