* 1931137
* Conference: The Sixth Symposium on Industrial Ecology for Young Professionals: Turning Research into Action
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Matthew Eckelman, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This grant is in partial support of the Symposium on Industrial Ecology for
Young Professionals, organized by the International Society for Industrial
Ecology Student Chapter Board (ISIE-SCB) under the mentorship of an NSF CAREER
Awardee from the CBET Environmental Sustainability program. The symposium
focuses on transition of industrial ecology (IE) research into tangible outcomes
through policy development or implementation. The main goal of this symposium is
to provide an opportunity for young professionals who perform research in IE to
use their research skills to identify and develop ways to translate
environmental engineering and sustainability research concepts into actionable
items, visit industrial facilities in the locale of the symposium site that have
implemented innovative IE concepts, discuss their novel research ideas and
experiences, and receive constructive feedback. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will advance participants'
fundamental skills in research and grant writing, oral presentation, developing
effective research products, and increasing the impact of their research. The
symposium will also provide students and young researchers with the skills to
connect their research interests to policy relevant questions. Additionally, the
symposium will provide an opportunity to facilitate initiation of international
collaborations among young professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.