* 1931154
* Unveiling the evolution of neural differentiation mechanisms in animals: a study of the structure and function of the POU-IV/Brn-3 gene regulatory network in Cnidaria.
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Nagayasu Nakanishi, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/29/2024
* USD 764,975.00

Understanding how nervous systems emerged and diversified over evolutionary time
is a fundamental problem in biology. This research project will use sea
anemones, whose ancestors split off from all other animal lineages over 600
million years ago, to reconstruct the deep evolutionary history of neural
development in animals. The resultant knowledge will contribute to the
understanding of nervous system evolution in two ways: (1) it will provide
fundamental insights into developmental mechanisms that were critical for the
origin of nervous systems over 600 million years ago, and 2) it will provide new
information about how these mechanisms have diversified in the intervening time
period. This project will additionally broaden participation of underrepresented
minorities in STEM by actively involving minority undergraduate students
directly in research through participation in the Undergraduate Student
Mentoring Program of Arkansas INBRE (IDeA Network of Biomedical Research
Excellence). Furthermore, the research will strengthen both the research and
educational environments at the University of Arkansas by using a unique, non-
traditional animal model system that makes it easy give students first-hand
experience with cutting-edge biological technologies such as CRISPR-Cas9 genome
editing, Next Generation Sequencing, and confocal microscopy. The research will
advance fundamental knowledge about the origin and evolution of nervous systems,
as well as benefit society through basic science research and
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In bilaterian animals (e.g. mice, worms and
flies), the class IV POU homeodomain transcription factor (POU-IV or Brn-3)
plays an evolutionarily conserved role in regulating neural subtype
differentiation and maintenance. However, it is unclear whether the conservation
of POU-IV function extends beyond Bilateria, or whether divergent, novel
regulatory mechanisms exist in non-bilaterian animal groups with nervous systems
such as Cnidaria (e.g. jellyfish, corals and sea anemones) â€“ the sister group of
Bilateria. To address this problem, the research will dissect the structure and
function of the POU-IV gene regulatory network in the cnidarian sea anemone
Nematostella vectensis. Specifically, this project will focus on 1) defining
neural subtypes specified by POU-IV by combining in-depth gene expression
analyses with gene function analyses via CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genome editing,
and 2) dissecting the structure of the POU-IV gene regulatory network
underpinning neural fate specification by combining gene function perturbation,
ChIP-seq, and transcriptome analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Organization Program of the Neural Systems Cluster, and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.