* 1931371
* Preparing a 21st Century STEM Workforce: Defining & Measuring Leadership in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 02/12/2019,09/30/2021
* Denise Simmons, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 09/30/2021
* USD 281,223.00

This project aims to address the gap in understanding of how leadership
competency is defined, developed, and measured in engineering undergraduates.
Specifically, the goals are to: 1) investigate the definition of leadership as
defined by engineering students, faculty, and industry; 2) develop a theoretical
model of leadership development as perceived by undergraduate engineering
students and faculty; 3) develop a survey instrument to measure leadership
capacity and efficacy in engineering; and 4) collect and analyze data with an
eye toward evaluating differences between or among major, gender, socio-economic
status, generational status, and ethnicity. The impact of this project is the
enabling of measurement of leadership competencies among engineers on a
continuum from first year undergraduate students through graduation and into
their careers as practicing engineers. The results of this project can be used
to inform evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities, policies and
practices in engineering programs to improve the nation's capacity to prepare
students in STEM careers.

The project uses a multilevel, multiphase, multi-institutional, mixed
methodology to: 1) generate a clear definition of engineering leadership from
the perspectives of undergraduate students and faculty in engineering, ABET, and
National Academy Engineering, and the construction industry; 2) develop a
theoretical model describing leadership development among undergraduate
engineering students; and 3) produce and pilot test an instrument to measure
leadership competency (i.e., efficacy, capacity, and mastery) across a continuum
from undergraduate engineering students to practicing professionals. The
research plan is grounded in theories from engineering education and leadership
studies and builds on the project team's previous work in producing a meta-
synthesis of leadership in engineering. To address the interconnected outcomes,
this project uses the following methods: three-round Delphi Study, Q-Sort,
deductive analysis, a seven-step survey development protocol and grounded theory
methods.