* 1931750
* CPS: Medium: Secure Smart Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dawson Engler, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

Machining is software. Gcode, the programming language for machining tools such
as milling machines, lathes, and plasma cutters, was developed in the late 1950s
and remains the dominant language today. In the past 60 years, programming
languages and software have changed and advanced tremendously, but Gcode remains
mostly unchanged. This is true both for legacy systems as well as new ones, such
as 3D printers. Machining pioneered cyber-physical systems but, from a computing
perspective, remains half a century in the past. Enabling machine tools as
modern, networked programming systems has the potential to revolutionize the
$40B machining industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
demonstrate new techniques that safely and securely improve machining
automation, using new embedded operating systems, program analysis, secure code
distribution, and user tools. The research relies on three important principles:
discretization, programmable safety, and end-to-end integrity with auditing. The
first principle, discretization, is a method of program representation that
greatly simplifies correctness checks and verifying invariants. Rather than rely
on implicit curves and geometric to define physical shapes, programs use an
explicit, discretized representation defined by the desired machining precision.
The second principle, programmable safety, allows quickly-changing software to
have the same physical safety as traditional machining systems, by using high-
assurance software that operates correctly even if the entire system crashes.
Finally, end-to-end integrity and auditing allows operators to verify code
before running it and allows the system to prove that programs executed
correctly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.