* 1931328
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Scalable Modular Software and Methods for High-Accuracy Materials and Condensed Phase Chemistry Simulation
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Garnet Chan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

How electrons are arranged in materials gives rise to a large variety of
different behaviors. We can observe these behaviors and use them in various
technologies. However, the prediction of these behaviors is a serious challenge.
This makes the successful design of new materials harder. The goal of the
Materials Genome Initiative is to use computer simulations to model electrons
according to the laws of quantum physics. This will allow researchers to design
new materials with desired properties. This project aims to build fast and
accurate computer programs which simulate those new materials. These programs
combine advances in computer science, quantum chemistry, and condensed-matter
physics. They will be implemented in an open-source Python-based community code.
This distribution model allows other researchers to use this code and to
contribute new features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses gaps in
existing software cyberinfrastructure in quantum materials simulation, by
developing novel parallel implementations of low-scaling, high-accuracy methods.
In particular, new techniques for mean-field calculations will be developed,
which will act as groundwork for periodic coupled-cluster and quantum Monte
Carlo methods. State-of-the-art techniques in sparsity and tensor decomposition
will be employed to achieve good system-size scaling while retaining accuracy
within each of these numerical schemes. Critically, the methods will be
developed using efficient high-level software abstractions, implemented as
Python-level modules within PySCF that leverage the Cyclops library for
massively-parallel execution. The library software infrastructure will also be
extended to maximize productivity via source-to-source automatic
differentiation, as well as to enable execution of sparse kernels on emerging
GPU-based supercomputing architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
jointly supported by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, and the
Division of Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry within the NSF
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.