* 1931265
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Nature of Fire-Vegetation Relationships in Tropical Savanna-Forest Mosaics
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2025
* Lynn Clark, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 01/31/2025
* USD 199,795.00

Once viewed as destructive, fire in tropical savannas is now seen as critical to
the maintenance of species-diverse plant and animal communities. Indeed,
scientists now recognize that while it is important to exclude fire from places
where it is destructive (tropical forests), it is equally important to promote
fire in places where it is beneficial (savannas). Appropriate fire management is
key to conserving biodiversity and sustaining the livelihoods of people.
However, little is known about how (or if) fire-promotion and fire-protection
can be accomplished simultaneously. The overarching goal of this project is to
reconcile the need for savanna fires with the need to protect forests from
damaging wildfire. Using field and laboratory studies in savannas and forests of
Bolivia, this project will establish the scientific basis for how people living
in a savanna/forest matrix can use fire in an ecologically beneficial manner.
Additionally, this project will provide opportunities for a doctoral student and
a postdoctoral scholar to conduct international field research, and for
undergraduate students to conduct laboratory analyses in the USA. To foster
international educational exchange, a short course in tropical ecology and
botanical field methods will be offered to students from the USA and Bolivia. A
research symposium and workshop will be organized to further address the
challenges of incorporating beneficial fire management into savanna and forest
conservation initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide the
first-ever field-based test of alternative stable state theory in a tropical
savanna-forest mosaic where fire-vegetation feedbacks can be isolated from the
effects of soils and plant photosynthetic type. For most of the past century, in
regions where the climate can support closed-canopy forests, ecologists
attributed the existence of tropical savannas to edaphic conditions or human-
caused deforestation. Such ideas are being replaced by a new paradigm in which
savannas and forests are modelled as alternative stable states, maintained by
feedbacks between plant communities and fire. This research, to be conducted
across savanna-forest boundaries in Bolivia, will use vegetation and soil
sampling, field experiments, remote sensing, plant microfossil identification
and dating, and functional trait measurements to understand the contemporary,
paleoecological, and evolutionary relationships between plant communities and
fire. Results are expected to demonstrate that in the absence of external
drivers, such as logging, a persistence-colonization trade-off in grasses
promotes savanna flammability while constraining savanna expansion into
forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.