* 1931525
* Collaborative Research: Element: Development of MuST, A Multiple Scattering Theory based Computational Software for First Principles Approach to Disordered Materials
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Yang Wang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2023
* USD 269,950.00

The effect of disorder in materials is of great fundamental and technological
interest. Disorder disrupts the periodic arrangement of atoms in perfect
materials. It profoundly affects materials properties and can provide a valuable
tool in changing and controlling their physical properties. The best-known
example is the transistor and other silicon components which are controlled
through the introduction of disorder. Quantum mechanical states in
semiconductors induced by introducing impurities and disorder can dramatically
increase the efficiency of solar cells. There are many other materials of
potential technological interest, such as high entropy alloys, dilute magnetic
semiconductors, and topological insulators where disorder plays an essential
role. Being able to understand, control, and predict the disorder effects in
real physical systems is essential for the development of new structural and
functional materials for future technological applications. This project
involves building computer software that is aimed to enable the study of
disorder effects using the principles of quantum mechanics and to accelerate the
discovery of materials essential for industry and information technology
applications. The creation of a large community of users and developers who will
accelerate this process is envisioned. This project supports interdisciplinary
training and education of undergraduate and graduate students in the fields of
theoretical condensed matter physics and computational materials sciences. The
user community of this software will be supported through webinars, discussion
groups on social media, and online tutorial materials. This award supports
various training and outreach efforts, including an annual "Beowulf Boot Camp"
and "Quantum Day" for high-school students, and undergraduate and graduate
research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will build upon and unify
decades of development of research codes for the first-principles investigation
of disordered materials. These codes include the Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker Coherent
Potential Approximation, which is the first principles code for the study of
random alloys, and the Locally Self-consistent Multiple Scattering code, which
can enable the study of extremely large disordered systems from first principles
using the largest parallel supercomputers available. Strong disorder effects and
Anderson localization have been studied on the model Hamiltonian level using the
Typical Medium Dynamical Cluster Approximation (TMDCA). To enable the study the
strong disorder effects in real system within the first-principles Locally Self-
consistent Multiple Scattering formalism with cluster embedding, the project
team will use the typical medium analysis of TMDCA. The software product of this
project, MuST, will be made available on GitHub as a self-contained open source
package with detailed online documentations. MuST will create a scalable
approach for first principles studies of quantum materials that efficiently
utilizes petascale and future high-performance computing resources. It will
expand the user community by enabling researchers within academia and industry
to perform calculations that are presently out of reach for most users. MuST
will provide a computational framework for the investigation of phase
transitions and electron localization in the presence of disorder in real
materials and will also enable the computational study of local chemical
correlation effects on the magnetic structure, phase stability, and mechanical
properties of high entropy alloys and other disordered
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the NSF
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure and the Division of Materials Research
within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.