* 1931077
* Designing Responsive Physical Learning Environments to Promote Student Engagement and Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Steven Van Dessel, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,991.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE:EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by laying a foundation for developing adaptive physical
environments that promote student learning. In addition to the teaching, social,
and cultural factors that can influence students' learning, the physical
learning environment can also significantly affect student performance and
engagement. The physical learning environment includes lighting and air
temperature, quality, and movement. A major challenge for creating a physical
learning environment that promotes engagement for all learners is that students
in the same set of conditions can feel different levels of comfort.
Unfortunately, current indoor environmental design has limited flexibility
because the physical environment is typically treated as a static building
feature. For example, in contemporary building design and smart building
control, the systems work to maintain a fixed temperature, regardless of
variations in occupants' perceptions. Thus, the current approach represents a
missed opportunity to leverage personal environmental variations to improve
human performance, including learning. The research that will be conducted in
this project will begin the process of leveraging personal environmental
variations. Specifically, the project will examine levels of student engagement
and variations in engagement that may be associated with features of physical
learning environments. As conceived, the proposed work has potential to advance
knowledge and impact education by informing the design of learning spaces to
increase students' engagement and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
preliminary data, the major goal of the project is to more fully understand the
relationship between student engagement and the physical learning environment.
To achieve this goal, the research team will vary conditions such as air
temperature, lighting, and air movement in simulated learning settings. Students
will self-report their comfort, and the team will investigate correlations of
these data with student performance on assessments and self-reports of their
engagement. The team will also employ existing, validated instruments to measure
student engagement and mood states. This aspect of the study is designed to
validate the preliminary data, which suggests that student engagement correlates
to student comfort in the physical environment. It will also provide data to
assess the sensitivity of student engagement to multiple physical environmental
factors. Next, again building on preliminary data, the team aims to use computer
vision to collect data and develop algorithms using facial characteristics,
posture, and gestural behaviors for real-time engagement prediction. Lastly, the
project will assess the effectiveness of applying personal short-term
environmental stimuli, such as increased air flow and thermal changes, as
interventions to enhance student engagement. Executed in three phases, this
project aims to advance knowledge and understanding of the complex relationship
between the built environment and student engagement. Findings will seek to
describe the role environmental stimuli play in improving student engagement to
inform the design of next-generation smart classrooms. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. This is an Engaged Student Learning project in the
Exploration and Design tier. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
tools and practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.