* 1931443
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: User-Centered Deployment of Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Robert Proctor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 12/31/2021
* USD 343,110.00

Differential privacy (DP) has been accepted as the de facto standard for data
privacy in the research community and beyond. Both companies and government
agencies are trying to deploy DP technologies. Broader deployments of DP
technology, however, face challenges. This project aims to understand the needs
of different stakeholders in data privacy, and to develop algorithms and
software to enable broader deployment of private data sharing. The project's
novelty is combining the expertise of social science researchers with that of
computer scientists who have both theoretical and system research experiences
related to DP to develop a hybrid approach to private data sharing to achieve
better privacy-utility tradeoff. The project's impacts are in advancing the
state-of-the-art with regard to DP deployment in particular and privacy
protection in general. More specifically the project identifies the workflow of
DP data sharing, improve understanding of DP communication, and develop new
algorithms, privacy concepts, and privacy mechanisms to support deployment of
DP. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project has four tasks that will advance the
understanding of user-centered DP and lay a foundation for its deployment. (1)
Examine individual human users' perception, comprehension and acceptance of the
concept and guarantee of DP and the effect of privacy parameter, and to
investigate effective ways to communicate those concepts. (2) Implement methods
from the domains of human factors and human-computer interaction to identify
tasks, goals, and workflow in private data sharing. (3) Develop key algorithms
and software for a hybrid approach of private data sharing. In the hybrid
approach, one first publishes a private synopsis of dataset using carefully
selected low-degree marginals. From these marginals, one can either synthesize
new datasets, or answer queries directly using inference under the maximum
entropy principle. The hybrid approach enhances this with interactive query
answering, enabling extraction of information not covered by low-degree
marginals. (4) Develop techniques to further improve the privacy-utility
tradeoff in private data sharing, including a theory of differential privacy
under publishable information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.