* 1931738
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Mitigation strategies for enhancing performance while maintaining viability in cyber-physical systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Ilya Kolmanovsky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Complex cyber-physical systems (CPS) that operate in dynamic and uncertain
environments will inevitably encounter unanticipated situations during their
operation. Examples range from naturally occurring faults in both the cyber and
physical components to attacks launched by malicious entities with the purpose
of disrupting normal operations. As infrastructures, e.g. energy,
transportation, industrial systems and built environments, are getting smarter,
the chance of a fault or attack increases. When this happens, it is essential
that system behavior remains viable, i.e., it does not violate pre-specified
operating constraints on run-time behavior. Preserving safety, for instance, is
of paramount importance to avoid damage and possible loss of life. This project
will develop strategies for mitigating the effects of such unanticipated
situations, that seek to optimize for performance (measured by multiple metrics
such as cost, efficiency, accuracy, etc.) without compromising viability. The
emphasis will be on the automotive application domain, given the upcoming
revolution brought by innovations such as vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V), vehicle to
infrastructure (V2I) communication and autonomous driving, and because of the
safety-criticality of the transportation infrastructure. To ground our research
on relevant problems, we will engage industrial partners. The outcomes of the
project will be validated upon test scenarios drawn from the automotive
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental issues arising when safety-critical
CPS operate in uncertain environments will be addressed, with the objective of
obtaining a better understanding of, and developing optimal or near-optimal
strategies for dealing with, emergent problems that arise from the interaction
of resource-allocation and control strategies in such systems. One of the
novelties of the technical approach adopted in this project is to closely
integrate three different CPS perspectives control theory, automotive &amp;
aerospace application domain-knowledge, and real-time resource management &amp;
scheduling in order to develop run-time mitigation strategies for complex CPS's
operating in dynamic and uncertain environments, and exposed to a variety of
faults. Such an integrated approach will allow for the identification of
emergent problems that arise from the interaction of resource-allocation and
control algorithms, that may otherwise remain undiscovered if the control and
resource-allocation aspects were considered separately.&lt;br/&gt;The general
design-time and run-time tools for creating resilient CPSs will be guided by the
implementation and evaluation of the research in simulation and on laboratory
test-beds upon three applications from the automotive domain: fault resilience
for variable-valve internal combustion engines; fail-safe energy management for
hybrid-electric vehicles; and robust sensor management for autonomous
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.