* 1931249
* Adaptive Decoding of Noisy, Non-stationary Neural Spiking Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2024
* Ian Stevenson, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2024
* USD 399,999.00

Decoding techniques allow neuroscientists to measure to what extent properties
of external stimuli or movements can be reconstructed from neural activity
observed in a specific brain area. Although most decoders only take average
neural responses into account, decoding performance can also be affected by the
variability in neural responses. Neural variability, in addition to a neuron’s
mean response, depends on and can provide information about the external world.
Here the researchers propose developing new statistical techniques that can more
accurately model variability in neural activity and adapt to changes in neural
response properties over time. More accurate decoding techniques have the
potential to improve brain machine interfaces, such as motor prostheses and
cochlear implants. The statistical tools developed here may also have
applications outside of neuroscience as general methods for describing count
data. As part of this project, graduate and undergraduate students participating
in the research will receive interdisciplinary training in computational
neuroscience and gain familiarity with the underlying neural systems. The models
and results from this project will be integrated into graduate computational
neuroscience coursework, and all code will be shared publicly with the
neuroscience community to reproduce and extend our results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this work is to develop model-based
statistical approaches that can more accurately describe within-trial and
between-trial variability in neural spiking activity. The researchers will apply
these models to 1) characterize noise and non-stationarity in single neuron
spiking, 2) evaluate how variability is shared in populations of neurons, and 3)
more accurately and robustly decode external variables. This work is based on a
framework that combines Conway-Maxwell-Poisson models of spike count noise and
adaptive filtering models of non-stationarity. Since most existing methods
ignore non-Poisson noise, non-stationarity, or both, the work proposed here will
provide a new set of tools for systems neuroscience. The research will examine
multi-electrode spike train recordings from multiple existing data sets and
quantify heterogeneity in neural responses across cell types, behaviors, and
brain areas. There is growing evidence that neural variability depends on many
factors, including an animal’s alertness and motivation, as well as properties
of the environment and task. The results of this modeling will provide a more
detailed understanding of the neural code and the role of variability in this
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.