* 1931439
* Collaborative Proposal: Frameworks: Project Tapis: Next Generation Software for Distributed Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Joseph Stubbs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,184,915.00

The goal of a robust cyberinfrastructure (CI) ecosystem is to become a catalyst
for discovery and innovation by fostering the development of software frameworks
as sustainable production-quality services. Modern science and engineering
research increasingly span multiple, geographically distributed data centers and
leverage instruments, experimental facilities and a network of national and
regional CI. The Tapis framework will enable scientists to accomplish
computational and data intensive research in a secure, scalable, and
reproducible way allowing scientists to focus on their research instead of the
technology needed to accomplish it. Tapis will allow easier implementation,
sharing and re-use of complex computational applications, workflows, and
infrastructure and enable analysis previously too challenging for researchers.
The framework will maximize application portability, allowing flexible
scheduling of geographically distributed computational workloads, offer a web-
based science-as-a-service to enable multi-facility, decentralized deployments,
and provide production-grade support for sensors and streaming data. Tapis will
impact multiple science domains, geographic and underrepresented communities
with the potential to tackle the world's most important scientific problems
spanning astronomy, climate science, medicine, natural hazards, and
sustainability science. Education and outreach will include sponsored workshops,
hackathons and training materials covering the platform and providing examples
to encourage widespread adoption for users across a variety of technical skills
and targeting the next generation of young researchers and professionals through
immersive workshops and professional development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tapis, will be a new platform for
distributed computational experiments that leverages NSF's investments in the
Agave, Abaco and CHORDS projects. The Tapis software framework will 1) provide
production-grade support for sensors and streaming data, 2) maximize application
portability, allowing flexible scheduling of computational workloads across
geographically distributed providers, and 3) provide science-as-a-service HTTP-
based RESTful APIs to enable multi-facility, decentralized deployments that are
both secure and scalable. Working alongside a diverse set of domain researchers
to drive real-world use cases, Tapis will be the underlying cyberinfrastructure
for computational workflows and science gateways. Tapis will leverage containers
to maximize application portability, allowing flexible scheduling of
computational workloads across geographically distributed providers. The project
will achieve this flexibility by introducing execution system capabilities and
application requirements throughout the framework. The Jobs service will be run
in a distributed manner to take advantage of data locality and, optionally, to
schedule jobs on underutilized systems. Tapis will deploy in centralized or
distributed configurations using a microservices architecture that includes a
novel, decentralized security and authorization kernel. This kernel can be
deployed on-premises to retain local control over confidential data. Custom
microservices can be plugged into the security kernel to provide new
capabilities, resulting in a cyberinfrastructure ecosystem for distributed
computing. To effectively execute Tapis, teams from the Texas Advanced Computing
Center (TACC), the University of Texas at Austin (UT), and the University of
Hawaii (UH) will leverage a long-standing collaboration to support investigator-
driven, geographically distributed, data-intensive
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.