* 1931662
* EPCN: Learning power grids from limited measurements: fundamental limits and practical algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 386,840.00

This project develops methods to make the management of future power grids more
efficient, secure, and robust. The development of an intellectual basis and
practical algorithms for future energy systems is an important challenge and a
goal of this project.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, network topology and line
parameters are critical information for the management of power systems. Even
though errors in such information can significantly impact system operation,
there is relatively little work in identifying them, especially when
measurements are limited both temporally and spatially. This problem is even
more severe in medium-voltage and low-voltage distribution grids, not only
because the lack of monitoring infrastructure today, but also because topology
may change more frequently in response to changes in load or solar generation.
Our goal is to develop a theory and algorithms for topology and line parameter
identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will focus on cases where measurements
are available only at limited locations or/and for a limited time period. These
settings are difficult but realistic, as, e.g., most distribution systems today
have measurements from substations where a distribution grid interfaces with the
bulk transmission grid, and from smart meters at end users, but not much
measurements in between. Future applications may have to make identification
decisions in near real-time based on limited numbers of samples. The proposed
research consists of three thrusts. Thrust 1 (Learning with limited spatial
measurements) focuses on the theory and algorithms when not all network nodes
are observable, but sufficient samples can be collected over time from the
observable nodes before an estimation has to be made. Thrust 2 (Learning with
limited temporal measurements) focuses on the case where all network nodes are
observable, but only a limited number of samples are available for
identification. Thrust 3 (Integrated learning with limited measurements)
integrates the theory and algorithms developed in Thrusts 1 and 2 into an
overall identification system that is applicable where measurements are limited
both spatially and temporally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed in
the proposal are applicable to other network systems (social, communications,
transportation, financial). The project integrates research with education
including curriculum development and linking to
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.