* 1931531
* Frameworks: Re-Engineering Galaxy for Performance, Scalability and Energy Efficiency
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,500,000.00

Biomedical research is an important branch of science that deals with the
problem of studying biological processes and identifying, preventing and curing
diseases. This research forms the pathway to the discovery of new medicines as
well as new therapies. As such, biomedical research is crucial to advance the
national health and prosperity. Given the geographically distributed research
groups and biomedical labs, collaborative science plays a very important role in
biomedical research. Galaxy is an open source, web-based framework that is
extensively used by more than 20,000 researchers world-wide for conducting
research in many application domains, the most prominent of which is biomedical
research. It provides a web-based environment using which scientists perform
various computational analyses on their data, exchange results from these
analyses, explore new research concepts, facilitate student training, and
preserve their results for future use. Galaxy currently runs on a large variety
of high-performance computing (HPC) platforms including local clusters,
supercomputers in national labs, public datacenters and Cloud. Unfortunately,
while most of these systems supplement conventional CPUs with significant
accelerator capabilities (in the form of Graphical Processing Units (GPUs)
and/or Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs)), the current Galaxy
implementation does not take advantage of these powerful accelerators. This
project enhances the Galaxy framework so that it can take full advantage of the
tremendous computational capabilities offered by GPUs and FPGAs. By doing so,
the important applications running under Galaxy experiences significant
speedups, thereby accelerating scientific discoveries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of four complementary tasks, which
follow a logistic progression as follows: Task-I focuses on redesigning existing
Galaxy tools with GPU/FPGA support and integrate them to Galaxy tool-chains;
Task-II provides containerization support for the tools and accelerator-aware
orchestration for running Galaxy on cloud platforms; Task-III implements
specific policy driven scheduling schemes for Task-I and Task-II; and finally,
Task-IV redesigns Galaxy storage to speed up execution and reduce bottlenecks
related to data transfer. The proposed enhancements to Galaxy enables the
integration of innovation with discovery by providing a state-of-the art
experimental platform to a larger community of researchers across several
disciplines. On the broader impact and outreach/educational front, this project
impacts the performance and energy efficiency of Galaxy tools and applications
and improves the productivity of a typical Galaxy user tremendously; that is,
the main beneficiaries of this project are thousands of members of existing
Galaxy Community. However, this project also (i) helps existing GPU and FPGA
based (non-Galaxy) applications start using Galaxy, thereby taking full
advantage of all existing toolsets within the framework, (ii) enables Galaxy
tools to take better advantage of emerging cluster scheduling capabilities, and
(iii) creates a synergy with concurrent Galaxy related efforts and existing
infrastructure efforts the PIs are involved with, to further expedite scientific
discoveries. As such, this proposed system support will have a broad societal
impact via the enhanced Galaxy system support. On the education side, the
project involves under-represented groups in computer science as well as in bio-
informatics, outreach to undergraduates, various K-12 related activities
(Science-U, CSATS, VIEW), and engagement with researchers in other disciplines
(e.g., natural language processing, image processing, drug discovery and
cosmology) via a workshop open to the Galaxy
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.