* 1931144
* Conference: Society for Natural Philosophy Meeting: Microstructure, Defects, and Growth in Mechanics; Chicago, Illinois; September 13-15, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2020
* Arash Yavari, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2020
* USD 31,827.00

This grant provides financial support for the 55th meeting of the Society for
Natural Philosophy: Microstructure, Defects, and Growth in Mechanics to be held
September 13-15, 2019, at Loyola University, Chicago. The ability to understand
and model complex synthetic and biological materials has become an increasingly
important topic of research. The understanding of the interrelated roles of
microstructure, defects, and growth that are the focus of this workshop is
central to a deeper understanding and development of these materials. This event
will bring together researchers of international and national stature as well as
recent PhDs and graduate students to present and discuss the latest advances.
The meeting will differ from other similar events in that it will be without
parallel sessions. This emphasis on a smaller, single-track meeting will be
conducive to a more focused program and will also promote collaborations between
engineers, mathematicians, and physicists for the creation and development of
new mathematical methods and physical concepts. Funding for this workshop will
go towards supporting speakers as well as 15 young researchers to attend and
interact with leading researchers in the fields of mechanics and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-day workshop will involve a total of 17
lectures. Eight of these will be one-hour lectures given by prominent leading
researchers from the fields of mechanics and mathematical sciences. Another
eight 30-minute roundtable discussion lectures will be given by a mix of leading
researchers and promising young researchers, postdocs, and PhD students. About
half of the roundtable lectures will be by invitation and the rest chosen from
submitted abstracts. Finally, a "Clifford Ambrose Truesdell III Lecture" will be
delivered by a senior researcher in honor of the founder of the Society. A one-
hour open discussion on the future directions of research related to the subject
of the meeting will also be conducted. Out of this discussion, a report of the
proceedings will be generated that will include: (i) the identified challenges,
(ii) the potential areas of research, and (iii) viable
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.