* 1931218
* I-Corps: Computational Pathophysiology-Centric Medical Guidance Systems
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Lui Sha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is dramatically
reduced preventable medical errors, which claims 250,000 lives per year and is
the third leading cause of deaths. Our medical best practice guidance system is
an advanced clinical decision support (CDS) technology. Like Global Positioning
System (GPS) based navigation systems that transformed transportation, the
guidance systems developed here will potentially fundamentally transform the
implementation of medical best practices, with rapid and consistent timing of
medical interventions, preventing unintended deviation from standardized medical
treatment guidelines, more accurate record keeping, and improved team situation
awareness. Current market reports estimate a CDS market of more than $1 billion
by 2023, with stand-alone systems accounting for the greatest market share.

This I-Corps further develops a computational pathophysiology platform. Using
this new computational paradigm, an informal description of the disease process
in the medical text can be transformed into executable formal representations in
the form of networked organ state machines and best practice state machines that
can be verified against specifications and validated in clinical evaluation. The
result is executable computer models and precise software that can track and
records complex disease dynamics. The precise and repeatable nature of
executable software model removes errors caused by subjective interpretations
and memorization problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.