* 1931980
* CPS: Medium: Dynamic Pricing for Optimal Design of Sustainable Transportation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Samuel Coogan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,018,602.00

This project will study the use of pricing to influence behavior in human-in-
the-loop cyber-physical systems with an emphasis on electric vehicle (EV)
charging. In EV charging systems, humans (drivers) interact with both cyber
infrastructure, in the form of apps that provide information about location and
other characteristics of charging infrastructure, and with physical
infrastructure, in the form of EVs and their charging infrastructure. Given that
EV charging can take hours, EV charging infrastructure often serves two purposes
whose relative importance shifts dynamically depending on context: fueling the
vehicle and providing a parking spot. Dynamic pricing tools communicated through
apps are capable of influencing driver behavior to achieve desirable outcomes in
both purposes. The results of the project will be tested using the Georgia Tech
EV charging system as a testbed. The proposed combination of theoretical and
empirical work on dynamic pricing tools for behavioral influence is highly
translatable to other systems where prices can be directly communicated to
consumers. Price-mediated EV driver behavior is highly societally relevant, with
major ramifications for the sustainability of the long-term transportation
system. The electric vehicle revolution will inextricably intertwine
transportation infrastructure and energy infrastructure in new and significant
ways that will alter how people consume electricity and how people move around.
New interdependencies caused by the electrification of the transportation system
will induce additional strain and will likely expose new vulnerabilities that
dynamic pricing-based behavioral nudges could help
mitigate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three major parallel
activities that focus on characterizing the potential for dynamic pricing to
influence behavior in the EV charging cyber-physical system. Task 1 includes
large-scale observational studies using an extensive, high-resolution database
of electric vehicle charging transactions across the US from a popular mobile
platform in order to understand how electric vehicle users respond to price.
Task 2 will evaluate the system-scale environmental implications of EV charging
at various scales and with multiple technological scenarios, using life cycle
assessment to consider environmental dynamics among vehicles, parking, and
charging infrastructure. Task 3 will develop foundational dynamic pricing
frameworks, to be refined by leveraging analyses of behavior and environmental
impact from Tasks 1 and 2 to design dynamic pricing structures in order to
achieve various engineering objectives emphasizing cost, social, and
environmental sustainability in transportation. Our final task, Task 4,
leverages an actual EV charging platform at Georgia Tech to implement and test
results from Tasks 1 through 3. The main mechanism to enable the Georgia Tech
campus as a living laboratory will be a collaboration with the Georgia Tech
Parking and Transportation Services, which manages 22 Level 2 EV chargers across
campus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.