* 1931208
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Checking Security Checks in OS Kernels
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Kangjie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,996.00

Operating system (OS) kernels play a critical role in computer systems by
virtually having complete control over the systems. OS kernels not only manage
hardware and system resources, but also provide services and protection. Given
these tasks, OS kernels have to process external untrusted inputs and perform
complicated operations, both of which are error-prone. To avoid entering into
erroneous states, OS kernels tend to enforce a large number of security
checks---"if" and "switch" statements that are used to validate states.
Unfortunately, security checks themselves are often buggy. In particular, a
security check may be missing or incomplete, be placed in an improper location,
target a wrong variable, etc. Buggy security checks often cause critical
security impact because the intended validation for potential errors can be
void. This project aims to systematically investigate security checks in OS
kernels, to automatically identify security checks, and to develop a set of new
techniques to detect the common classes of security-check bugs. This project is
expected to effectively find a potentially large number of previously unknown
security-check bugs in widely used OS kernels, and thus to significantly improve
the security of computer systems with billions of users. The broader educational
activities of this project include integrating research with outreach,
organizing Capture The Flag competitions among universities and industries in
Minnesota, and developing courses for training interdisciplinary and
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
systematically investigate security checks and effectively detect the common and
critical security-check bugs in popular OS kernels, including the Linux kernel,
the Android kernel, the FreeBSD kernel, Darwin-XNU (MacOS), and ReactOS
(Windows-like). The project is comprised of two main research thrusts: (1)
identifying security checks and (2) detecting security-check bugs. Both research
thrusts are challenging because they require the understanding of code semantics
and contexts, and even developer logic. Therefore, this project develops a set
of semantic-and context-aware approaches. This project also enhances existing
techniques such as fuzzing and symbolic execution to effectively and scalably
detect security-check bugs. Multiple general techniques developed in this
project, such as accurately finding indirect-call targets, identifying
semantically-similar peer code paths, modeling OS-kernel boundary, would also
advance future research on systems analysis and
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.