* 1931134
* III: Small: Methods for Auditing and Enhancing Completeness of Ontologies
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Licong Cui, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 306,916.00

An ontology is a formal representation of the knowledge by a set of concepts
(terms) and the relationships between those concepts within a domain of
specialty. Ontologies have been widely used for orchestrating the coding,
management, exchange, and sharing of the increasingly large amounts of digital
data produced by the biomedical research enterprise. For example, SNOMED CT, one
of the largest and most complex biomedical ontologies, supports the development
of high-quality electronic health records and facilitates patient subgroup
identification, clinical decision support, and healthcare delivery quality
measurement. Given such important roles that biomedical ontologies play, quality
issues (such as incompleteness in coverage of subclasses), if not addressed, can
affect the quality of diagnoses and decisions. However, incompleteness issues
such as missing hierarchical relations and missing concepts are infeasible to be
addressed by manual work alone due to the size and complexity of biomedical
ontologies. The goal of this project is to develop automated and scalable
approaches for identifying potential incompleteness issues as well as suggesting
solutions to fix them. This project will incorporate the computational aspects
of the proposed work into curriculum development and educational offerings
related to data science and promote women participation in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To audit and enhance completeness of ontologies,
this project explores the following research tasks: (1) Development of a robust
reasoning framework for detecting and repairing missing subclass or hierarchical
relations. This will result in suggestions that directly enhances the subclass
completeness of ontologies; (2) Development of novel methods for identifying
missing concepts and creating appropriate name labels for the identified missing
concepts. This will result in enhancement in the concept completeness of
ontologies; (3) Generation of supporting evidence for suggested solutions by
leveraging rich extrinsic knowledge. For further verification of the robustness
of the proposed approaches, domain experts will be involved in validation of the
discovered incompleteness issues. The proposed approaches are applied to three
large ontologies in biomedicine: SNOMED CT, Gene Ontology, and NCI Thesaurus.
Suggested ontology changes will be communicated to the respective ontology
owners for incorporation in subsequent versions. The project website will
include further information about this project, and provide access to
publications, software, datasets and curriculum
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.