* 1931211
* Periplasmic Chaperone Network Organization and Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Karen Fleming, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

This discovery project investigates the maturation processes of beneficial
microorganisms found in humans. These microbes have sugar- and fat-filled
membrane surfaces that encapsulate their cells. Proteins are embedded within the
sugar/fat mixture, and their proper incorporation is essential for the integrity
and functions of these surfaces. This project addresses how these three types of
molecules come together. A series of systematic investigations will be conducted
to determine the molecular structures of helper proteins that play key roles in
the assembly process. A second part of the project will use pictures of living
cells to discover the surface distribution of these helper proteins throughout
the cell. Are these helper proteins clumping all together in a cell? Or are they
sprinkled evenly throughout? In addition, the PI will broaden the participation
in science through research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, by nurturing a more inclusive climate in graduate and undergraduate
STEM education, and by teaching using evidence-based best practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to investigate
the periplasmic chaperone network organization and mechanism. This will be
achieved using two general approaches. The first is to determine the solution
structures of two of the soluble chaperone proteins in complex with an unfolded
outer membrane protein. This will be accomplished by integrating information
from orthogonal, biophysical methods and computational modeling. The outcome
from this effort will be novel structures that provide key information on how
these chaperones ensure efficient outer membrane protein biogenesis by
maintaining unfolded membrane proteins in solution. The second fundamental
effort addressed in this project is to examine the periplasmic distribution of a
key chaperone in living cells using imaging techniques. The main question in
this latter effort is to evaluate whether or not soluble chaperones are well
mixed in this unique cellular compartment that lacks any external energy source.
Together the outcomes will provide a fundamental understanding of membrane
protein biogenesis in bacteria. This information can be used to infer
mechanistic insights into homologous system in mitochondria of
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.