* 1931339
* Elements: Community portal for high-precision atomic physics data and computation
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Rudolf Eigenmann, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2023
* USD 559,999.00

Many engineering products and science projects depend on knowledge of exact
characteristics of the atoms that make up the used materials. Today's Global
Positioning Systems (GPS) are an example of such engineering products. This
project will develop an easy-to-use web portal that provides the atomic physics
and other communities with much-needed precision information about atomic
properties. Research in quantum information, degenerate quantum gases, atomic
clocks, precision measurements of atoms and molecules, plasma physics,
astrophysics, and studies of fundamental physics all rely on precise knowledge
of atomic properties. Experimental measurements are impossible or infeasible in
many cases. Releasing all codes to the public and creating a portal with easy
access to high-precision computations, now limited to only group of experts,
will enable and accelerate a broad range of physics research and engineering
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The portal is powered by a database of high-
precision information, including matrix elements and polarizabilities of
frequently used atoms. The database is coupled with a package of computational
applications capable of computing on-demand a wider range of properties and for
atoms not yet in the database. The code package has already demonstrated these
capabilities, but will be developed into community codes that run efficiently on
available high-performance computing systems. For atoms with many valence
electrons, computing precise properties is not yet feasible, as the
computational complexity is exponential. This project will develop new methods
and algorithms for computing these properties, enabling precision atomic
research to be done with atoms not possible thus far. Finally, the development
of the portal and parallel applications addresses important computer science
challenges, such as the efficient coupling of databases with complex
computations that automatically ingest new data. Thus, this project will also
create new knowledge in the key issue of combining data and
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Physics and the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.