* 1931062
* Early Detection of Solar Flares Using High Sensitivity Extreme-UltraViolet (EUV) Data
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Larisza Krista, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 728,783.00

The timely detection of solar flares is of primary importance to space weather
forecasting efforts that are critical to national security, the economy,
infrastructure services, remote sensing, space exploration, navigation, and
timing services -- as stated in the National Space Weather Strategy and Action
Plan. Current flare detection methods have a built-in minimum 4-minute delay in
their alert issuance due to the limitations of the methods and instruments used.
However, a new flare detection method using high-sensitivity satellite data has
been developed that improves flare detection time significantly. This new data
and tool allows preventative measures to take place in a timely manner to
protect societal and national interests. Furthermore, it has a significant
potential to contribute to the current understanding of solar flare initiation
processes -- a highly debated scientific
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, solar flare forecasting methods
primarily rely on X-ray irradiance data without any visual imagery. The main
goal of this three-year project is to take advantage of the new, high-
sensitivity, real-time, low-latency data available from the GOES/Solar
Ultraviolet Imager (SUVI) instrument in order to identify not only the time of
the flare occurrence, but its location as well -- a property that can influence
the magnitude of the corresponding space weather effects. Furthermore, the new
tool is capable of giving over ten minutes of advance warning before detrimental
space weather effects occur. The high-sensitivity extreme ultraviolet data
available to us is uniquely suitable to identify early signs of a flare
development using the novel, robust and fast flare detection tool to be utilized
during this project. By analyzing the flare development process the algorithm
could also gain insight into how early ultraviolet signatures are related to
flare magnitudes. It also provides a brand new insight into the deeper physics
of flares and the ways in which energy is released and plasma is heated during
the evolution of energetic solar eruptions. Studying the temporal development of
flares in different wavelengths allows us to better understand how the
initiation happens and what different physical environments and processes lead
to instabilities in flaring regions and how it relates to the magnitude of
severe space weather disturbances. The research and EPO agenda of this project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.