* 1931270
* A Convex Computational Framework for Understanding and Controlling Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Matthew Peet, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 267,752.00

Complicated engineered systems have become increasingly common and autonomous,
with examples including underwater vehicles, UAVs, and self-driving cars, as
well as less visible systems such as power inverters, battery storage devices,
network routers, and data storage devices. Extended periods of autonomy
inevitably lead to such unexpected changes as: altered or degraded system
configuration; failures of actuators or sensors; and evolution of the working
environment. Without an automated mechanism for identification of and adaptation
to such changes, it is likely that the technological foundation of our society
will become increasingly unreliable. The goal of the project is to improve
autonomy in complicated systems. Specifically, optimization algorithms are used
to learn the environment, analyze this information, and design control
strategies. Based on fundamental theory of how dynamical systems operate, these
algorithms provide a rigorous basis for cognizance and adaptability. The impact
of this work will be a more safe and reliable technological infrastructure, both
on earth and in space. Increasing the reliability and duration of autonomous
systems will lead to, for example, faster and cheaper exploration of space,
safer transportation networks, and more reliable communication
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, Sum-of-Squares (SOS) algorithms have
become a powerful tool for understanding nonlinear dynamical systems. The power
of SOS lies in its convex parametrization of non-quadratic Lyapunov functions.
Unfortunately, however, this convex formulation assumes the dynamics are known
and has not been extended to estimating the Region of Attraction (ROA), Minimum
Invariant Set (MIS), and Forward Reachability (FRS). At the core of this project
is the novel observation that the ROA/MIS/FRS problems can be expressed using
sub- or super-solutions to a value function defined by the solution to a
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation. The first part of the project exploits
this equivalence to show that the ROA/MIS/FRS problems can be posed as SOS
optimization problems wherein the objective is volume minimization or
maximization of sublevel sets of a sub/super-value function. The second part of
the project uses new convex volume metrics to solve these SOS volume
optimization problems. The third part of the project considers the case where
the dynamics are unknown and uses trajectory data to directly estimate the ROA
and FRS without use of a dynamic model. The algorithms are also applied to
control of spacecraft attitude dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.