* 1931084
* Collaborative Research: Electro-Mechanical Interactions in Biological Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ashutosh Agrawal, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 284,183.00

Lipid membranes form the envelope surrounding the interior of biological cells.
These membranes exhibit&lt;br/&gt;unique mechanical and electrical properties
that interact in such a way as to facilitate a wide range
of&lt;br/&gt;biological processes. The structure of the lipid molecules that
constitute these membranes imparts unusual&lt;br/&gt;mechanical behavior
resembling that of liquid crystals, a phase of matter intermediate between
conventional&lt;br/&gt;solids and liquids. Another basic feature of plasma
membranes is a negatively charged inner layer of lipid&lt;br/&gt;molecules.
These charged lipids diffuse on the membrane surface in response to physical
forces. In turn,&lt;br/&gt;charged lipids play a significant role in regulating
the functionality of membrane-embedded protein&lt;br/&gt;structures. The
objective of this project is to formulate and employ mathematical and
computational models&lt;br/&gt;to investigate electro-mechanical interactions of
lipid-protein systems. Insights gained from the project will&lt;br/&gt;lead to
improved understanding of physical processes occurring at the cellular level.
This in turn is expected&lt;br/&gt;to enhance understanding of the mechanisms
underlying lipid-associated diseases and the efficacy of
drug&lt;br/&gt;therapies. Thus, the project will promote the progress of
fundamental science and advance national&lt;br/&gt;priorities in the critical
area of healthcare. The project combines expertise in various branches of
physics,&lt;br/&gt;structural engineering and cellular biology. It will provide
advanced training to a diverse group of students&lt;br/&gt;and thereby enhance
U.S. global competitiveness by contributing to the establishment of a new
generation&lt;br/&gt;of interdisciplinary scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the mathematical
framework to describe the fundamental interactions of charged&lt;br/&gt;lipids
and proteins in biological membranes. It will culminate in a predictive tool for
the simulation of the&lt;br/&gt;microscopic electromechanical interactions
responsible for a host of cellular functions. Its novel
features&lt;br/&gt;include the use of continuum theory and molecular dynamics
modeling of the coupled interplay between&lt;br/&gt;membrane deformation at the
lipid-protein interfaces, diffusion of charged lipids and proteins, and
the&lt;br/&gt;quantification of the role of electric fields on the behavior of
the combined system. The derived framework&lt;br/&gt;would also assist
researchers in the mechanics and material science communities to model complex
2D&lt;br/&gt;interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.