* 1931555
* Elements: Comprehensive Time Series Data?Analytics for the Prediction of Solar Flares and Eruptions
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Emmanouil Georgoulis, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 599,787.00

Solar flares are some of the largest explosive events in our solar system.
Together with the accompanying eruptions, solar flares have the potential to
disrupt the technology we rely on, such as GPS, radars, high-frequency radio
communications between aircraft and air traffic control, communication
technology that relies on satellites (such as cell phones and Internet), and
electricity grid distribution networks. This project aims to, first, improve
scientists' understanding of the time-dependent physical and statistical
behavior of solar active regions to the point that we can exploit their
observations to predict whether and when they will flare, or erupt, in general,
and, second, to enable scientists worldwide to perform comparative,
reproducible, and data-driven studies on the prediction of solar explosive
events. This project, together with its advanced solar flare prediction software
infrastructure, will strengthen our nation's efforts to mitigate the potentially
catastrophic impact of solar eruptions. Moreover, by helping achieve reliable
forecasts of the timing, location, and magnitude of solar flares (already
considered as natural disasters), this project will also contribute to
mitigating the impact on other types of infrastructure, such as satellites (GPS,
Internet, satellite communications), that are critical to not only our national
defense but also a broad range of sectors, such as enterprise operations (e.g.,
oil-drilling) and communications. This award will also invest in the development
of a highly educated, diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce trained in an
interdisciplinary environment through the educational and research efforts at
Georgia State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to improve the scientists' understanding of eruptive solar events by
re-shaping the state-of-the-art on data mining techniques. This project will
build cyberinfrastructure for data-driven scientific research on complex
multivariate time-series data sets. This includes public releases of
comprehensive benchmark data sets ideal for data mining research on multivariate
time series classification, regression, and clustering, as well as open-source
software for these applications (i.e., the public release of pre-trained
models). While the domain area is focused on solar physics, this software and
data sets can benefit other domains that involve event tracking and mining of
spatiotemporal trajectories (e.g., security and healthcare applications of
monitoring movement, traffic and weather data analyses, and business
predictions). The project will also advance research in Space Weather
forecasting through the delivery of reproducible data-driven solar flare
predictions, inspired by new research directions (most notably, time series
analysis at an unprecedented level) and spearheaded by the data-driven,
physically interpretable machine learning models. In this direction, the
projects will produce publicly available flare forecasting big data benchmark
data sets aligning with recommendations by the National Science and Technology
Council and being useful to both Data Science and Space Weather communities.
Finally, this project will advance Computer Science research in data mining and
information retrieval areas through the above cutting-edge work on time series
data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.