* 1931149
* RUI: Collaborative: A REAL Approach to Investigating Bacterial Degradation of PET Plastic Waste
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Rosa Leon-Zayas, Willamette University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 94,231.00

Reduce, reuse and recycle programs are important, but are not enough to address
the massive plastic pollution problem facing our planet, and thus this research
is focused on the biodegradation of plastics found in our environment. Toward
creating a more circular plastic economy, investigators previously isolated a
consortium of bacterial species, five in total, that degrade polyethylene
terephthalate (PET), the material used to make plastic water bottles.
Collectively, the consortium grew faster on, and produced more plastic-degrading
enzyme activity than individual consortia or species alone. Researchers will
determine the genetic and biochemical basis for these observations. The
collaborative project will provide undergraduate and high school students
research opportunities aimed at accomplishing the project?s goals. First
generation and underrepresented minority students will be recruited for this
exciting set of projects, with funding for summer research, and continued effort
during the academic year. The genetic basis for bacterial degradation of PET
also will be investigated in the laboratory portion of a general microbiology
course, enriching the curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synergistic degradation
of PET plastic by soil bacteria is unexplored, but has the potential to aid in
the removal of a portion of the estimated 6.3 billion metric tons that currently
exist in our environment. Three Pseudomonas and two Bacillus spp. were isolated
from petroleum polluted soils near Houston, TX, by screening for lipase
activity, which has been associated with plastic degradation. The consortium of
five bacterial species act synergistically, producing more lipase activity and
degrading PET plastic faster than individual consortia or strains. Investigators
will mine the genomes of the five bacteria to understand the metabolic pathways
necessary for biodegradation of PET, aided by the KEGG pathways database, and
will use NMR to identify byproducts, correlating these data with genetic
information. Secreted enzymes will be identified using spectrometry techniques.
Transposon mutagenesis, an unbiased approach will determine the genetic basis
for expression and secretion of lipases, esterases, and biofilm formation
necessary for PET degradation. Investigators will also dissect the genetic
regulatory network, using RNA sequencing, of the consortium bacteria required
for ester bond cleavage and the complete degradation of the monomers
terephthalic acid and ethylene glycol, with the ultimate goal of reducing PET
waste on land and in our oceans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.