* 1931309
* Convergence RAISE: Harnessing Extracellular Vesicle Mediated Interkingdom Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mark Wiesner, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project is about integrating complex, interdisciplinary science to better
understand how communication works, at a cellular level, between different
kingdoms, and how cells actively shape their environments. Specifically, work
will focus on how fungal, microbial, and plant cells communicate between and
affect each other and surrounding soil systems. One known mechanism enabling
inter-kingdom communication is that cells secrete nanoscale structures called
extracellular vesicles. These extremely small sub-cellular objects play a role
in transporting packages of genetic and chemical materials that are used to
communicate with other cells, and to affect the interactions of other living and
non-living entities in their environments. What remains poorly understood are
which biological and environmental factors govern extracellular vesicle release,
what "cargo" they carry, where they are transported, whether they transform
along the way, how and if they reach their targets, and their ultimate effects.
The potential implications of being able to understand and manipulate
extracellular vesicles in the environment are enormous; these interactions can
have significant impacts on agriculture, wastewater treatment, contaminant
clean-up, microbiomes, and other critical systems. Investigating the mechanisms
of inter-kingdom communication is only possible with a confluence of expertise
ranging across widely disparate disciplines, and therefore this project includes
researchers from biochemistry, environmental microbiology, colloid science,
nanoscale fate and transport, biogeochemistry, molecular biology, mycology, soil
science, data science, and one integrating discipline called integration and
implementation science. The project will also study how effective applied
integration and implementation science methods are at enabling and improving co-
creation of knowledge at the intersection of disciplines. The broader impacts of
this research involve training of graduate students, broadening participation of
underrepresented minority students, and performing outreach to elementary
students and the general public in museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort
addresses the biological basis for inter-kingdom communication via vesicle
transport, the impact of geochemistry on vesicle mediated communication, and the
biophysical parameters and surface properties of vesicles that lead to
interkingdom biological interactions. The convergence of biochemistry,
nanoparticle surface properties, and soil geochemistry is unique in studies of
bacterial/fungal/plant interactions within the native soil environment.
Consequently, the overall intellectual merit of this project is two fold: the
advancement of knowledge to bridge the gaps in diverse fields of study, and a
transformative approach to interdisciplinary research. Goals of the work include
intertwining and blending expertise across disparate disciplines to elucidate
fungal and bacterial extracellular vesicle generation and transport processes as
a basis for engineering improved control strategies. To achieve these goals, the
following objectives will be pursued: 1) Identify and characterize extracellular
vesicles (e.g. surface chemistry and biological cargo) involved in the
interaction of fungi, bacteria, and plant cells in soil systems; 2) Investigate
the effects of the surrounding media conditions on extracellular vesicles, 3)
Investigate the biological effects imparted by extracellular vesicles between
bacteria and fungi under environmental conditions relevant to fungal-bacterial-
plant interactions in soil and rhizosphere systems; 4) Use this information to
engineer soft colloid vehicles for delivering diverse macromolecular cargo to
cells in applications ranging from agriculture to contaminated sediment
remediation, and 5) Pilot and qualitatively evaluate the effectiveness of
interdisciplinary integration communication methods, conceptual frameworks, and
knowledge building tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.