* 1931213
* RAPID:  Recovering at-risk Holocene fossils to test phylogenetic &amp; ecological hypotheses for extinction in crocodiles (Crocodylus) &amp; giant tortoises (Aldabrachelys) of Mada
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Christopher Raxworthy, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 05/31/2024
* USD 228,602.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2014 cave divers from the Madagascar Karst
Diving Project unexpectedly identified a treasure trove of Holocene and recent
fossil material in two caves in Southwestern Madagascar. An NSF funded
expedition led by researchers from the University of Massachusetts in Amherst
and the University of Antananarivo in Madagascar further explored the submerged
caves to document fine-scale environmental changes and their relationship to
major extinction events on the island. This project provides an opportunity to
recover and document a large number of specimens of extinct crocodiles and giant
tortoises and to document how alteration of ecological processes may have led to
recent patterns of extinction and decline among the megafaunal communities of
Madagascar. The sampling and documentation of the fauna will be used in ongoing
ancient DNA work to resolve the evolutionary relationships of extinct species
and to identify drivers of extinction over a period of 5000 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will specifically address hypotheses
regarding the taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships between modern and
recently extinct Madagascan crocodiles and giant tortoises. Additionally, these
collections and associated stratigraphic data will allow us to identify the
relationship between fine scale temporal dynamics of genomic diversity, diet and
faunal change in these taxa and the arrival of humans in southwestern Madagascar
during the pre-extinction period. Comparison of this intact depositional series
with previous collections of these and other Holocene taxa across Madagascar
will help explain changes in species composition, abundance, and genetic
diversity within communities following the arrival of humans and during known
climate shifts on the island. Societal impacts of the proposed work will include
co-generation of knowledge by US and Malagasy researchers. Additional engagement
is ensured through abundant opportunities for outreach and education via planned
museum activities and public lectures. More broadly, this research promotes
continued interdisciplinary research and interaction among academic researchers
and local stakeholders from the U.S. and Madagascar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.