* 1931521
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Tracing Diversification of Ceremonial Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Fiona Marshall, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 28,256.00

The contemporary social landscape of East Africa is closely linked to pastoral
immigration and the reshaping of identities over the last several millennia.
Doctoral dissertation researcher Lorraine Hu will study early processes of
social differentiation among herding groups by examining localized variability
in burial customs. Previous scholarship on the spread of nomadic societies to
this region has emphasized economy and subsistence, focusing on the aspects of
daily life that make pastoralism distinct from sedentary or hunter-gatherer
lifeways. Other cultural practices, though more difficult to trace in deep time,
are equally important to understanding how groups create and negotiate fluid
social landscapes. Archaeology is well-equipped to provide insight into
questions of social variability by tracing changes in local customs over the
long term. Understanding how communities choose to define their own identities
through maintaining or changing traditions has relevance for many herding groups
today, where processes of globalization complicate boundaries of both identity
and subsistence. The project will build partnerships through providing training
opportunities for Kenyan students and promote cultural heritage education in
East Africa and the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Fiona Marshall and Lorraine Hu
of Washington University in St. Louis will examine the development of funerary
practices of early pastoralist groups in East Africa. The research will be
conducted in southern Kenya where a tradition of cremation, unique to the area,
developed between 3000-1000 years ago when herders first migrated into the
highlands. These early pastoralists are known to have developed distinct lithic
and ceramic traditions, but social variability across communities is yet
unknown. Research on funerary customs aims to elucidate localized differences.
By combining excavation, sedimentological sampling and study of skeletal
material from previously excavated cremation sites, the researchers will
reconstruct cremation burial practices from different sites. Integrated sediment
and skeletal analyses allow detailed study of pyrotechnic processes, and in
conjunction provide a new approach to mortuary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.