* 1931193
* Widely Tunable Single-Mode Interband Cascade Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Santos, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,979.00

Non-Technical Description: Semiconductor infrared lasers with widely tunable
emission wavelength are critically needed for a wide range of applications such
as environmental and chemical-warfare monitoring, detection of pipe leaks and
explosives, food safety, medical diagnostics, and industrial process control.
This project combines novel optical structures and customized semiconductor
materials to demonstrate and develop the much-needed semiconductor lasers. The
objectives of the project also include advancement in the understanding and
knowledge of how infrared light interacts with the new optical structures as the
injecting current is adjusted to tune the wavelength. The project offers
graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Oklahoma unique
opportunities to pursue education, training and research in multidisciplinary
topics (materials science, quantum engineering, photonics, and device
fabrication). This project also enhances Oklahoma's infrastructure for science
and technology development and increases the opportunities of students from
under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Many
applications require widely tunable single-mode mid-infrared semiconductor
lasers that can operate continuously with low power consumption at room
temperature. By monolithically integrating a novel half-wave V-coupled cavity,
the proposed interband cascade lasers will have a single-mode emission with a
high side-mode suppression ratio (&gt;30 dB) without conventional distributed
feedback gratings. This configuration also enables the lasers to have a wide
tuning range (&gt; 30 nm). Additionally, through innovation of the waveguide
structure, these lasers will have enhanced optical confinement, improved thermal
dissipation, and reduced strain accumulation. These widely tunable single-mode
mid-infrared lasers will significantly benefit many useful applications,
especially where mid-infrared systems must be operated with batteries and energy
cost/availability is a concern, including space applications with strict
constraints on size and electric power. The availability of these lasers will
greatly enhance the capabilities of mid-infrared laser instruments and their
applications in many areas. This project not only advances the understanding and
knowledge of optical science, it also generates new knowledge in the design of
quantum-engineered structures and broadens their
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.