* 1931174
* Collaborative Research:  Environmental Data Initiative: Sustaining the Legacy of Scientific Data
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Margaret O'Brien, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,986,265.00

The Environmental Data Initiative (EDI) facilitates the publication of
environmental data generated by publicly funded research projects. With a
mission to ensure the long-term viability and legacy of publicly funded
scientific data, EDI is committed to making environmental data Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR). EDI provides support, training,
and resources to help archive and publish high-quality data and metadata,
providing accountability and transparency to data providers, while opening the
door to answering new questions through Big Data analyses. EDI is actively
engaged in the national and international community of data curators to promote
data management best practices and stewardship. Programs served include, but are
not limited to, Long Term Research in Environmental Biology (LTREB),
Organization for Biological Field Stations (OBFS), MacroSystems Biology (MSB),
and Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) within the NSF Division of
Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EDI is a collaborative effort among
data practitioners, software developers, and research scientists at the
University of New Mexico and the University of Wisconsin-Madison to provide a
comprehensive data archive and publication service for ecological researchers.
To achieve the overall mission of EDI, the project focuses on (1) curation and
training services tailored to the needs of the environmental sciences community
and (2) the support and maintenance of a state-of-the-art data repository. EDI
services include direct management of data documentation by practitioners
experienced in environmental and ecological data science, community training in
data management practices and data archive workflows for contributing data to
the repository, and software development for the creation of scientific
metadata. Team members are experienced in data science best practices and
software frameworks, including RStudio and Jupyter Notebooks, and are certified
data and software Carpentry instructors. The PASTA+ software behind the EDI data
repository is based on a Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). The EDI data
repository is designed to be simple, durable, extensible, and congruent with the
FAIR guiding principles. EDI has created a feature-rich, public-facing Data
Portal that provides a user-friendly web-browser interface to the repository,
allowing users to evaluate and upload data, and discover and view data and
associated metadata. The Data Portal also serves as a complete reference
implementation in Java for guiding other software developers on the use of the
PASTA+ application programming interface which enables developers to interact
directly with the repository at its lowest level. These technologies and
services are designed to promote the persistence and use of scientific data and
to ensure that all environmental scientists have access to high-quality data
curation and publication services. The EDI repository may be found at
https://environmentaldatainitiative.org/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.