* 1931348
* CSSI Elements: DataSwarm: A User-Level Framework for Data Intensive Scientific Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Douglas Thain, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 578,994.00

This project creates a capability that will support the construction of large,
data intensive scientific applications that must run on top of national
cyberinfrastructure, such as large campus clusters, NSF extreme-scale computing
facilities, the Open Science Grid, and commercial clouds. The new capability
(DataSwarm) brings data requirements and software dependencies to the target
cyberinfrastructure systems, and deploys them as and when required, rather than
having these requirements pre-installed on the target systems. The motivation
comes from applications in high energy physics, molecular dynamics, and quantum
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main motivation of the work is the challenge
of scalable computing frameworks. Based on a prior development by the Principal
Investigator (Work Queue), the current project provides technical innovation in
three areas: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Molecular Task Composition. Molecular task
composition is used as an abstraction for the precise construction of tasks that
require a custom software environment, large data input, and a scratch data area
to capture the outputs. By expressing these aspects explicitly instead of
implicitly, the project improves the storage efficiency of large numbers of
tasks. &lt;br/&gt;(2) In-Situ Data Management. In-situ storage management is
performed to offset the increased storage consumption likely to occur under
molecular task composition, avoiding unpredictable failures of tasks due to
storage exhaustion. &lt;br/&gt;(3) Precision Provenance. Precision provenance of
both data objects and task components enables the efficient re-use of resources
across multiple runs, as well as precise incremental changes to complex
workflows.&lt;br/&gt;For this project, the three key elements addressed are the
software environment, input data, and a scratch data area. These elements are
usually independently managed; here, they are bound together to form temporary
"molecules" for task execution. The three applications included in this project
represent three typical types of complex data and complex software dependencies.
They include custom late-stage data analysis codes in high energy physics,
complex multidimensional optimization, and ensemble molecular dynamics,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.