* 1931227
* FW-HTF: Collaborative Research: Pre-Skilling Workers, Understanding Labor Force Implications and Designing Future Factory Human-Robot Workflows Using a Physical Simulation Platform
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kylie Peppler, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,002.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
between Purdue University, Indiana University and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology is based on the rationale that today's manufacturers, especially
small and medium enterprises, may struggle to keep pace with rapid changes in
manufacturing. To help manufacturers thrive in a rapidly changing industry, this
project aims to develop a Physical-Simulation Platform that will realistically
simulate interactions between workers, robots, and machines in future factories,
and at the same time, improve factory agility and productivity. This project
will provide new insights into workers' spatial, multitasking, and predictive
task abilities in manufacturing, and their performance in shared and smooth
workflows. Those insights can then be used to shape the augmented manufacturing
environment of the future by amplifying cognitive capacity and transferring some
cognitive burden to artificial intelligence and smart automation. Such changes
can improve both productivity and worker experience. The project will explore
the economic impact on different types of workers as well as the benefits of
artificial intelligence-based augmentation technologies on human labor, factory
productivity and agility. In addition, the project will contribute to workforce
development by creating educational plans and outreach to prepare workers for
the manufacturing workplace of the future. The researchers will directly engage
underserved young people by introducing them to new toolkits and curriculum
developed as part of this project. These materials can then be adapted by
educators across the country. Strong industry collaborations are present to
facilitate testing and adoption of this approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team of mechanical and electrical engineers, psychologists, computer
scientists, education researchers, and economists will work toward accomplishing
five goals: (1) use Mixed Reality to capture interactions, shared workflows, and
collaborative tasks as close as possible to a real manufacturing environment;
(2) develop and demonstrate new types of authoring platform to program robots,
internet-of-things-based machines, and humans interacting with them, with
augmented reality, artificial intelligence to substantially reduce cognitive
loads and enhance worker and factory overall capabilities and productivities;
(3) discover, design and develop flexible representations of collaborative
intelligence workflows and metrics to simulate and evaluate Humans-Robots-
Machines shared work; (4) evaluate shared work economics and labor market
implications of augmenting humans with robotics, augmented reality, and
artificial intelligence; and (5) pre-skill the workforce and increase engagement
towards the future of work at the human-technology
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.