* 1931623
* I-Corps: Embedding fabric-based sensors into apparel
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to leverage
fabric-based technologies to create functional apparel that can track body
movements and in return analyze exercise technique, track performance, and
identify likelihood of injuries. The global sports apparel market is currently a
$200 billion dollar industry, yet the focus in apparel technologies have been on
incremental improvements on material properties and optimizing
manufacturability. Therefore, consumers rely on other technologies to inform
them of their fitness levels which has corresponded to a dramatic rise in smart
watch sales, doubling every year since 2015. Even so, athletes still rely on
coaching, personal trainers, and physical therapy for exercise guidance. There
is no single platform in which consumers can access data on their health given
the disparate fitness markets. The technology pursued in this I-Corps project
aims to combine these value propositions directly into users' clothing by
leveraging new sewing technologies to embed fabric-based electronics for motion
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to advance the scope and
application of wearable technologies by re-inventing traditional sewing
methodologies. Using a combination of new conductive materials and fibers,
electrically active threads can be sewn into clothing using tradition sewing
machines without much disturbance in apparel manufacturability. Over lays and
patterning of different conductive fibers can produce various functional fabric-
based sensors such as pressure, bend, or stretch responsive sensors. These
sensing mechanisms can then be harnessed to directly measure the movement of the
clothed joint or body part. Currently a custom algorithm is being developed to
analyze these new datasets in order to extract relevant metrics such as exercise
technique, effort level, and eventually machine learn likelihood of injuries or
provide user-specific feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.