* 1931704
* I-Corps: Dynamic Distributed Fiber Optic Sensor System
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Kenichi Soga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project on the new
dynamic distributed fiber optic strain technology is that it could be applied
within a field that requires or could benefit from a high density of data for
strain or temperature detection. Infrastructure is a large part of a nation's
assets and efficient management of these assets is vital to society. The lack of
rich data on structural performance limits our understanding of infrastructure
behavior. The new technology can provide a single distributed monitoring system
for large infrastructure projects in civil engineering, such as bridges,
tunnels, foundations, dams, levees, etc.; or in the oil and gas industry such as
for methane hydrate excavation, deep wells, surface or buried pipelines, and
shale gas excavation monitoring. Through the use of monitoring systems centered
on this technology, clients would be provided quality control data to observe
and validate the construction of their assets and their long-term performance,
potentially over the entire asset lifespan. The produced monitoring data can be
presented and shared within a network data map that can be adopted as part of
the 'smart city' approach for both hazard prevention or future city management.

This I-Corps project explores commercial opportunities for the new distributed
fiber optic sensor system technology that reduces the reading time and provides
the dynamic detection capability for strain or temperature sensing. The newly
developed system provides very high density of data (every 2cm) over very long
distance (10-50km), giving equivalent of thousands of conventional 'strain
gauge', 'thermo-couple' or 'accelerometer' instruments through the use of a
single low-cost fiber optic cable. Its dynamic performance opens a window of
detection linear wave vibration along the fiber cable and detects the response
of the infrastructural under external load or even seismic event. The I-Corps
team will interview potential clients, stakeholders, and key business adopters
to better understand the monitoring needs and current areas for improvement
within the marketplace. This exercise will allow the team to determine the
potential commercial viability of the technology, as well as help identify
potential areas for further research as well as other markets for deployment
that are not currently using distributed fiber optic sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.