* 1931131
* A New Instrument and Measurement Approach to Cryo-Seismogeodesy:  Monitoring Antarctic Ice Shelf Stability Using Ice Penetrators
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Hoffman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 07/31/2024
* USD 939,631.00

Part I: Nontechnical &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Antarctic continent is covered by
a massive sheet of ice. The ice sheet gains mass by snowfall and losses mass by
melting and calving of towering icebergs. Losses occur primarily at the ice
shelves. These are where the ice sheet meets the ocean. The stability of the
Antarctic land-based ice sheet depends on the stability of the oceanic ice
shelves, because the ice shelves act as a buttress, restraining and modulating
the amount of ice that can flow into the ocean. When ice shelves thin and
weaken, as is currently observed, they can disintegrate, which leads to
accelerated discharge of land-based ice to the ocean. Once the ice reaches the
ocean, it contributes to accelerating sea-level rise. Thus, the Earthâ€™s climate
and the state of Antarctic ice are intimately linked through the stability of
the ice shelves. It is therefore critical to understand how the Antarctic ice
shelves are responding to ongoing changes in atmospheric and ocean conditions.
Unfortunately, the conditions of the Antarctic environment are extreme.
Deploying scientific instruments that can survive those conditions and measure
the on-ice response of the shelves to forces imparted by the atmosphere is a
logistics and an engineering challenge. As a result, ice-shelf measurements are
sparse. These challenges can be met by developing a robust instrument that
packages the desired scientific sensors into an ice penetrator that can be air
dropped into remote locations on many ice shelves. This project will fuse state-
of-the-art sensors that scientists use to study the physics of earthquakes and
volcanoes into a single instrument that will obtain measurements pertaining to
ice shelf physics. As a test to demonstrate the value of this approach, two such
instruments will be dropped from a helicopter onto the Ross Ice Shelf near the
US base at McMurdo, where they will collect science data for about a year,
relaying the data in real time via satellite link. The project will include
significant participation from undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical Description
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Antarctic ice shelves, a critical element in the stability
of the Antarctic Ice Sheet, are showing signs of rapid decline. Ice-shelf
melting, retreating, and thinning lead to increased discharge of grounded ice to
the ocean, and to concomitant sea-level rise. Ice-shelf disintegration could
drive the Antarctic Ice Sheet to eventual collapse. Despite their key role in
the future fate of the Antarctic Ice Sheet under a warming climate, ice shelves
are lacking in-situ seismic and geodetic measurements. Although seismogeodetic
measurements can unveil the response of the ice shelves to present-day ocean and
atmospheric forcings, obtaining continuous, high-quality measurements on the
Antarctic ice shelves is challenging. To address these scientific problems and
tackle the observational challenges, This project will combine cryoseismology
and cryogeodesy for the first time into a single instrument, a seismogeodetic
ice penetrator (SGIP), that can be air-dropped onto an ice-shelf surface to help
advance understanding of Antarctic ice-ocean-atmosphere dynamics. The
seismogeodetic ice penetrator provides a means to efficiently observe and
quantify ice-shelf stability. The seismogeodetic ice penetrator field testing
will occur on the Ross Ice Shelf near McMurdo where two seismogeodetic ice
penetrator units will be helicopter dropped in the first season and allowed to
continuously operate over winter. A third, reference instrument will be manually
implanted along an air-dropped seismogeodetic ice penetrator for ground-
truthing. Science and engineering data from these instruments will be relayed
over a satellite link in near-real time. The seismogeodetic ice penetrator and
reference equipment will be recovered in the second
season.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.