* 1931115
* Revealing the Palatable Meal-Inducible Circadian Oscillator
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2020,04/30/2025
* Shin Yamazaki, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2025
* USD 700,000.00

Circadian rhythms are fundamental endogenous properties of living organisms that
can be observed in behavior and physiology in most living organisms on the
earth. Those daily rhythms are governed by an autonomous circadian pacemaker.
Although the molecular mechanism of the circadian rhythm generation has been
studied in depth, accumulating evidence suggests the existence of novel
circadian pacemakers that can oscillate without the canonical circadian
molecular machinery. These novel pacemakers are revealed by the activation of a
reward system. With state-of-the-art circadian behavior recording apparatus and
real-time circadian gene-reporting developed by the principal investigator, this
project uncovers the functional significance of the novel non-canonical
circadian pacemaker revealed by palatable meals. This project provides
opportunities to individuals at all stages of learning, from high school
students to postdoctoral trainees, to participate in experiments that advance
understanding of the role and function of the non-canonical circadian pacemaker.
An additional goal of this project is to extend scientific knowledge to a young
generation of learners. To this end, the principal investigator and trainees
engage in outreach programs to share their knowledge of circadian rhythms in
classrooms of underrepresented middle and high school students in the
Dallas/Fort Worth area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mammalian circadian system is a
hierarchical network of oscillators optimally coordinating behavior and
physiology with daily environmental cycles. The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of
the hypothalamus is at the top of this hierarchy because it synchronizes to the
light-dark cycle, which is often the dominant environmental cycle. The
laboratory of the principal investigator recently discovered that timed access
to a palatable meal reveals an endogenous behavioral rhythm in mutant mice, of
which all the canonical circadian oscillators were genetically disabled. This
revealed rhythm, the palatable meal-inducible circadian oscillator (PICO),
persists for several cycles under ad libitum feeding after termination of the
palatable meal feeding schedule. In this project, the investigator uses
molecular tool sets to examine the role of and map the dopamine reward input
pathways that evoke the PICO-driven behavior rhythm. This project also uncovers
how the SCN and PICO coordinate circadian oscillators in peripheral tissues and
optimally tune physiological events to adapt to environmental daily cycles. The
project thereby will transform current understanding of the multi-oscillator
circadian network in mammals, which is critically involved in the temporal
regulation of physiology and behavior to optimally adapt to daily changes in the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.