* 1931975
* CPS: Small: Data-driven Real-time Data Authentication in Wide-Area Energy Infrastructure Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Yilu Liu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 470,922.00

The electric power grid is a large-scale dynamic cyber-physical systems (CPS)
and it is critical to the modern society. To ensure its reliable operation,
wide-area monitoring and control systems are essential to provide real-time
understanding of the system dynamics such that proper control actions can be
taken in real time to respond to power system disturbances and avoid blackouts.
Like many other CPSs, power grids are vulnerable to data spoofing attacks due to
the lack of security properties in monitoring and control protocols.
Conventional cryptography techniques are not usable because the computation
burden and time delay are intolerable to numerous power system devices
considering the fast-changing system dynamics. This project proposes to develop
spatial and temporal signature-based methods and tools that efficiently
authenticate power grid wide-area measurements and effectively prevent malicious
cyber-attacks from causing catastrophic losses. By delivering data
authentication tools to detect cyber-attacks, this project will provide a new
path that leverages measurement data from CPS itself to protect the security of
wide-area highly-dynamic closed-loop real-time CPS. This project will have
immediate positive impacts on electric power grid security and will also be
beneficial to other tightly-coupled, physically-distributed CPSs. The project
will also provide many educational resources and opportunities for K-12 and STEM
students to broaden their participation in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's primary goal is to address power system cyber security issues and help
protect the power system from data spoofing attacks that are hard to detect by
existing technologies. The project team discovered that power grid wide-area
monitoring system (WAMS) measurement data have spatial and temporal signatures
caused by natural responses of each local grid's continuous and random condition
changes. These signatures are almost impossible to counterfeit, making them
perfect for data authentication. This project will be the first time to use
signatures in high data rate (up to 1,500 sample per second) measurements to
develop data-driven cyber-physical security tools. Major steps to achieve the
project goal include: (1) investigate methods to extract spatial and temporal
signatures embedded in WAMS measurements efficiently; (2) develop methods and
tools for authenticating a large volume of WAMS measurement data in real time;
and (3) online implement and demonstrate cyber-attack detection technologies on
FNET/GridEye, which is an actual cyber-physical system. With credible real-time
information provided by the secure cyber system, power system operators will be
able to assess system risks or take prompt actions to control and mitigate risks
and prevent blackouts. The secured cyber system will also ensure the physical
power system is under appropriate controls determined by automatic controllers
to prevent systems entering dangerous status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.