* 1931997
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Multiagent Physical Cognition and Control Synthesis Against Cyber Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Cristina Nita-Rotaru, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 364,328.00

This project proposes a novel cyber-physical paradigm for enhancing the security
in networks of advanced robots from external malicious cyber attacks (and
internal non-malicious malfunctions as well). Such systems have tremendous
potential for improved productivity, but also carry new risks: malicious actors
could exploit the connectivity of the devices to carry out attacks with
consequences in the physical world.&lt;br/&gt;The core idea of this project is
to provide a novel layer of security against such threats by designing
distributed security specifications based on introspection: agents use physical-
sensing capabilities to surveil the behaviors of other agents in the team in
addition to the task-specific mission objective. Such specifications will offer
an additional layer of protection in emerging applications with networked
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed research revolves around three main
thrusts: A) systematically identify attack models specific to the scenarios
considered, together with countermeasures based on measurements in the physical
world, B) develop abstraction-based high-level planning algorithms that generate
flexible plans that satisfy both the task specifications and the additional
security requirements, and C) new low-level controllers that can negotiate the
high-level plans with real-time objectives (such as obstacle avoidance) while
allowing for collaboration between the agents. The proposed research includes an
evaluation plan on a robotic testbed which includes camera-equipped ground and
aerial vehicles, as well as short-throw projectors for creating augmented
reality environments emulating our motivating
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.