* 1931380
* Elements: Development of Assumption-Free Parallel Data Curing Service for Robust Machine Learning and Statistical Predictions
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jae-Kwang Kim, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2023
* USD 592,386.00

Large, incomplete datasets create major challenges for statistical prediction in
research. This project will develop a data curing service that is able to manage
large, incomplete, and diverse datasets, and would provide uncertainty measures
for the cured data. The project identifies and collaborates with several
communities where this data service is central to scientific research, including
civil engineering, building science, urban energy, and social science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort creates a parallel data curing service,
provides uncertainty measures for the cured data, and develops supplementary
imputing algorithms. The team develops a data curing platform with imputation
for incomplete, heterogeneous data; robust machine learning (ML) and statistical
predictions would be established by developing an easy-to-use, general-purpose,
large data-friendly imputation program. The focus is on a novel combination of
three established imputation methods: two-level finite mixture model-based
imputation (FMMI), fractional hot deck imputation (FHDI), and Gaussian mixture
model-based imputation (GMMI), for which parallel implementations in R would
also be provided. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.