* 1931512
* Elements: RADICAL-Cybertools: Middleware Building Blocks for NSF's Cyberinfrastructure Ecosystem.
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Shantenu Jha, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 12/31/2023
* USD 599,981.00

This project builds upon a previously funded middleware development effort by
the Research in Advanced Distributed Cyberinfrastructure and Applications
Laboratory (RADICAL) at Rutgers University; the previously developed middleware
building blocks were known as RADICAL-Cybertools (RCT). In the current project,
the team pursues a targeted set of developments, driven by the need to scale the
number of software components, user, and supported platforms; and improve
performance, engineering processes, and sustainability. The resulting
capabilities will serve scientific applications in multiple domains, including
software engineering, chemical physics, materials science, health science,
climate science, drug discovery and particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon a prior prototype investment, which developed a pilot system
for leadership-class HPC machines, and a Python implementation of SAGA, a
distributed computing standard. The current effort is organized around three
activities:&lt;br/&gt; - Extending RCT functionality to reliably support a range
of novel applications at scale (examples include tightly coupling traditional
HPC simulations with machine-learning methods);&lt;br/&gt; - Enhancing RCT to be
ready to support new NSF systems, such as the Frontera supercomputing system and
other new systems;&lt;br/&gt; - Prototyping a new component: a campaign manager
for computational resource management. &lt;br/&gt;Data-driven approaches will be
used to improve software development, engineering, and life-cycle management,
and to enhance the long-term sustainability of RCT and the supported
communities. The project includes use cases that are representative examples of
the growing community that RCT engages and supports, such as the ATLAS high-
energy physics project and the QCArchive project enabling large-scale force-
field construction and physical property prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.