* 1931215
* Engaging Educators, Strengthening Practice: Creating &amp; Sustaining Successful Industry-Education Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Mary Slowinski, Bellevue College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,970,027.00

The Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program strives to meet the nation's
demand for skilled technicians by developing and improving technology education
in community and technical colleges. As technological workforce needs multiply
and skilled workers become increasingly difficult to find, this effort becomes
ever more critical to the health of our national economy. The employer needs for
right-skilled graduates is well-documented. For example, in its most recent
survey, the Manpower Group found that nearly half of employers are having
difficulty filling US jobs. In addition, they report that, for the 6th
consecutive year, skilled trades positions are the hardest positions to fill.
When asked why they were unable to fill roles, almost half of employers point to
a lack of applicants or a lack of applicants with the necessary hard or soft
skills. Mitigating such disparities between workforce needs and worker skills
are important goals of community and technical colleges. Strong industry
partnerships are fundamental to this work. When done well, these relationships
stimulate exchange and dialogue between institutions and employers that, in
turn, ensure program currency, alignment with workforce needs, awareness of
industry trends, and the production of graduates who are right-skilled and work-
ready. Strengthening these beneficial collaborations is not only critical for
the grantees of the National Science Foundation's ATE program, but for all
colleges and programs that wish to advance technological education and expand
opportunities and pathways for students and the communities in which they serve.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Engaging Educators, Strengthening Practice project
team has investigated education-industry partnerships across the ATE community
and has found that 78% of PIs have received no training or support for forming
or maintaining industry partnerships. In addition, none mentioned instruction or
guided development of an industry partnership action plan or support for the
execution of such a plan. This project will develop curricula that supports
educators in establishing and sustaining industry partnerships. The curriculum
will be delivered during in-person workshops and webinars. Workshop participants
will construct an industry partnership action plan based on research and best
practices, as well as aligned with their specific organizational goals. The
project will: 1) Develop curricula that supports educators in establishing and
sustaining industry partnerships; 2) Facilitate the use of a rubric for
partnership assessment/evaluation; 3) Provide professional development workshops
and webinars to guide the use of the materials and to build participant
community; 4) Establish online learning exchanges for post-workshop participant
knowledge transfer, support, and collaboration; 5) Adapt workshop materials for
online reference and use by participants and others; and 6) Disseminate the
tools, findings, and outcomes of these efforts via the project website,
conference presentations, published reports, and webinars. The project website
and resources will be designed to ensure that they are accessible by all users,
including those with disabilities. All appropriate resources will be archived
with ATE Central to ensure sustainability. This project is funded by the NSF
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.