* 1931425
* Elements: Can Empirical SE be Adapted to Computational Science?
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Timothy Menzies, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 592,129.00

Today the computer is just as important a tool for chemists as the test tube.
For example, the 2013 Nobel Prize was awarded to chemists using computer models
to explore very fast chemical reactions during photosynthesis. Other scientific
areas where software is used intensively are astronomy, astrophysics, chemistry,
weather prediction, economics, genomics, molecular biology, oceanography,
physics, political science, and many other engineering fields. It is important
to ensure the quality of these software-driven fields since its results
accelerate global innovations by improving quality and quantity of computational
scientific studies. But many software developers in this area have not formally
studied computer science or software engineering. This proposal will create
SEnTRY, a workbench containing methods adapted from empirical software
engineering, that would help bridge the skill gap via automatic agents by
suggesting to developers when they should investigate or redo part of their
code. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software is used intensively in
scientific areas such as astronomy, astrophysics, chemistry, weather prediction,
economics, genomics, molecular biology, oceanography, physics, political
science, and many other engineering fields. It is important to ensure the
quality of these software-driven fields since its results accelerate global
innovations by improving quality and quantity of computational scientific
studies. But many software developers in this area have not formally studied
computer science or software engineering. This proposal will create SEnTRY, a
workbench containing methods adapted from empirical software engineering, that
would help bridge the skill gap via automatic agents by suggesting to developers
when they should investigate or redo part of their code. To achieve these goals,
methods developed for traditional kinds of software must be extensively adapted
for computational science. For example, language models describing software
defects must be created, especially for the computational science community;
test case prioritization algorithms must be re-tuned to appropriately prioritize
"tests" that are really "tests of scientific concepts"; and static code analysis
warnings have to be re-engineered to manage the kinds of software tools used
within the computational science community. To that end, this project will apply
data miners, hyperparameter optimizers and active learning to project data from
the computational science community. When successful, SEnTRY will reduce the
associated cost (time, money, etc.) required to handle many of the large and
more tedious aspects of software development. This will free up more time of the
computational scientists, and allow them to focus on core scientific issues. As
an additional benefit, SEnTRY will also ensure the reproducibility and
credibility of the computational science researches which, in turn, will
naturally encourage more adoption of current work as well as adaptation and
innovation in future work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.