* 1931853
* CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research: Safe Learning in Co-robots--Theory, Experiments and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Recht, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This award will support fundamental research on scalable and safe collaborative
cyber physical systems. Specifically, this project will address the question of
how to balance adaptability with safety for large human-robot teams. While pre-
programmed robots can perform well in a perfectly known and unchanging
workspace, accomplishing complex tasks under real-world conditions requires the
ability to adapt to unexpected circumstances. This adaptability can be provided
using artificial intelligence or machine learning techniques, but the resulting
robot behavior becomes less predictable, which in turn makes it difficult to
guarantee safe human-robot interactions. This project addresses the challenge of
guaranteed safety by using an innovative integration of machine learning with
techniques from control theory and nonlinear dynamics. In contrast to current
approaches, the methods studied here will be scalable, that is, they will remain
practical to implement even when the number of interacting humans and robots
become large. Many important applications can benefit from the results of this
project, including disaster relief, rescue missions, homeland security, and
assisted healthcare. This project will also develop a teaching platform for
collaborative human-robot engineering that will be used to teach collaborative
robotics in large classes, and to help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robots that
collaborate with human partners in a shared physical workspace are called co-
robots or cobots. This research will address the fundamental challenge of safety
and performance guarantees as collaborative human-robot cyber physical systems
move from model-driven control approaches to data-driven methods. In particular,
the project will focus on data-rich iterative tasks performed by groups of
humans and robots, and dynamically challenging tasks where human-robot and
robot-robot interaction forces are complex to model. Statistical learning theory
will be merged with predictive control theory using a mix of physics-based and
data-driven models in the learning process. In the co-robot cyber physical
systems under study, robot and human models will be updated in real-time using
data feeds. Within each robot such models will be used by a predictive
controller to forecast robot motion and human interaction, and to take
corresponding safe and collaborative actions. The new theory resulting from this
project will provide statistically rigorous guarantees of performance
improvement and safety during the learning process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.