* 1931307
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Theoretical Computer Science (TCS) Women Meeting at Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Virginia Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support student attendance at the Theoretical Computer Science
(TCS) Women Event which will be co-located with the 51st Annual Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM) Symposium on the Theory of Computing (STOC), June
23-26, 2019, as part of the Federated Computing Research Conferences (FCRC).
Scientists all over the world are increasingly acknowledging the need for
diversity. Many diversity-related workshops are being organized with the goal of
building community, increasing camaraderie, and helping minorities to share
their experience and receive mentoring. While these workshops and meetings of
minority communities are extremely important, it is equally important to co-
locate these meetings with major technical conferences whenever possible. This
allows the broader research community to hear the issues raised by minorities.
It also allows the minority participants to better take advantage of the
technical conferences.

STOC is one of the flagship annual research conference in the field of
Theoretical Computer Science (TCS). STOC features presentations covering all
aspects of TCS and encourages papers that broaden the reach of computer science
theory. Moreover, the co-located theory festival organizes invited sessions with
the best theoretical papers presented outside the TCS community. This year, STOC
is collocated with a dozen other computer science conferences under the umbrella
of ACM FCRC 2019, including Conference on Learning Theory (COLT), Economics and
Computation (EC), Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architectures
(SPAA), and many others. This award will provide partial support to
approximately 10 students to attend this leading conference as well as the TCS
Women event. The event will consist of a lunch, a panel of senior female
researchers, and a workshop open to all, featuring research presentations by
prominent female researchers. An important goal will be to provide opportunities
for network-building among women and minority researchers in TCS. It will
contribute towards attracting more under-represented groups to TCS research, and
will provide a positive environment for their future professional development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.