* 1931627
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (ACM MobiSys)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Bradford Campbell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

The ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services
(ACM MobiSys) is a premiere event for presenting innovative and significant
research of mobile systems, applications and services. The research topics of
MobiSys span multiple disciplines, including wireless networks and
communication, mobile sensing and crowdsourcing applications, wearable
computing, vehicular and robotic wireless systems, operating systems,
distributed algorithms, data management, energy management, sensors, security
and privacy. ACM MobiSys brings together academic, industry, and government
professionals to a single-track, highly selective forum, and thus provides an
ideal venue for researchers pursuing technological advances of mobile systems,
applications and services. The goal of this student travel support is to promote
research engagement of students, especially ones who are not well-funded, under-
represented, or otherwise not likely to be able to attend high-profile
conferences on mobile systems. The grant will highly encourage such students to
become active and then take the lead in the latest research directions in the
related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the funds is to support
approximately 20 student participants at recognized US institutions of higher
education. They will be selected by the conference student travel grants
committee to maximize their potential benefits from MobiSys, while prioritizing
support for under-funded or under-represented communities. The support of NSF
will be highly recognized by all the conference organizers and attendees, and
its impact will be reported along with students testimonials, as well as all the
significant information including announcement and selection process. The
student participants will have opportunities to exchange innovative ideas in a
vibrant field, which will significantly impact their future research directions.
Their ideas will offer momentum to the future of mobile systems and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.