* 1931242
* Collaborative Research: Reconstructing Pacific Trade Wind Variability - Extending and Replicating a Promising New Coral Proxy
* GEO,OCE
* 09/04/2018,06/30/2023
* Diane Thompson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 342,990.00

Global surface warming markedly slowed between 2000 and 2014 despite a continued
increase in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Both climate models and
observations suggest that this slowdown or "hiatus" in warming may be attributed
(at least in part) to strong trade-winds in the tropical Pacific. These strong
winds transport heat into the subsurface ocean, leaving less heat to warm the
atmosphere. Because wind strength changes on a decade-to-decade timescale
(associated with natural variability in the Pacific), other periods of both
accelerated and reduced warming over the last 100 years are likely tied to these
changes in tropical trade-winds. Thus, warming will likely accelerate in the
coming decade(s) when the cycle reverses and trade-winds weaken once again.
However, our understanding of the link between global air temperatures and
tropical Pacific wind strength to date has been limited by the scarcity of
historical wind observations. This project will utilize the chemical
fingerprints of changes in tropical Pacific winds captured in the skeleton of
living and fossil corals to investigate past wind variability - and its link to
global air temperatures - across the past century and preindustrial era. The
research will also extend the application of this novel wind archive, providing
key groundwork for such records to be extended to additional sites and time
periods. These natural archives of tropical Pacific wind strength over the
recent past have the potential to dramatically improve our understanding of the
impact of wind variability on the rate of global climate change. This project
will also contribute to broadening participation and diversity in science by
supporting two early career female scientists, a minority postdoctoral
researcher and two undergraduates, who will together develop programs to promote
race, gender, and LGBTQ diversity, equity and inclusion at Boston University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical Pacific coral records have dramatically improved
our understanding of the oceanic response to changes in climate forcing over the
past millennium, but our understanding of the associated atmospheric response
remains limited by uncertainties in the interpretation of (often indirect and/or
remote) hydrological proxies. This project leverages existing modern and fossil
coral cores and a promising new coral proxy to investigate tropical Pacific
trade wind variability across changes in natural and anthropogenic forcing.
Building off pioneering studies linking westerly wind anomalies and coral
skeletal Mn/Ca at Tarawa Atoll, the project will calibrate and extend this new
proxy across sites (Tarawa, Kiritimati, Butaritari, and Palmyra) and time
periods (20th century and Little Ice Age/preindustrial). Initial results
demonstrate that coral Mn/Ca from Kiritimati and Butaritari capture the westerly
winds observed at these sites during the 1997/98 El Ni√±o event, supporting the
causal link between wind variability and coral Mn/Ca at atolls with west-facing
lagoons, and thus the potential for extending Mn/Ca-based trade-wind
reconstructions across space and time. This project will produce the first
robust, well-replicated, and quantitative reconstructions of Pacific trade wind
strength spanning the 20th century and Little Ice Age (LIA) to preindustrial
period (1400-1850CE) using overlapping modern and fossil corals from the western
and central equatorial Pacific. This project also lays the foundation for coral
Mn/Ca-based trade-wind reconstructions to be expanded to other sites and time
periods by exploring the strengths and limitations of this novel proxy. Such
trade-wind reconstructions have the potential to dramatically improve our
understanding of trade-wind variability and its impact on global climate change
in response to both natural and anthropogenic forcings.