* 1931696
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Information Design and Price Mechanisms in Platforms for Cyber-Physical Systems with Learning Agents
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Ramesh Johari, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this project is new theory for architectures for crowdsourced
markets for cyber-physical systems (CPS), such as power systems and shared
vehicle systems. A technology-enabled platform digitally mediates transactions
between buyers (e.g., energy consumers/riders) and sellers (e.g.,
generators/drivers) helping to determine prices and pair buyers and sellers.
Large-scale CPS impose fundamental physical constraints than traditional 'cyber'
platforms, including environmental uncertainty, spatial difference, delay, and
limited resources. The broader impacts of the work include mentoring with high-
school students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop
guidance for optimal platform design. A central challenge is the complex
behavior of agents, which possess limited information and receive limited
feedback about how their actions translate to payoffs, and learn continuously
over time to discover optimal strategies. The focus of the project is on the
design of two significant levers available to the platform: information feedback
and price-setting mechanisms. The research agenda is divided into two thrusts:
(1) characterization of the dynamical behavior of agents under limited feedback;
and (2) platform design through information sharing and pricing. In the first
thrust, each agent is assumed to use a reasonable, `natural' learning algorithm
and the goal is to understand how mechanisms available to the platform impact
the learning process and eventual collective behavior. Outcomes from the first
thrust will feed directly into the second, where the primary aim is to design
information mechanisms to supplement pricing in order to shape the aggregate
behavior of agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.