* 1931009
* 2019 Pacific Math Alliance Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Tamas Forgacs, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2020
* USD 28,000.00

This award will provide funding for "The 2019 Pacific Math Alliance Conference"
which will be held in Hayward, California on October 12, 2019. The conference is
being hosted by the Department of Mathematics at the California State
University, East Bay. This inaugural conference will bring together
mathematicians and students at all career stages from the talented undergraduate
to the internationally distinguished researcher. In addition, the meeting will
serve as a venue for faculty from community colleges, four year colleges and
universities, and PhD granting institutions to increase the understanding of the
synergy they must provide in order to best serve the exceptionally diverse
student populations in the Pacific region. This award will provide travel
support for students, early-career faculty, and mathematicians belonging to
under-represented groups, as well as other participants who have no other
federal support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conference will create
awareness about and promote the Pacific Math Alliance's mission -- to increase
the number of under-represented minority students who enter PhD programs in the
Mathematical Sciences, as well as to improve the quality of mathematical
education provided to them prior to the PhD program. The conference will develop
networking groups; provide students with a venue where they can present their
work to a welcoming and supportive audience; provide space for senior faculty to
mentor/train junior faculty in representation of all groups in the mathematical
sciences; provide a venue in which faculty with a proven track record in
increasing diversity and opportunity can collaborate for student success; and
hold career panels for students and workshops for faculty. In order to elucidate
matters and circumstances that are particular to under-represented minority
students and faculty in the mathematical sciences, the conference will also
feature talks addressing socio-cultural issues in mathematics. Conference
website: http://tiny.cc/2019PMAConf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.