* 1931117
* A Science Based Educational and Cultural Exchange Workshop at Mystic Aquarium for Native American and Alaska Native Youth
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Tracy Romano, Sea Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2024
* USD 49,999.00

Mystic Aquarium will hold a science based educational and cultural exchange
workshop for Alaska Native youth and local Connecticut Native American youth. A
total of 14 individuals including tribal and community leader chaperones will
participate in activities for eight days at the Aquarium and local natural and
historical sites. The main goals of the workshop are to stimulate excitement
about science, inspire high school youth to pursue education and careers in
science with the realization that they can be a resource to their communities
for the management and sustainability of marine resources. Opportunities will be
provided throughout the workshop for the cohort to learn and share culture and
traditions. Activities include hands-on laboratory and animal experiences, field
trips to local and historical sites and cultural activities in which dance,
song, art, stories and native foods will be shared and exchanged. These
activities will promote learning science in the context of Native culture. The
workshop and field opportunities for students leading up to the workshop
promotes the progress of science by investing in future scientists. For the
Alaskan Native and Native American students and community, the workshop serves
to advance their knowledge and hopefully inspire students to continue their
education and careers, contributing to national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is "ground zero" for climate change
with rapid changes posing threats to arctic animals and ecosystems including
humans. Mystic Aquarium in Mystic, CT, in collaboration with the North Slope
Borough Department of Wildlife Management, AK, and the Alaska Native community
of Point Lay, AK, are studying beluga whales which serve as sentinel species for
ocean health given their top-level predator status and their distribution across
arctic and subarctic ecosystems. Importantly, belugas offer food security for
Alaska Natives and understanding the health status and natural history of
belugas is critical to ensure their future sustainability as well as the
cultures and traditions of the people that rely on them. For several years,
Alaska Native and Native American youth have assisted with live capture,
tagging, sampling and release studies of belugas and collection of data and
samples from subsistence harvested belugas. This workshop will educate the
participants in the importance of research on beluga
whales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.