* 1931436
* Elements: Enabling Accurate Thermal Transport Calculations in LAMMPS
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hasan Babaei, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2023
* USD 312,867.00

Computational thermal transport research is critical to the development of new
materials that can address challenging energy and environmental problems.
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are used extensively to study thermal
transport in materials. One of the most widely used MD software packages is the
Large-scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS). It is the
primary aim of this project to create and carefully implement improved thermal
transport calculation methods in LAMMPS. This problem is made challenging by the
fact that this software has hundreds of thousands of users and the solution must
be merged into the core LAMMPS code, as opposed to offered as a modular "plug-
in". The three objectives of the project are: (1) to implement a corrected heat
flux computation for all supported many-body potentials in LAMMPS, (2) to
identify the types of molecular systems most affected by the changed heat flux
computations, and (3) educate the LAMMPS community on how to implement heat flux
in new potentials correctly as well as train new scientists to contribute
professional-quality code to the LAMMPS code base. This research will, among
other broad impacts, enable large-scale computational screening of materials to
accurately predict their thermal properties, which fulfills one of the key goals
of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI). Furthermore, it is an innovative,
scalable, reusable software component that supports training for the broad
LAMMPS user community as well as general workforce development via training to
undergraduates, and ensures the new software capacities are widely available via
the open-source LAMMPS package. Additionally, the project provides professional
software engineering training to graduate and undergraduate students via a
highly-trained resident software developer and resources from the Center for
Research Computing at the University of Pittsburgh. Due to the large user base
and open source nature of LAMMPS, the research is expected to have a broad
impact; these software innovations will be widely available across both industry
and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most common MD technique to compute
thermal conductivity, the Green-Kubo method, yields incorrect results in LAMMPS
for the majority of molecular simulations. Although the ramifications of the
error in the heat flux for the thousands of papers already published using
LAMMPS has yet to be fully determined, preliminary data indicates that for
liquid hydrocarbons, the heat flux through a many-body potential can be
underreported by 95%, leading to a total error of the heat flux of 22%. Unless
correct thermal transport calculations can be achieved and implemented for this
widely used and highly optimized software package, research and development of
materials with novel thermal properties will be significantly hindered. There is
no widely available MD code that is able to correctly compute heat flux. The one
exception is for molecular systems where only pair-wise interactions exist
(which excludes all molecules with greater than two atoms), in which case the
current LAMMPS implementation gives correct results. The heat flux computation
problem in LAMMPS was identified more than four years ago, but the lack of a
correct implementation in any widely used MD software package speaks to the
challenge of finding and dedicating software engineers to do this important
work. This project addresses the theory, implementation pathway, and validation
strategy for an expansive re-implementation of heat flux computations in LAMMPS
for many-body potentials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.