* 1931767
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: RUI: Towards Efficient and Secure Agricultural Information Collection Using a Multi-Robot System
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Ladislau Boloni, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 135,000.00

With the growing world population and diminishing agricultural lands, it becomes
imperative to maximize crop yield by protecting crop health and mitigating
against pests and diseases. Though there are decades-old practices still in
place, there is also growing adoption of so-called precision agriculture
solutions, which employ emerging technologies in sensing, automation, and
analytics in daily farmland operations. As farmers gain real-time access to
critical data (e.g., land and weather conditions) and can quickly share any
untoward findings with others, farmland operations are morphing into full-
fledged cyber-physical systems. To this end, this project seeks to develop,
implement and evaluate a multi-robot agricultural information collection system
that is autonomous, efficient and secure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project led
by the University of North Florida (UNF) and supported by the University of
Central Florida (UCF) has two main goals: (i) develop and implement novel
information collection techniques for autonomous mobile robots that collect,
store and share data in an efficient yet secure manner using blockchain,and
(ii)and to train undergraduate and graduate students to conduct basic and
applied research while closely working with local farmland partners in north-
east Florida. Current technologies already use robots for agricultural purposes,
but they typically have a high maintenance cost and do not necessarily consider
issues related to security and data integrity. The primary objective is to
design and deploy a set of autonomous robots that communicate wirelessly and
navigate through planned paths in order to collect valuable data. This project
will also consider the threat of security attacks by which collected data can be
corrupted; seeking new distributed blockchain-based consensus protocols that
mitigate the adversarial influence of such attacks. This project also contains a
significant research and education component leveraging the leadership of UNF in
the context of a primarily undergraduate institution (RUI). Being predominantly
an undergraduate institution, there is a lack of opportunity for pursuing higher
degrees in the Jacksonville area. This project aligns with an established
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between UNF and UCF to provide a conduit for
computing/engineering students to pursue M.S. degrees at UNF that feed
seamlessly into Ph.D. programs at UCF. Students will benefit from the new
robotics course to be developed at UNF and the ones being offered at UCF.
Research progress will be showcased via technical workshops at both institutions
to be held annually. Developed solutions are expected to transfer to other
cyber-physical system applications, including search and rescue, patrolling,
advanced manufacturing, among others. Most broadly, this project will raise
awareness among today's teenagers and young adults of the impending agricultural
crisis if worldwide food production falls even further behind meeting demands of
an increasing global population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.