* 1931343
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Cyberloop for Accelerated Bionanomaterials Design
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Wonpil Im, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2024
* USD 589,999.00

The evolution of biological and materials systems must be understood at many
scales in order to achieve groundbreaking advances. Areas that are impacted
include the health sciences, materials sciences, energy conversion,
sustainability, and overall quality of life. Molecular simulations using complex
models and configurations play an increasing role in such efforts. They address
the limitations of experiments which study events over very small time and
length scales. Such simulations require great expertise due to the complexity of
the systems being studied. and the tools being used. This is particularly true
for systems containing both inorganic and biological materials. This project
will help researchers to quickly set up complex simulations, carry out the
simulations with high accuracy, and assess uncertainties in the results. They
will help develop the Cyberloop computational infrastructure. Cyberloop will
dramatically reduce the time required to perform state-of-the-art simulations.
They will also help to educate the next generation of researchers in this
important field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyberloop will integrate three existing
successful platforms for soft matter and solid state simulations (IFF, OpenKIM,
and CHARMM-GUI) into a single unified framework. These systems will work
together to enable users to set up complex bionanomaterial configurations,
select reliable validated force fields, generate input scripts for popular
simulation platforms, and assess the uncertainty in the results. The integration
of these tools requires a host of technological and scientific innovations
including: automated charge assignment protocols and file conversions, expansion
of the Interface force field (IFF) to new systems, generation of new surface
models, extension of the Open Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (OpenKIM) to
bonded force fields, development of machine learning based force field selection
and uncertainty tools, and development of new Nanomaterial Builder and Bionano
Builder modules in CHARMM-GUI. Cyberloop fulfils a critical need in the user
community to discover and engineer new multi-component bionanomaterials to
create the next generation of therapeutics, materials for energy conversion, and
ultrastrong composites. The project will facilitate the training of graduate
students, undergraduate students, and postdoctoral scholars, including
underrepresented and minority students, at the participating institutions to
prepare an interdisciplinary scientific workforce with significant experience in
cyber-enabled technology. Online educational materials and tutorials will help
increase participation in bionanomaterial research across academia and
government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported by the NSF
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, and the Division of Materials Research
and the Division of Chemistry within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.