* 1931827
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Optimal Ride Service For All: Users, Service Providers and Society
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sean Qian, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 354,877.00

This project develops a cyber-physical-social system for communities to
incentivize emerging ride-sourcing (such as Uber and Lyft) and sharing services
to improve societal outcomes. The goal is to enable novel public-private
partnerships that leverage these services for a win-win-win outcome for all
parties involved: reducing travel times, energy use and emissions, while
ensuring cost-effectiveness for public agencies; boosting mobility service
providers' profitability; and improving the experience of all travelers.
Research results will be disseminated through courses, open-source tools,
journal publications, conferences, workshops, and an online short course. This
project will provide interdisciplinary training to a diverse group of students,
who will be part of the next generation of globally-engaged leaders. Learning
sessions and hands-on activities will be designed and offered to general public
under the collaboration with the Carnegie Museum of Natural History.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a theoretical, modeling, and
computational framework for communities to incentivize emerging mobility
services to achieve system-wide goals on efficiency and reliability. This is
done through optimally pricing a surcharge or credit to riders' fare with
respect to departure times, routes, pooling and curbs (i.e., pick-up/drop-off
locations), in conjunction with subsidies to mobility service providers in
exchange for guaranteed system improvement. This project advances fundamental
knowledge regarding how public right-of-way spaces (such as curbs and roads) and
travel demand should be priced and balanced for social optimum. It develops an
architecture that integrates travelers' seeking to maximize their utilities and
service providers' goals for improving service efficiency and maximizing
revenue, with novel optimization and controls of infrastructure and service
pricing. In addition, it develops efficient and scalable algorithms to estimate
and optimize mixed flows of shared and personal vehicles for large-scale
networks. This project will assess multi-source high-resolution data, including
vehicle trajectory data from mobility service providers to validate, test and
demonstrate this cyber-physical-social system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.