* 1931800
* SATC: EDU: Curriculum Development for Secure Blockchain Technologies
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,595.00

The widespread adoption of Blockchain technologies, both in government and
industry, has given rise to an increased demand for a workforce that is
adequately trained and able to cope with the challenges of leveraging the
Blockchain platform in the real world. Current shortfalls in Blockchain
expertise make a compelling case in favor of incorporating a comprehensive
curriculum in this field into Cybersecurity education. The University of Texas
at Dallas (UT Dallas) will enhance its current programs in cybersecurity and
privacy by leveraging its expertise in Blockchain technology to create such a
curriculum. UT Dallas proposes to build a syllabus to encourage interested
students to gain experience in Blockchain with a focus on architecture and
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The course will familiarize students with a
variety of Blockchain concepts including mining algorithms, smart contracts, and
various consensus algorithms such as Proof-of-Work, Proof-of-Stake, etc. used on
Bitcoin, Monero and Ethereum Blockchain. Furthermore, the course will address
security concerns such as smart contract protection through code rewriting and
vulnerability detection using machine learning method. In addition, the course
will cover various case studies in applying Blockchain technology in IoT data
management and data provenance. UT Dallas ongoing research will develop new
techniques which will be incorporated in this project. These techniques are
novel and are not readily available from other sources. For example, UT Dallas
research on protecting smart contracts and detection of vulnerabilities in smart
contracts will be disseminated via this proposed capstone course. The capstone
course will consist of several modules and hands-on activities related to secure
blockchain and its applications. After taking these courses, students will have
experience with applying theoretical results to real world applications. By
engaging in realistic projects, they will gain a clear perspective on how the
tools and techniques of Blockchain platform permeate across multiple
disciplines. The performance of the students will be evaluated continually to
gauge the efficiency of the course curriculum and to initiate necessary
improvements. The project has the potential to contribute to the training of
Blockchain technology workers with skills specifically catered to industry and
government needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.