* 1931611
* Adsorption of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFASs) and Other Polar Organic Contaminants on Pristine and Organic-Coated Clay Mineral Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Ian Bourg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 329,992.00

Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances (PFAS) are a class of synthetic compounds
that have been widely dispersed in the environment. Recent evidence indicates
that PFAS can lead to adverse health outcomes in humans. These compounds are
being found increasingly in drinking water and soils. These developments have
led to numerous legal and regulatory actions regarding their use. Despite
numerous studies over the past few decades, there remain significant gaps in our
knowledge of the environmental persistence of PFAS. This project aims to gain
deep insight into the molecular-scale attachment of PFAS and other organic
contaminants to solid surfaces using molecular dynamics simulations on
supercomputers. Generalizable knowledge of the affinity of PFAS for solid
surfaces has the potential to transform our understanding of the environmental
fate of these compounds. Successful completion of the research will lead to
better models of environmental persistence of PFAS, and the potential
development of novel water treatment and soil remediation technologies to
protect human and ecological health. A web-based science gateway will produce
visualizations of results for the K-12 and broader educational community, thus
increasing the scientific literacy of the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand the adsorption of organic contaminants on pristine and organic-coated
smectite clay surfaces. The research focuses on polar or anionic organic
contaminants, including many compounds of emerging concern such as per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). These compounds exhibit a more diverse range
of functional groups and more complex adsorption behaviors than legacy
pollutants such a polychlorinated biphenyls or polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.
The focus on PFAS is timely and relevant given the acute challenges these
compounds pose for site remediation and water treatment. The research will
develop a novel computational chemistry methodology that can accurately predict
the affinity of polar or anionic organic contaminants for pristine and organic-
coated smectite clay surfaces at the molecular scale. Variables include the
influence on adsorption of compound structure for a diverse range of 53
compounds, aqueous chemistry, and organic clay surface coatings. This
methodology will be validated using laboratory sorption experiments to develop
new geochemical modeling tools. The project team will develop a web-based
interface that will enable the broader educational community of high school
students and teachers to visualize and explore simulation results stored on the
high-performance data storage systems at the National Energy Research Scientific
Computing Center (NERSC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.