* 1931158
* Travel Support for International Focus Workshop: Granular and Particulate Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Karen Daniels, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 10/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award will provide partial support for US researchers to attend an
interdisciplinary workshop titled "Granular and Particulate Networks
(PARNET19)," which will be held in Dresden, Germany on July 8-10, 2019. The
workshop will be hosted by the Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex
Systems. The award will support young researchers who will benefit from
interacting with international leaders in the field of granular and particulate
media. It will also provide them opportunities to establish new collaborations
with international colleagues and present results of their research to an
international science and engineering audience. Special efforts will be made to
support researchers from traditionally underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.

The analysis of particulate and granular materials poses challenging problems.
The arrangements of the particles and the distribution of forces in particulate
and granular media span a broad range of length scales, which makes it
especially difficult to predict how these materials respond to external
loadings. Developing new theoretical methods that can take particle-level
interactions and predict macroscopic properties requires expertise from
mathematics, statistics, physics, engineering and computer science. The goal of
the workshop is to assemble researchers from a wide variety of science and
engineering disciplines, including experts trained in network-based approaches,
to explore the use of network theory to guide new theoretical developments for
particulate and granular media. Participants will explore ways to isolate key
characteristics of force transmission in particulate networks, identify
appropriate tools from network analysis to describe granular dynamics, and use
these tools to predict failures in granular systems

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.