* 1931049
* RAPID: Decision-Making Involving Risk in the Immediate Aftermath of a Natural Disaster
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Dean Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Exposure to a natural disaster can lead individuals and families to make
inefficient decisions, some of which may involve risk. Negative shocks often
lead to increases in behaviors that results in bad outcomes that may persist
into the long run. However, the mechanisms through which natural disasters
affect decision making are not known. This research will use experimental
methods to study the effects of a natural disaster on household decision making
in the immediate aftermath of the natural disaster. Specifically, the research
will investigate the following: (i) what are the human and economic losses due
to the disaster, (ii) the effects on health decisions such as medical testing,
taking medications, (iii) changes in individual choices that may reinforce or
reduce the initial effects, and (iv) how household cope with the disaster. This
project's findings can reveal many consequences of natural disasters: disruption
of programs to combat epidemics such as HIV/AIDS or measles. Understanding the
mechanisms through which natural disasters affect decisions with risky outcomes
will help policy makers to craft more effective ways to help reduce the damaging
effects of natural disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks
to answer the following questions: (i) how does a natural disaster affect the
health and economic outcomes of households in the immediate aftermath? (ii) how
do household make decisions about health care immediately after the disaster?
(iii) how do changes in individual preferences mediate these effects (will the
disaster affect household risk or time preference)? and (iv) what mechanisms do
households adopted to cope with the disaster? The researchers will leverage
prior randomization at the community and individual levels in an on-going
project in the area to identify the causal effects of natural disaster on these
outcomes. A major contribution of this research project is the collection of
ephemeral data on household preferences and healthy behaviors in the immediate
aftermath of the disaster. The presence of the research team in the disaster
area allows the team to collect the appropriate ephemeral data. The results of
this research project will provide important data sets to study household
behavior in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. The results will also provide
important inputs into policies to help victims of natural disasters in the US
and around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.