* 1931714
* InTrans: Modular Security on an Open Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Azer Bestavros, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,999.00

This project explores the intriguing possibilities that result from the
combination of two tools: cryptographic software that distributes any computing
task over several machines with strong security guarantees as long as the
machines are isolated, and a multi-provider cloud datacenter that offers to any
tenant the ability to rent multiple isolated machines that are administered by
different organizations. The project's novelties are to optimize
cryptographically secure multi-party computation (MPC) for use in a multi-
provider datacenter, leveraging the security properties already provided by such
datacenters. The project's impacts are open-source software packages that
provide a compelling application for cloud datacenters like the Mass Open Cloud
(MOC) that adopt a multi provider approach. The research in this InTrans project
is of strong interest to two industrial partners, Honda Research Institutes and
Red Hat, and it builds on top of the work performed in the Modular Approach to
Cloud Security Frontier project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this
cross-disciplinary project encompasses three sets of tasks that span
cryptography and distributed systems. First, the investigators explore
opportunities to improve and optimize the algorithmic design of MPC toward
specific scenarios for which we have observed large interest by our industry
partners and others. Second, the investigators adapt and optimize system
software and existing MOC tools to improve MPC's networking and distributed
computing steps. Third, the investigators perform a universal composability (UC)
security analysis of the MOC's security-relevant systems in order to determine
the extent to which can contribute toward MPC. These three tasks are co-
dependent: for instance, a UC model of the MOC can provide insights into the
design of new MPC algorithms that combine software with partially trusted
hardware and to validate whether the cloud meets the pre-conditions required by
MPC (such as isolation between nodes).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.