* 1931042
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Learning Dynamic and Robust Defenses Against Co-Adaptive Spammers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Sihong Xie, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Online reputation systems are ubiquitous for customers to evaluate businesses,
products, people, and organizations based on reviews from the crowd. For
example, Yelp and TripAdvisor rank restaurants and hotels based on user reviews,
and RateMDs allows patients to review doctors and hospitals. These systems can
however be leveraged by spammers to mislead and manipulate the inexperienced
customers with fake but well-disguised reviews (spams). To comprehensively
protect customers and honest businesses, advanced spam detection techniques have
been deployed. Nonetheless, intelligent spammers can still probe and then evolve
to bypass the deployed detectors. This project investigates dynamic and robust
countermeasures to defeat the evolving spammers. This research will allow
regulatory agencies to enforce a more fair, transparent, and trustworthy online
environment, encourage business owners to offer higher quality products and
services rather than fake opinions, and ultimately, allow consumers to
increasingly rely on the reputation systems confidently to save money, time and
even lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate the design of
adaptive spam detection technologies and systems against intelligent spammers
that learn to bypass static detectors. The investigation will follow two
principles: (1) the goals and workings of the detectors and spammers can be
sensed through their behaviors; (2) both parties should act dynamically to
optimally defeat their opponents who co-adapt with the other's behaviors. Based
on these principles, the researchers aim to: (i) investigate the footprint of
dynamic spamming and formalize the gained insights into evasion models against
static detectors; (ii) model the interactions between the evolving spammer and
dynamic detections through deep reinforcement learning and Markov games; and
(iii) introduce multiple cooperative spammers to inform more complex spammer-
detector co-adaptations through multi-agent and hierarchical reinforcement
learning. The research aims will be complemented by metrics and evaluations that
capture realistic spammer and detector goals and constraints. The project will
result in datasets, algorithms, and testbed system for the research community,
and gamified educational software and materials to increase awareness of fake
contents among a broader population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.