* 1931659
* Enabling Minimal Brine Discharge Desalination Using Intercalation Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Kyle Smith, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 12/31/2023
* USD 327,723.00

Freshwater depletion threatens human livelihood and security globally.
Desalination, or removing salt ions from sea and brackish waters, could increase
freshwater access, but co-produced brine, or waste salt water, requires disposal
that is costly and environmentally unsustainable. The goal of this project is to
develop a cost-effective, energy-efficient brine concentration process that will
produce more fresh water relative to the amount of co-produced waste brine,
benefiting large-scale desalination facilities across municipal, agricultural,
and industrial sectors. Unlike thermal processes for brine disposal, which
require water evaporation, this research will investigate a novel process using
electrically-driven reactions to concentrate brines with low energy and cost,
while simultaneously desalinating feedwater. These reactions, in which ions move
into a material, are called intercalation and have been used in the past for
energy storage. However, their use in brine concentration requires faster,
reversible intercalation of various ions with differing sizes, with low energy
use. The primary objective of this project is, thus, to characterize, design,
and model electric deionization devices using cation intercalation reactions for
the concentration of brines. The expected improvement in desalination
performance will be accomplished using the synergistic effects of two
intercalation materials, one designed to accept larger ions while the second is
designed to accept smaller ions. Beyond its immediate broader impacts and the
involvement of graduate students therein, this research will broaden the
participation of women and underrepresented groups in STEM through the
development and dissemination of complementary educational materials. A design-
oriented "3D-Desalination" (Digital Device Design for Desalination) activity
linking chemistry, engineering, and desalination will be created with associated
curricula developed in collaboration with University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) outreach coordinator. Participation of pre-college women in
these STEM activities will occur through GAMES (Girls Adventures in Math,
Engineering and Science) camps and through summer teacher workshops at
UIUC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop improved intercalation
materials for use in desalination. These improved materials incorporate solid
intercalation nanoparticles into porous electrodes and exhibit high volumetric
loading and facile charge transport. The hypothesis that raw cation absorption
and absorption rate can be balanced by combining high-capacity materials having
small interstitials with lower capacity materials having large interstitials
will be tested by combining intercalation materials of differing composition to
synergistically concentrate dissolved alkali/alkaline-earth salt mixtures. The
low electronic conductivity of many intercalation materials necessitates their
integration with conductive additives to sustain high-rate cycling. A novel wet-
phase inversion process will be created here to fabricate porous electrodes with
high intercalation-material loading and fast electron/ion transport by promoting
electronic percolation. Previous modeling and experiments of electrochemical
desalination with lower salinity feeds suggest that flow-through electrodes and
anion-selective membranes increase salt removal. Separations performance of an
electrochemical flow cell will, therefore, be characterized experimentally with
various flow fields and separators. With measurements of the effective transport
properties of electrodes computational modeling will be validated and used to
quantify local energy loss mechanisms in individual device components. The
outcome of the project will be further knowledge in the use mixed intercalation
materials and the synergistic interaction between materials with differing
capacity and interstitial size. The project is jointly supported by the
Molecular Separations and the Electrochemical Systems programs in the Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.