* 1931610
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Epitaxial Stabilization of Polar Epsilon-phase Gallium Oxide Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Rohan Mishra, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 65,000.00

Non-technical description: Semiconductors and ferroelectrics are ubiquitous
electronic materials. In semiconductors, the conductivity can be tuned using
doping and the velocity of charge carriers in typical semiconductors used for
device applications is large. Ferroelectric materials exhibit inherent electric
polarization that can be reversed using an external electric field; however
charge carriers in ferroelectrics typically have lower electron velocity. This
research aims at combining both the properties in a single material by
stabilizing a new ferroelectric semiconductor based on the metastable, epsilon
phase of gallium oxide. This project is an early effort on developing a
fundamental understanding of how the structure and synthesis conditions of
epsilon-phase gallium oxide affects its material properties. Theoretical studies
and predictions guide the experimental efforts. By combining the properties of
semiconductors and ferroelectrics in epsilon-phase gallium oxide, this project
aims to unlock its potential, prospects and limitation for devices with multiple
functionalities, such as power, high frequency, and memory, all in a single
materials platform. The project provides training to undergraduate and graduate
students and a post-doctoral scholar to synergistically combine theory and
modeling, advanced material synthesis, and materials characterization to develop
fundamental structure-property correlations in this new class of materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The metastable, epsilon phase of
gallium oxide has been predicted to be a rare, ferroelectric semiconductor with
an ultra-wide band gap. This project seeks to stabilize epsilon-phase gallium
oxide using epitaxy and demonstrate electric-field switching of polar domains.
The research employs a combination of first-principles density-functional theory
calculations and metal-organic vapor phase epitaxy to grow epsilon gallium oxide
thin films on various predicted substrates and control their quality. It uses a
variety of characterization techniques, including aberration-corrected scanning
transmission electron microscopy, to characterize the structure, electrical,
optical and polar properties of the deposited thin-films and develop structure-
property-processing correlations. The realization of high-quality ferroelectric
semiconductor based on epsilon-phase gallium oxide is expected to open up
pathways to design novel devices for power and high-frequency electronics,
information storage and processing applications. Education and outreach aspects
include training of undergraduate and graduate students and the organization of
a summer program for high-school students and teachers from Utah-region schools
to the Utah Nanofab and epitaxy facility to provide exposure to
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.