* 1931697
* The function of epigenetic memory in cell fate
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Katz, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,246,924.00

Within an organism, every different type of cell contains the same set genes,
but only a subset of these genes are on. This gives rise to the many different
types of cells. Over many years scientists have made progress in understanding
how the packaging of genes into an open or closed formation determines whether
the gene will be on or off. This is a fundamental part of biology. However,
scientists still have very little understanding of what happens when these
mechanisms go awry and different cell type programs are competing against one
another. The microscopic worm C. elegans has a unique feature where every cell
type is made exactly the same way in every embryo. This provides a unique
opportunity to address this question. The Katz Lab will take advantage of the
invariant embryo in these worms to learn the rules governing how cells respond
when an incorrect program is activated alongside the normal program. This will
address a fundamental aspect of biology with wide ranging implications for many
different and important processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using C.
elegans, the Katz Lab discovered that the H3K4me2 demethylase, LSD1, acts along
with the H3K9 methyltransferase, MET-2, as an epigenetic reprogramming switch,
replacing the active histone modification, H3K4me2, with the repressive
modification,H3K9me2, at fertilization. In spr-5;met-2 mutants, the
inappropriate inheritance of histone methylation leads to the ectopic expression
of &amp;#8764;200 critical germline genes in somatic cells, resulting in
developmental delay. This model provides a unique opportunity to understand how
inappropriately inherited chromatin affects transcription and how the expression
of one developmental program affects cells trying to specify a different
developmental program. To address this question, the Katz Lab will take
advantage of the invariant C. elegans lineage to determine how chromatin, gene
expression and cell fate are affected with single cell resolution in spr-5;met-2
mutants. This project is highly complementary to broader impacts pursued by the
Katz Lab. Over the past 5 years of NSF funding, the Katz Lab at Emory University
has partnered with a nearby liberal arts college, Oglethorpe University, to
establish a Pipeline Course Embedded Undergraduate Research (CURE) curriculum,
where biology majors take part in C. elegans research reiteratively throughout
the biology major. This culminates in a Capstone Course, led by a postdoctoral
fellow from the Katz Lab, where students spend the bulk of their class- time
over a semester on an original C. elegans research project related to ongoing
experiments in the Katz Lab. Because of the Pipeline CURE, the majority of
biology majors now participate in authentic research, and initial surveys
indicate that this authentic research can recapitulate the experience that is
typically only found in an apprentice style approach at a major research
university. To continue to lower the bar of accessibility to authentic research
at a liberal arts college, the Katz Lab now proposes to provide every biology
major the opportunity to conduct thesis research performed entirely in the
classroom at Oglethorpe University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.