* 1931931
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Collaborative Research: Cyber-Physical System Integrity and Security with Impedance Signatures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Christopher White, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 503,184.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS), such as automobiles, planes, and heavy equipment
rely on complex distributed supply chains that source parts from manufacturers
across the world. A fundamental problem that these systems face is ensuring the
safety, security, and integrity of both the cyber components and physical parts
that they receive through their supply chain. Because of the separation between
the manufacturer and the consumer of the part, there are immense challenges in
ensuring that physical parts arrive from the desired source and are not modified
or swapped for inferior copies in transit. For example, the Aerospace Industries
Association states that "though we know counterfeit parts enter the aerospace
supply chain, the time and place of their entry is unpredictable." If either the
cyber-components or the physical parts being incorporated into these systems
have been tampered with, significant cyber-physical security risk is introduced.
As an example, an attacker who has a part's cyber-information can simply produce
a counterfeit part, clone any physical identifiers (serial numbers, etc.), and
claim that the cyber-information is for the cloned part.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While cyber-security techniques, such as roots of trust
and signing chains, exist to help ensure software integrity, there are no
commensurate roots of trust and signing chains that can guarantee the source and
integrity of both the cyber components and physical parts. As such, there is a
risk that the algorithms and control approaches used in a supply chain will not
identify the inferior performance characteristics of a counterfeit part and
control its operation in an unsafe manner. The primary goal of this research is
to create an integrity mechanism based on physically unclonable functions to
ensure that an entire CPS is built from both trusted software and physical
parts. To achieve this goal, the research investigates (i) a physical
measurement technique (electro-mechanical impedance) to provide parts an
unclonable physical identity and (ii) the cyber signing approaches to build
chains of trust from these identities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.