* 1931322
* XXVIIth International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unification of  Fundamental Interactions (SUSY 2019) and Pre-SUSY Training Workshop (Pre-SUSY 2019)
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2020
* Barbara Szczerbinska, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 04/30/2020
* USD 13,200.00

This grant award is made to Professor Barbara Szczerbinska at Texas A&amp;M
University Corpus Christi, in support of the SUSY 2019 Conference and SUSY 2019
Pre-School. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Standard Model of particle physics
successfully explains virtually all data which has ever been collected at high-
energy collider experiments. Supersymmetry (SUSY) is one of most elegant
extensions of the Standard Model and allows scientists to address a number of
theoretical issues left unresolved by the Standard Model. These include the
origin and stability of certain mass scales which appear in the theory. SUSY
also predicts the existence of certain particles which might serve as ideal
candidates for the unseen dark matter of the universe, searches for which are
ongoing in a number of experiments worldwide. SUSY also allows the different
fundamental forces to be unified into a single "grand-unified" force at high
energy scales. Searches for SUSY are ongoing at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC).
SUSY also plays a prominent role in string theory and in many other ideas for
physics beyond the Standard Model. As a result of the central importance of
supersymmetry in modern particle physics, the annual SUSY conferences have grown
over the past 20 years to become the dominant annual international physics
conferences focused on physics beyond the Standard Model. As such, these
conferences provide a unique venue for discussions not only on the status of
SUSY but also on diverse topics such as connections between particle physics and
cosmology, supersymmetry and its alternatives, the Higgs particle, the physics
of neutrinos, dark matter, astro-particle physics, gravitational waves, and
string theory. The SUSY conferences also include discussions of results from the
Large Hadron Collider, recent neutrino experiments and observations, direct and
indirect dark-matter detection experiments, detection of gravitational waves,
data from particle colliders, as well as measurements of the Cosmic Microwave
Background and Large Scale Structure in the universe. Moreover, starting this
year, the SUSY conferences will also be featuring connections between high-
energy physics and experimental techniques from Atomic/Molecular/Optical (AMO)
physics and Quantum Information Science, thereby increasing the
interdisciplinarity of this conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUSY 2019 (the
XXVIIth International Conference on Supersymmetry and Unification of Fundamental
Interactions) will be hosted by Texas A&amp;M University Corpus Christi (TAMU-
CC), during May 20-24, 2019. The annual SUSY conferences are typically attended
by large numbers of young postdocs and students each year, and as a result a
tradition has developed wherein each SUSY conference is also preceded by a
"school" or training workshop dedicated to providing these future young
researchers the background to fully profit from the contents of the conference,
as well as to educate them in state-of-the-art methods of experimental and
theoretical high-energy physics. This objective is fulfilled through a series of
high-level lectures and talks by well-known active researchers in the field of
high-energy physics. Accordingly, the SUSY 2019 conference will be preceded by a
four-day pre-SUSY training workshop which will take place on TAMU-CC campus
during the week prior the SUSY 2019 conference (May 15-18,
2019).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support for the SUSY 2019 Conference and the SUSY
2019 pre-School will have significant broader impacts. Both the Conference and
pre-School will help young scientists to interact with theoretical and
experimental colleagues and thereby broaden their knowledge of particle physics.
These educational goals are important to the integration of young scientists
into the community, and to maintain the vibrancy of the field. As such, support
for these events advances the national interest by promoting the progress of
science and the training of the next generation of researchers in the United
States. Throughout the planning for this conference, care has been taken to
ensure a diverse set of speakers at all levels as well as a diverse set of
conference participants. Moreover, a fund will be made available to help cover
the expenses of students from underrepresented institutions, as well as
underrepresented minorities and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.