* 1931200
* Collaborative Research:  The Rules of Predation: Linking Biomechanics and Ecology in the Bat-Insect Arms Race
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Aaron Corcoran, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 488,757.00

How a predator pursues its prey may be one of the most important aspects of its
behavior. Predation success determines survival for nearly all animals, be they
predator or potential prey. We know little, however, about the specific movement
abilities of predators and prey in nature and how they determine the outcomes of
life-or-death encounters. It is difficult to study natural predation; these
events are rare and difficult to anticipate. Predators use a variety of movement
strategies to hunt prey: striking with great speed, sneaking up stealthily, and
maneuvering quickly and repeatedly during pursuit, to name a few. This research
will address how bats hunt insects using different predation strategies,
dissecting the physiology and anatomy that underlie the abilities of particular
species to select their form of pursuit. This research will provide rich
learning opportunities for teams of students in biology, engineering and
computer science. It will develop a science communication internship program at
Brown University where students will transform research videos of bats hunting
insects into media that will be distributed globally and that highlight the
importance of bats and insects to our ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses the model system of bats and insects to link detailed understanding
of the mechanistic basis of locomotion with experiments and simulations that
examine how movement abilities influence predator-prey interactions. Bats and
insects are highly diverse groups that have co-evolved for millions of years.
The researchers will use emerging video-recording and computer vision
technologies to quantify with high precision the movement abilities of several
bat species as they hunt insects under natural conditions. These field studies
will be complemented by studies of bats flying in a custom flight arena that
allow measurement of bat flight movements in greater detail. Flight and
predator-prey computer simulations will be used to test hypotheses regarding
what determines bat flight abilities and how movement abilities affect predator-
prey outcomes. This will lead to open-access computer software that will help
scientists studying a variety of animals to predict flight abilities and the
outcomes of predator-prey interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.