* 1931891
* I-Corps: High Content Label Free Imaging of Tissue using a Novel Laser Source
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2020
* Haohua Tu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project encompasses
laser science, microscope technology, and the entire spectrum of biological
imaging of live tissues, cells, and microorganisms. This includes basic life
science and environmental research where advanced microscopes and cell
measurement instruments are used routinely to collect data from cell cultures,
animals, and human specimens. Most of these measurements currently require the
use of expensive chemical or biological "labels" to identify the targets of
interest. This labeling process is time consuming, expensive, and often results
in irreversible damage to the specimen. This technology largely eliminates the
need for these labels, substantially reducing both the cost and time required to
perform experiments. This means that precious public and private research funds
will accomplish more. In addition, the potential commercialization plan for this
technology includes offering it to existing microscope and instrument
manufacturers so that it can readily be integrated into existing systems.

This I-Corps project and its intellectual merit involves an advanced technology
for rapidly capturing images of live tissue at microscopic resolution, and
immediately extracting a wealth of information about the viability and function
of the cells and tissue from those images, all without the need for chemical
staining or tissue preparation. This technology is the result of over a decade
of research conducted at a major university where the research team created a
new programmable laser light source that tailors and launches short pulses of
light to interact with specific molecular components within the live tissue,
essentially making blood vessels, different cells, and cancerous tissue "light-
up" with unique light signatures. By combining this laser source with an
advanced microscope and software also developed by the research team, a next-
generation imaging device has been developed that could dramatically improve the
accuracy and speed, and lower the cost of histology, which is currently used to
microscopically assess dead, fixed, and stained tissue sections.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.