* 1931333
* Collaborative Research: Permafrost Carbon Network: Synthesizing flux observations for benchmarking model projections of permafrost carbon exchange
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Edward Schuur, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,062,852.00

Permafrost is ground that is frozen all year round for two or more years.
Permafrost contains carbon from the remnants of plants, microbes, and animals
that have accumulated over thousands of years. Present estimates suggest that
permafrost currently holds twice as much carbon as the atmosphere, which are
released as carbon dioxide and methane gas as the permafrost degrades in
response to climate warming. Release of just a fraction of this frozen carbon
could have significant impacts on the global carbon cycle that may dramatically
increase the rate of future global climate warming and accelerate sea-level
rise, extreme weather, droughts, and impacts on agriculture at rates beyond
those currently projected by models. Most climate models do not yet fully
include the feedback loops that cause northern regions to emit additional carbon
dioxide and methane to the atmosphere, so the level of risk to society is
uncertain. This proposal supports the Permafrost Carbon Network, formed to link
biological carbon cycle research with well-developed networks in the physical
sciences focused on the thermal state of permafrost. The Permafrost Carbon
Network produces new knowledge by synthesizing a wide range of research results
into a more coherent circumpolar view of the role of permafrost carbon in
driving future climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports the
activities of the Permafrost Carbon Network to: 1) expand networking
opportunities that engage the community and enable new science synthesis ideas
to arise through the activities of working groups, 2) synthesize permafrost zone
carbon flux data from US and international sites to produce a unified time
series of ecosystem-atmosphere carbon exchange that can be updated as new data
become available, and 3) benchmark the recently completed Permafrost Carbon
Network model inter-comparison experiment using new and past data synthesis and
experimental results. This combination of research and networking activities
gives scientists and decision makers an annually updated view of changing Arctic
carbon emissions to the atmosphere in relation to Earth System Model forecasts,
while also helping to prioritize and implement improvements to climate models.
The new research activities and expanded networking build upon past Permafrost
Carbon Network momentum as a foundation to increase, distill, and communicate
our understanding of change in this remote region with its important
consequences for society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.