* 1931266
* Elements:Collaborative Proposal: A task-based code for multiphysics problems in astrophysics at exascale
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Mark Scheel, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2022
* USD 295,000.00

Upcoming computers will run at exascale, over a hundred times more powerful than
typical machines of today. Many algorithms used in current codes will not be
able to take advantage of these new machines. The researchers will complete the
development of an open-source community code for multi-scale, multi-physics
problems in astrophysics and gravitational physics. The code uses transformative
algorithms to reach the exascale. The techniques can be applied across
discipline boundaries in fluid dynamics, geoscience, plasma physics and nuclear
physics and engineering. The development of this new code has been driven by the
current deployment of gravitational wave detectors such as LIGO. To fully
understand and analyze the signals and waveforms measured with such detectors,
it is essential that accurate, robust, and efficient computational tools be
available for solving the dynamical Einstein equations over very long time
scales. The recent detection of the merger of a neutron star-neutron star merger
by LIGO and by a host of electromagnetic telescopes has ushered The extreme
energy densities of matter and radiation and the highly dynamic spacetimes of
these events probe fundamental physics inaccessible to terrestrial experiments.
The new code will be made available as open-source community
cyberinfrastructure. The researchers will reach out to other communities within
astrophysics (e.g., star formation, space plasma physics) and across discipline
boundaries to fluid dynamics, geoscience, plasma physics, nuclear engineering
etc. Early-career researchers trained in these techniques are in great demand,
both in academia and as highly-skilled members of the industrial STEM workforce.
Undergraduates will participate in the research by producing
visualizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new code uses discontinuous Galerkin
methods and task-based parallelism to accomplish its desired goals. This
framework will allow the multiphysics applications to be treated both accurately
and efficiently on the new architectures of petascale and exascale machines. The
code is designed to scale to over a million cores for efficient exploration of
the parameter space of potential sources and allowed physics, and for the high-
fidelity predictions needed to realize the promise of multi-messenger
astrophysics. The code will allow astrophysicists to explore the mechanisms
driving core-collapse supernovae and the properties of stellar remnants, to
understand electromagnetic transients and gravitational-wave phenomena in
compact objects, and to reveal the dense matter equation of state. The two key
algorithmic innovations in the code, the discontinuous Galerkin method coupled
with task-based parallelism, promise revolutionary impact in other fields
relying on numerical solution of partial differential equations at the
exascale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of "Windows
on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big
Ideas for Future NSF Investments. This project advances also the objectives of
the National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI), an effort aimed at
sustaining and enhancing the U.S. scientific, technological, and economic
leadership position in High-Performance Computing (HPC) research, development,
and deployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Physics and the Division of
Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.