* 1931162
* Collaborative Research: 3D Ambient Noise Tomography (3D ANT) for Natural Hazards Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Brady Cox, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 03/31/2021
* USD 387,922.00

Despite significant progress in medical imaging, subsurface imaging for
infrastructure engineering lags far behind. For example, many engineering
analyses are still based on 1D profiles of the subsurface, or pseudo-2D/3D
profiles constructed from several 1D soundings. When true 3D imaging is
performed, the depth and resolution of exploration is often limited. While the
problem of subsurface imaging is quite complex, the ability to develop rapid,
realistic, 3D images of the subsurface, with accompanying engineering properties
(e.g., shear modulus), would significantly advance engineering for more
resilient and sustainable infrastructure. This research aims to develop a new 3D
subsurface imaging method using recordings of ambient noise obtained from a grid
of surface sensors. The new 3D Ambient Noise Tomography (3D ANT) method will
provide a rapid, non-intrusive, robust way of imaging the subsurface in 3D at
m-scales over the top 50- to 100-m of the subsurface. While numerous example
applications for accurate and deep 3D subsurface imaging exist within
infrastructure engineering, this project will specifically address two needs
related to natural hazards: (1) the need for developing realistic 3D subsurface
models for use in earthquake ground motion studies, and (2) the need for
improved 3D in-situ imaging for anomaly (e.g., void/sinkhole) detection.
Furthermore, significant and broad benefits for society, both anticipated and
unanticipated, will result from developing deeper, higher-resolution 3D
subsurface imaging methods. The ability to look inside the earth and retrieve
rapid and reliable models using ambient noise will impact fields as diverse as:
natural resource exploration, subsurface hydrology, pure earth science,
archeology, underground development, military/security studies, and space/planet
exploration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research
center around testing the hypothesis that accurate 3D subsurface P- and S-wave
velocity models can be extracted at m-scales down to 50- to 100-m depth from
surface recordings of ambient noise. To test this hypothesis, the research will
develop a novel 3D ANT method and verify the method with numerical simulations
and field experiments. The use of ambient noise for 3D subsurface imaging
presents inherent challenges related to the uncontrollable frequency content and
propagation direction of ambient noise. However, ambient noise is rich in low
frequency energy, allowing for deeper imaging than what is currently possible
using active-source 3D full waveform inversion (FWI) methods. Hence, 3D ANT,
when coupled with active-source 3D FWI, will provide high resolution images to
depths presently unobtainable. The 3D ANT method will require collecting ambient
noise recordings from a 2D grid of closely spaced surface sensors. The noise
recordings will be used to extract experimental correlation functions between
every possible pair of sensors. 3D viscoelastic wave equations will then be used
to obtain synthetic correlation functions, which will be matched with the
experimental ones using a Gauss-Newton FWI approach for extracting 3D subsurface
models. Optimization of the 3D ANT algorithm will include parametric studies on
field testing configurations (i.e., number and spacing of sensors) and ambient
noise characteristics (i.e., frequency content and azimuthal distribution).
Ultimately, two well-characterized field sites with ground truth have been
selected to test the methodology under real-world conditions. This research will
only achieve its broadest impact if we are successful at training students to
carry it into the future, disseminating results, and developing tools that
practitioners can use in industry. We aim to tackle these challenges while
simultaneously broadening the participation of women in natural hazards
engineering. Hazards engineering is about transforming how civil infrastructure
can be designed and rehabilitated such that communities and individuals are more
resilient to the devastating effects of natural hazards, and studies have shown
that women are more interested in STEMM fields when they have direct societal
impacts. This work will help foster a natural intersection of interest and
purpose in a diverse and talented group of future engineers with skills that
will be critical for revolutionizing natural hazards engineering, such as
coding, analyzing big-data, and supercomputing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.