* 1931667
* I-Corps: Range-based car swapping networks
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* John Campbell, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
significantly reduce the cost of electric vehicles (EV). The software platform
technology streamlines the design of vehicle swapping networks using a life-
cycle approach to scale subsidies. The initial focus will impact existing EV
owners and members of peer-to-peer car-sharing platforms. The platform can be
customized for a wide range of transportation needs that may benefit from
occasional access to specialized vehicles. The ability to efficiently swap
vehicles within a network of drivers and to scale subsidies to the benefits of a
specific network will result in reduction in transportation costs that may
attract a wide range of users. New users will not need to form their own
networks but will be able to build onto initial networks, adding new functions
and greater geographic diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims
to enable drivers to swap vehicles within a network of long-range and short-
range electric vehicles (EV's). Recent advances in life-cycle assessment
research provide the knowledge needed to develop a software platform that can
allow transportation businesses to estimate life-cycle emissions which provide
access to federal, state, and local subsidies that are essential to EV
profitability. In particular, life-cycle assessment studies have recently
developed regionalized models that account for spatially explicit constraints on
emissions as well as detailed impact inventories of battery manufacturing
processes. A software application that can assist in the optimal design of these
networks to reduce cost and optimize greenhouse gas savings will enhance both
the user ability to afford sustainable transportation and the public agency
ability to scale subsidies to the actual benefits of a specific vehicle network.
The system leverages research results in life-cycle assessment on electric
vehicles that quantifies the economic cost and greenhouse gas emissions across a
range of product stages including raw material extraction, manufacturing,
vehicle use, and end-of-life recycling and disposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.