* 1931932
* CPS: Small: Data-Driven Reinforcement Learning Control of Large CPS Networks using Multi-Stage Hierarchical Decompositions
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Aranya Chakrabortty, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 353,237.00

In the current state-of-the-art machine learning based real-time control of
large complex networks such as electric power systems is largely bottlenecked by
the curse of dimensionality. Even the simplest control designs demand numerical
complexity to accomplish. The problem becomes even more challenging when the
network model is unknown, due to which an additional learning time needs to be
accommodated. This project will take a new stance for solving this problem, and
develop a suite of hierarchical or nested machine learning-based schemes that
take advantage of various forms of physical redundancies in the network dynamics
to learn only the most important traits of its behavior instead of wasting time
in learning minor traits that may improve the closed-loop performance only by a
small amount. This selective learning approach will reduce learning time by
several orders of magnitude, making real-time control more tractable and more
implementable. Products will include numerical algorithms that are applicable
across a wide range of machine learning based control. In terms of societal
impact, the project is strongly envisioned to bring control theorists closer to
data scientists so that these two research communities can work together, and
answer important questions such as: why the value of big data has traditionally
been under-utilized in controls, what new dimensions can control theory gain
from machine learning and vice versa, and what primary analytical and
experimental tools are needed to make this marriage more successful. The
research will also support the cross-disciplinary development of a diverse
cohort of PhD and undergraduate students, and the development of a graduate-
level course on the applications of machine learning in
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main technical philosophy behind this work
will be to exploit the fact that most large-scale dynamic networks exhibit a lot
of redundancy in their dynamics. These redundancies can arise from various
factors such as time-scale separation, spatial-scale separation, low-rank
controllability, spectral clustering, similarity in temporal snapshots,
separation in the control objectives, etc. By deciphering these redundancies
from online measurements of states and inputs using machine learning tools, one
can devise appropriate decomposition rules to partition the network into non-
overlapping groups. Multiple sets of composite controllers can then be learned
independently for each group using model-free reinforcement learning.
Accordingly, the control goals of the network will also be decomposed into local
(microscopic) and global (macroscopic) reward functions. Local controllers will
be designed via privacy preserving group learning, and the global controllers
via model reduction and filtering. The study will be driven by examples from
wide-area control of power systems using streaming Synchrophasor data from
Phasor Measurements Units (PMUs). Validation experiments will be carried out in
a cyber-physical systems testbed at North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.