* 1931202
* 2019 Plant Metabolic Engineering Gordon Research Conference and Gordon Research Seminar, June 16-21, 2019 in Il Ciocco, Italy
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Maureen McCann, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 05/31/2020
* USD 18,750.00

The 8th Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Plant Metabolic Engineering is
scheduled for Jun 16-21 in Il Ciocco, Italy. Increasing populations and
urbanization are compounding factors that impact future food, water, and energy
demands. Plants contain a remarkable metabolic diversity that is just beginning
to be tapped to address those challenges such as increasing crop yields,
enhancing food production, and engineering plants to produce novel chemical
products. Advances in reading and writing the DNA of plant genomes as well as
the ability to exploit the diversity of natural metabolic production in plants
are allowing plant scientists to engineer plants with improved and novel traits.
This conference is focused on recently breakthroughs and advances in methods of
engineering plant metabolic pathways with applications in engineering plants for
the production of biofuels, improved fiber, pharmaceutical products, better
animal feed, fragrances, flavors, and nutrition. The outcomes of this conference
will provide global scientists the opportunity to exchange ideas and knowledge,
and learn about new technologies and scientific advances to plant metabolic
engineering. In addition, this conference provides a seminar series targeted at
students, postdocs, and other scientists entering the field to provide
additional training and knowledge exchange
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019 Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
and accompanying Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Plant Metabolic Engineering
will build on the successes of previous GRCs that have focused on pathway
discovery and recently on using the concepts and approaches of synthetic biology
to guide plant metabolic engineering more effectively towards products and
applications. Constraints (and opportunities) afforded by intracellular
compartmentation, complex regulatory control mechanisms and multicellular
context have rendered the discovery and design of plant metabolic pathways
inherently more challenging than for microbial pathways. During the conference
presentations from leading exponents of engineering fuel, fiber, pharma, feed,
fragrance, flavors and food in plants, will highlight important future
technologies that will facilitate both plant metabolic engineering and
implementation strategies. A final objective is to build stronger networks
between those working on plant metabolic engineering in the USA, Europe and
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.