* 1931962
* CPS:Medium:Interactive Human-Drone Partnerships in Emergency Response Scenarios
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Walter Scheirer, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,213,394.00

Small unmanned aerial, land, or submersible vehicles (drones) are increasingly
used to support emergency response scenarios such as search-and-rescue,
structural building fires, and medical deliveries. However, in current practice
drones are typically controlled by a single operator thereby significantly
limiting their potential. The proposed work will deliver a novel DroneResponse
platform, representing the next generation of emergency response solutions in
which semi-autonomous and self-coordinating cohorts of drones will serve as
fully-fledged members of an emergency response team. Drones will play diverse
roles in each emergency response scenario - for example, using thermal imagery
to map the structural integrity of a burning building, methodically searching an
area for a child lost in a cornfield, or delivering a life-saving device to a
person caught in a fast-flowing river. The benefits of this project will be
realized by urban and rural communities who will benefit from enhanced emergency
response capabilities. Practical lessons learned from this work will broadly
contribute to the conversation around best practices for drone deployment in the
community including issues related to privacy, safety, and equity. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the DroneResponse vision involves delivering novel scene
recognition algorithms capable of recreating high-fidelity models of the
environment under less than ideal environmental conditions. The work addresses
non-trivial cyber-physical systems (CPS) research challenges associated with (1)
scene recognition, including image merging, dealing with uncertainty, and
geolocating objects; (2) exploring, designing, and evaluating human-CPS
interfaces that provide situational awareness and empower users to define
missions and communicate current mission objectives and achievements, (3)
developing algorithms to support drone autonomy and runtime adaptation with
respect to mission goals established by humans, (4) developing a framework for
coordinating image recognition algorithms with real-time drone command and
control, and finally (5) evaluating DroneResponse in real-world scenarios.
Researchers will leverage user-centered design principles to develop human-CPS
interfaces that support situational awareness designed to enable emergency
responders to make informed decisions. The end goal is to empower human
operators and drones to work collaboratively to save lives, minimize property
damage, gather critical information, and contribute to the success of a mission
across diverse emergency scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.