* 1931523
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Cyber Infrastructure for Shared Algorithmic and Experimental Research in Online Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Anthony Botelho, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,891,611.00

This project, RAILKaM, will create new technology that will enable twenty
researchers during the grant period to run large-scale field experiments where
they study basic principles in education and educational psychology in the
context of both K-12 mathematics learning and university Massive Online Open
Courses (MOOCs). The experiments will be delivered through adaptive learning
technology embedded in learning systems already being used by over 100,000 K-12
students and hundreds of thousands of MOOC learners each year. RAILKaM will also
support 75 data scientists in conducting analyses on student data after the
fact, using carefully redacted datasets that protect student privacy. In
facilitating high-power, replicable experiments with diverse student populations
and extensive measurement, this infrastructure increases the efficiency and ease
of conducting high-quality educational research in online learning environments,
bringing 21st-century research methods to education for the long-term betterment
of learner outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, RAILKaM, will support
researchers in more easily running scaled, highly instrumented studies on
education and educational psychology, both in K-12 and university Massive Online
Open Courses (MOOCs). RAILKaM will leverage ASSISTments, an online learning
platform for middle school mathematics homework and classwork used by more than
100,000 students each year. In addition, RAILKaM will build functionality atop
the ASSISTments platform so that educational experiments involving scaffolded
problem-solving can be easily built into MOOC courses. ASSISTments will use open
source APIs to integrate with MOOCs offered by the University of Pennsylvania,
branching capacity for investigation to higher education while enabling richer
student interactions and data collection than is typically feasible in MOOC
courses. These capacities will enable researchers to run online field
experiments to test interventions designed to increase student learning and
engagement with a focus on how adaptive learning experiences can be optimized.
These experiments will be augmented by rich data collection on learners,
extending MOOC log data and ASSISTments data with several indicators of learning
and engagement not previously available for research at scale. This project will
develop the software infrastructure necessary to conduct experiments and collect
enriched data, as well as the social infrastructure necessary to select and
refine study ideas while maintaining instructor control over the activities that
students experience. The combined software and social infrastructure will enable
us to engage with researchers who are interested in these issues but who
currently lack the infrastructure, technical capacity, or access to learners
necessary to conduct high-powered or complex randomized controlled trials. This
infrastructure will help these researchers to improve scientific understanding
of the principles of human learning, providing a unique shared resource for
learning scientists that will have considerable potential for broader
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.