* 1931005
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Collaborative: Understanding and Mitigating Adversarial Manipulation of Content Curation Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Rachel Greenstadt, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2022
* USD 249,999.00

Online social networks (OSNs) have fundamentally transformed how billions of
people use the Internet. These users are increasingly discovering books, music
bands, TV shows, movies, news articles, products, and other content through
posts from trusted users that they follow. All major OSNs have deployed content
curation algorithms that are designed to increase interaction and act as the
"gatekeepers" of what users see. While this curation and filtering is useful and
necessary given the amount of content available, it has also exposed people and
platforms to manipulation attacks whereby bad actors attempt to promote content
people would otherwise prefer not to see. This has driven the creation of an
underground ecosystem that provides services and techniques tailored towards
subverting OSNs' content curation algorithms for economic and ideological gains.
This project will conduct open research to improve our understanding of current
algorithmic curation attackers. The team will devise content curation algorithms
and defenses which are hardened against manipulation and that can be adopted by
these OSN platforms, providing a systematic approach to improving design and
practice in an area of critical national importance. Technology transfer from
this project will protect the integrity of social media discourse from
adversarial manipulation. This project will train students with expertise in
security and machine learning, areas of broad national need, and produce
educational materials to engage both high school students and the public in
these critical questions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The team will holistically
explore the economic, social, and technical perspectives of machine learning-
based content curation algorithms' weaknesses. The research comprises three main
activities: 1) understand how OSNs are currently being successfully manipulated
at large scales, 2) investigate the defenses OSNs have in place, and 3) design
more resilient defenses. The team will build the first-ever taxonomy of
manipulation services and techniques that are actively used to manipulate
curation algorithms. Another thrust of the project is to create a framework for
the external evaluation of deployed manipulation defenses based on the
collection of both public data from the OSN's platform and external data to
compare it against. The team will then develop robust and scalable algorithms to
detect OSN manipulation within the collected data. Finally, the team will use
the insights from the taxonomy of effective manipulation techniques and the
exploration of the limitation of current defenses to design fundamentally
resilient content curation algorithms. The project will explore both new
curation algorithms and more effective mitigation techniques for existing
algorithms. The project's findings will deepen our understanding of social
network manipulation and adversarial learning and produce reliable approaches to
algorithmic content curation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.