* 1931224
* LTREB: Stability and resilience in the face of multiple interacting press and pulse disturbances of a changing world (Kenya Long-term Exclosure Experiment: KLEE)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Truman Young, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 12/31/2024
* USD 512,987.00

The ecosystems upon which humans depend are continually affected by a wide
variety of forces, including domestic and wild herbivores, fire, drought, and
climate change. For example, although it is becoming increasingly clear that
loss of native animals can have far-reaching effects on ecosystems, experimental
studies on the effects of loss or addition of different combinations of large
mammals on ecosystems remain rare. While we are beginning to understand how
ecosystems are (or are not) resilient in the face of individual forces such as
grazing by herbivores, drought, and fire, this long-term experimental project
will seek to understand the interactions amongst multiple forces that are likely
to be complex and often unexpected. This research in a savanna rangeland will
also document the interactions between livestock and native plants and animals
that will inform the management of mixed-use landscapes in a world where most
wildlife shares land with livestock production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extending
our understanding of ecosystem resilience in the face of environmental
variability requires long-term data examining multiple interacting drivers. The
Kenya Long-term Exclosure Experiment (KLEE) uses semi-permeable barriers to
create six different combinations of 1) cattle, 2) zebras and antelopes, and 3)
elephants and giraffes, along with controlled burns, and across multiple drought
cycles. Leveraging and extending more than 25 years of data, the Kenya Long-term
Exclosure Experiment will ask: 1) how does the stability and resilience of this
savanna ecosystem change under multiple experimental and natural stressors over
multiple decades?, and 2) is there a discernable structure (e.g., hierarchy) of
stressors to which the ecosystem responds? While some studies have examined
aspects of these questions, the research team is in a unique position to address
them across long and ecologically relevant periods of time, and with multiple
experimental drivers. Although it has been suggested that multiple stressors
synergistically lead to ecosystem thresholds from which recovery is not
possible, the long-term data from this system has begun to suggest interactive
mechanisms that buffer the ecosystem. Understanding interactive effects between
multiple environmental stressors is integral to understanding ecosystem
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.