* 1931435
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: An open source software ecosystem for plasma physics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Tulasi Parashar, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 273,452.00

Software is crucial to all areas of modern plasma physics research. Plasma
physicists use software for activities such as analyzing data from laboratory
experiments and simulating the behavior of plasmas. Research groups often use
software developed independently within their own group, which leads to
unnecessary duplication of functionality and a lack of interoperability between
different software packages. The lack of interoperability is compounded by
different groups writing software using different coding styles and conventions.
Much of the research software in plasma physics is not openly available to the
public, which makes it harder for other scientists to reproduce scientific
results. The team will develop PlasmaPy: a community-wide open source software
package for plasma physics research and education. PlasmaPy will be written
using the freely available Python programming language which is commonly used in
related fields like astronomy. PlasmaPy itself will contain the general
functionality needed by most plasma physicists, whereas community-developed
affiliated software packages will contain more specialized functionality. The
team will seek feedback from plasma physicists, hold annual workshops, and
actively support new users and contributors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team will lead the development of PlasmaPy and affiliated packages to foster the
creation of an open source software ecosystem for plasma physics. The PlasmaPy
core package will contain functionality needed by plasma physicists across
disciplines, whereas affiliated package will contain more specialized
functionality. At the beginning of the project, the research team will formalize
the software architecture, refactor existing code, improve tests, and improve
base data structures to provide a solid foundation for future development.
Subsequent code development priorities include a dispersion relation solver for
plasma waves and instabilities, the groundwork for a flexible framework for
plasma simulation, time series turbulence analysis tools, classes for the
analysis of plasma diagnostics, and tools to provide access to atomic and
physical data. They will make base data structures compatible with open source
packages for data science to enable future data science studies. The research
team will actively seek feedback from the plasma physics community, and adjust
code development priorities based on this feedback. The team will hold workshops
each year and actively support new users and contributors to grow PlasmaPy into
a self-sustaining project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp;
Information Science &amp; Engineering, the Division of Physics in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and the Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences in the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.