* 1931111
* Conference: Revisiting the Central Dogma of Molecular Biology at the Single-Molecule Level; July, 2019; Lima, Peru
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Rodrigo Maillard, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Newcomer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

The award will provide support for graduate students, post-doctoral associates
and early career independent scientists to attend an international meeting in
Lima, Peru July 18-21, 2019. The meeting will bring together leaders in the
fields of single molecule applications and nanoscale visualization. These
approaches reveal the molecular details of how the information encoded in DNA is
read and implemented. The meeting format is designed to foster interactions
between junior and senior scientists, as keynote lectures and short talks will
be held in the same sessions. RoundTable discussions will mix novices and
experts to encourage interactions among students, postdoctoral associates, and
junior and senior faculty. The meeting will introduce the power of these
techniques to potential users, fostering interdisciplinary collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-molecule manipulation and visualization techniques
have unveiled many new operating principles of the molecular and cellular
processes that drive the flow of information from genes to proteins, i.e., the
central dogma of molecular biology. The meeting will cover most of the recent
breakthroughs produced by single molecule biophysical approaches in DNA
replication, transcription, translation, and associated processes. In terms of
dissemination, the organizers will make the abstracts of the talks and posters
available to both participants and non-participants on a
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.