* 1931487
* Elements: Models and tools for on-line design and simulations for DNA and RNA nanotechnology
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hao Yan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2023
* USD 444,574.00

DNA and RNA nanotechnology are rapidly developing fields that use DNA and RNA
molecules as basic building blocks for constructing self-assembled nanoscale
structures and devices. Promising applications include novel materials for
diagnostics, drug delivery, nanophotonics, biophysical studies, and protein
structural biology, as well as devices to perform molecular computation.
Development of these structures is currently done with a trial-and-error
approach, which is costly and time consuming because each new design has to be
experimentally tested and gradually optimized until the desired structure is
achieved. Computer simulations can provide insight into the assembly and
function of these systems and greatly simplify and accelerate the design
process, as well as guide understanding of the nanostructure function. However,
computer simulations require molecular simulation expertise and high performance
computing infrastructures that are not readily accessible to experimental
groups. In this project, we will develop a new web server to provide users with
online automatized tools that can be used to design, simulate, and analyze the
properties of DNA and RNA nanostructures. The web server will also contain a
repository of previously reported nanostructures so that researchers can easily
access and use existing designs and adapt them for their use. We will also
develop new models for hybrid DNA/RNA and protein-DNA/RNA nanostructures,
thereby extending the ability of computational design and verification to larger
and more complex nanostructures. This project will benefit the public by
creating a highly efficient integrated platform to store, edit, design and
computationally analyze nanostructures, thus providing a common resource to
groups working in nanotechnology while simultaneously expanding access to these
nanostructures to researchers in other fields. The net result will be to speed
up and integrate the development of nanotechnology, simplify the design process,
and facilitate the extension of biomolecular nanostructures to practical
applications. The tools will also be impactful for teaching the simulation
methods and for outreach activities, where students will be taught the
principles of simulation and self-assembly by using the tools to design their
own nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite significant progress in the
development of experimental methods that allow for assembly and characterization
of the DNA and RNA nanostructures, the lack of easy-to-use software tools for
design of nanostructures still remain a major bottleneck for wider adoption of
the DNA and RNA nanotechnology in other related fields. Novel methods for
structure design and verification are needed for the field to reach its full
potential. Furthermore, the nascent field of hybrid DNA-protein and RNA-protein
nanotechnology currently lacks efficient coarse-grained tools that would allow
for the simulation. This proposal will consist of 1) Creation of a web-based
platform for the interactive design of DNA/RNA nanostructures, along with a
publicly accessible webserver for simulations and analysis of nucleic acid
nanotechnology; 2) Creation of a public online repository of successfully
assembled and verified DNA and RNA nanostructures from the field, where
researchers will be able to share and edit published designs, allowing easy
sharing and extensions of nanostructures; 3) Extension of our previously
developed models of DNA and RNA to include coarse-grained representation of
proteins and DNA-RNA hybrids, thus enabling the design of hybrid protein-DNA/RNA
nanomaterials. The project will require development of new methods for
nanostructure visualizations and analysis coupled with interactive high
performance simulations on GPU cards, and parametrization of new models on new
experimental data of hybrid nanostructures. The proposed research will have
significant societal and educational impact. The user-friendly design tool will
be easily incorporated into both the graduate and undergraduate curriculum. We
will also incorporate the tools also into our outreach activities among high
school students and teacher. The online design tool will be used for crowd-
sourced science for web-based nanostructure design
competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.