* 1931981
* CPS: DFG Joint: Medium: Collaborative Research: Perceptive Stochastic Coordination in Mass Platoons of Automated Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Javad Mohammadpour Velni, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 317,360.00

Connected Automated Vehicle (CAV) applications are expected to transform the
transportation landscape and address some of the pressing safety and efficiency
issues. While advances in communication and computing technologies enable the
concept of CAVs, the coupling of application, control and communication
components of such systems and interference from human actors, pose significant
challenges to designing systems that are safe and reliable beyond prototype
environments. Realizing CAV applications, in particular in situations where
humans may partly remain in the loop, requires addressing uncertainties that
arise from human input. Large scale deployment of CAVs will also require
addressing challenges in coordination of actions among CAVs and with human
operated systems. To address these challenges, this project develops a novel
model-based stochastic hybrid systems (SHS)-theoretic approach that relies on
describing and communicating behaviors of actors in the system in the form of
evolving SHS using Bayesian learning. The models are then utilized in a
stochastic model predictive control (SMPC) framework for optimal coordination of
actions. The proposed research will provide wide-ranging societal benefits
through three major impact areas: first, by advancing research in stochastic
communication-aware control design for hybrid systems; second, through the
development of new models and advanced controllers to address the emerging
challenges of coordinating mixed systems of automated and manned vehicles, hence
opening new vistas in other areas involving general multi-agent systems; and
third, through educational and outreach activities that are natural extensions
of this multidisciplinary research. This project is also the first fruits of a
recent National Science Foundation/Deutsche Forschungs Gesellschaft (NSF/DFG)
collaboration on cyber-physical systems (CPS). Through this collaboration, NSF
funds the US component (University of Central Florida and University of Georgia)
while the German partners (University of Technology and University of Koblenz-
Landau) are funded by DFG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
collaborative research is to introduce SHS-based modeling and control concepts
to allow the design of highly efficient CAV systems capable of large scale
coordination (mass platooning). Such designs are currently challenging due to
the uncertainties that stem from human input and communication of actors. The
key objectives of the project are to: (1) develop methods for capturing the
human, sensors and communication induced uncertainties of mixed automated and
manned systems in a stochastic hybrid system form (perception maps) and
communicating them in a control-aware fashion, (2) employ the models in an SMPC
framework to produce multi-modal decisions and lower level longitudinal motion
control in a single unified framework, and (3) validate the analytical outcomes
through both extensive data-driven co-simulation using industry utilized models,
and a fleet of realistic small CAVs and a full scale prototype
CAV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.