* 1931736
* CAREER: Modeling of Super-Earth Atmospheres -  Looking Toward the James Webb Space Telescope and Beyond
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Eliza Kempton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 632,579.00

Observations of planets around other stars will be one of the main targets of
the future James Webb Space Telescope and the 30-meter diameter telescopes under
construction here on the Earth. The investigator will create computer programs
to model the observations of the atmospheric structure and composition of those
planets near to Earth in size, or super-Earths. These programs will be used to
study the characteristics of atmospheres, focusing on their temperatures and
pressures, of many different types of super-Earths. The investigator will make
these programs broadly available to other scientists to use for their research.
This project serves the national interest as it helps our scientific
understanding of the properties of planets around other stars that are similar
to the Earth, and which could harbor life. The investigator will also teach
special courses for students with a low level of STEM preparation, and create a
peer mentoring program for STEM students coming from backgrounds that
traditionally are not represented in these fields, to fight lower success rates
in STEM classes at her home institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will build a set of computational tools that will be broadly
applicable to modeling the radiative transfer and atmospheric chemistry for low-
mass exoplanets in the Milky Way galaxy. The research will first complete the
development of Exo-RT, a robust radiative transfer (RT) suite of codes that will
calculate atmospheric structure (temperature-pressure profiles), emission
spectra, and transmission spectra for transiting exoplanets. The key improvement
of this RT suite over existing codes is its inherent ability to model
atmospheres of arbitrary atmospheric composition, making it ideally suited
toward modeling a diverse set of super-Earths. The fully developed code will
then be applied to a number of studies of super-Earth atmospheres, determining
the extent to which the attributes of a super-Earth can be inferred from
observations of its atmosphere and measurements of its bulk density. Atmospheric
studies of super Earths are a key science motivation for future exoplanet
investigations with the James Webb Space Telescope and ground-based 30-meter
class telescopes. At her home institution, Grinnell College, the investigator
will also implement a spatial reasoning course for students with a low level of
STEM preparation, and a peer mentoring program for STEM students from
traditionally underrepresented groups, to combat lower success rates in STEM
classes.