* 1931725
* I-Corps: Mobile Application for Preventing Credit/Debit Card Fraud in Real Time
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Kaushik Roy, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
the consumers of credit/debit cards with tools for preventing fraud in real-time
at the point of contact, that is, before it posts to the account. Credit/debit
card transactions involve five key players, namely: payment network provider,
issuing bank (issuer), acquiring bank, merchant and cardholder (consumer). The
payment network providers are the target customers of this project. They
facilitate transactions and provide services to issuers and acquirers. The
project proposes a payment defense strategy with the potential to save
customers' money from fraud losses by placing the consumer between the merchant
and the issuer, thereby adding another layer of security to the chain of
communication. The project shifts the responsibility of fraud prevention from
banks to the consumers by notifying consumers of impending fraud and providing
the requisite techniques to stop the fraud, thereby reducing the time to launch
a successful attack. Solutions on the market are reactionary in nature and rely
on consumers to detect and report fraud to issuers. Issuers then perform
forensic analysis to verify the legitimacy of the claim. These solutions aim to
prevent future attacks whereas the proposed solution aims to prevent the attacks
at hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project presents a real-time,
proactive solution that tailors machine learning (ML) with human intelligence to
prevent the fraud from occurring. The project implements an adversarial ML
technique to simulate card usage behaviors to realistically predict changing
behaviors and distinguish them from potential fraud. The ML module is hosted on
the back-end server and communicates with payment networks via APIs (application
programming interfaces) to obtain real-time transactional data from merchants.
This same data is sent to issuers to verify the availability of funds. The
acquired data is scored to determine whether it is fraudulent. Scores are
compared to a set of threshold values, beneath which consumers are notified for
manual approval/declining of the transaction by a single click on their mobile
phone. Above this threshold, the transaction is automatically approved or
disapproved, signifying a legitimate or fraudulent transaction, respectively. In
the case where consumers make manual inputs to approve or decline transactions,
transfer learning is used to learn new behaviors to improve the performance of
the existing model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.