* 1931069
* Role of Spatial Variability in Liquefaction Consequence Severity
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Armin Stuedlein, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 97,849.00

Earthquake-induced liquefaction can occur when strong ground shaking causes
saturated, loose sand and silt sediments to lose their strength and ability to
support structures, such as buildings, bridges, and port and harbor
infrastructure. Unfortunately, population centers are often founded above and
within the kinds of sediments that are susceptible to soil liquefaction. The
periodic earthquakes produced in seismically-active zones tend to lead to
widespread damage that can affect housing, critical infrastructure, utility, and
emergency service networks. For example, $15B of damage was attributed to soil
liquefaction resulting from the 2010-11 Canterbury Earthquake Sequence in New
Zealand. More than 25,000 homes experienced liquefaction-related damage in the
Tohoku and Kanto districts in Japan. The breadth of damage and disruption to the
residents of earthquake-prone areas pose significant economic consequences if
the liquefaction hazard is not sufficiently explored and mitigated, impacting
the ability of communities to recover from an earthquake event. This project
aims to leverage the significant dataset gathered within the New Zealand
Geotechnical Database (NZGD) to identify the role of spatial variability of
liquefaction-susceptible soil deposits on the severity of liquefaction-induced
consequences. An improved understanding of the liquefaction phenomenon and
resulting consequences may be obtained by linking those detectable
geomorphological signatures to the performance of existing liquefaction
triggering and severity models and the actual responses observed during the
2010-11 Canterbury Earthquake Sequence. Sites identified in the NZGD that have a
sufficient number of soil explorations to establish the vertical and horizontal
inherent variability of liquefiable soil deposits will form the basis for this
work. One doctoral student and one undergraduate research assistant will work on
this project, under the supervision of the Principal Investigator and in
collaboration with researchers from the University of Canterbury, New Zealand.
The analytical procedures necessary for evaluating the inherent spatial
variability of soils will be distilled into a broadly-, and freely-distributed
user-friendly framework to spur greater application of random field methods to
the evaluation of liquefiable soil sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
address potential shortcomings in existing techniques to assess liquefaction
severity by considering the geologic and geomorphological signature of
potentially-liquefiable soils deduced from measures of soil spatial variability
quantified using random field theory (RFT). Observations of post-earthquake
liquefaction severity following the Canterbury Earthquake Sequence provide a
ready source of observations by which to test whether or not knowledge of
spatial variability can reduce the inaccuracy of liquefaction severity measures.
Measures of soil autocorrelation and inherent variability will be directly
quantified using cone penetration test data in the NZGD using rigorous
statistical methods to improve our understanding of the range in vertical and
horizontal measures of spatial variability of liquefaction susceptible soils.
Furthermore, this work will evaluate the potential for correlation of quantified
random field model parameters and geomorphologic controls to relative accuracy
or inaccuracy in liquefaction severity measures. This work will lay the
groundwork for future studies by significantly increasing the number of sites
characterized within the RFT framework, particularly measures of horizontal
variability, as well as train current and future earthquake engineering
educators and students in RFT to promote awareness of this interpretational
framework by teaming with the NSF-sponsored Geotechnical Extreme Events
Reconnaissance Association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.