* 1931941
* Faradaic electrochemically-mediated processes for micropollutant remediation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Roland Cusick, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

Micropollutants are chemical compounds that can cause harm to human and aquatic
health, and due to their stability, they are persistent in the environment. A
few examples of such compounds include pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and many
chemicals present in household products. Micropollutants are often found in
water at very small concentrations, which makes them difficult to remove via
conventional water treatment processes. Electrochemical treatment is a method
that potentially can remove micropollutants more effectively and without
generating waste. However, there are two major barriers preventing this
technology from being deployed more widely. First has been the lack of
selectivity for this method in capturing and removing micropollutants. Second is
that electrochemical treatment typically requires high energy inputs. The
objective of this research project is to develop more selective
electrochemically-driven micropollutant removal systems that have lower
associated energy costs. As part of this project the research team will
undertake educational outreach at a Chicago K-8 charter school and develop tools
for the formative assessment of middle schooler's understanding of relevant
scientific knowledge. In addition, the researchers will incorporate
electrochemical water treatment cases into a new undergraduate elective course
to train the next generation of water treatment professionals. These educational
aims will be closely aligned to the research carried out in the proposal to
leverage intellectual merit and broader societal impacts. The results of this
project will increase STEM engagement and better prepare the next generation of
leaders to improve our nation's water security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research project is to develop an electrochemically-mediated
system that selectively removes micropollutants at low overpotentials. The
removal of micropollutants from water is an ongoing challenge due to their high
chemical stability and persistence in the environment. Furthermore, the
underlying mechanisms and chemical pathways of the electrochemical degradation
of micropollutants remain largely unexplored. The proposed system is based on
functionalized Faradaic electrodes that have high ion selectivity and fast
electron-transfer properties within the aqueous stability window. During this
project the researchers will explore the effectiveness of Faradaic (redox-
active) electrodes for the removal and conversion of selected micropollutants
and will use transformation product analysis to elucidate mechanisms for ion-
selectivity and electrochemical degradation. The researchers also will develop a
continuous flow system and parametric model to enable a comparative
technoeconomic analysis of the process. Micropollutants to be studied include
heavy metal oxyanions, pharmaceutical and nitrosamine precursors, and per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). The outcomes of this research are expected to
lead to new insights into the role of Faradaic processes for micropollutant
degradation and potentially lead to a practical treatment
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.