* 1931673
* SBIR Phase I:  Icy Road Forecast and Alert  Product Using  Road-Physics-Enhanced Weather Forecast Model and Remote Sensing Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Menglin Jin, SpringGem Weather Information, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 245,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to reduce risks on icy winter roads and
thus enhance transportation safety. Snow-covered and icy roads result in
fatalities and disruption of commercial transportation. Decision-makers in
government and industry need real-time observations and reliable weather
forecasts to support timely decisions to reduce risks associated with icy road
conditions. This SBIR project aims to develop and commercialize an innovative
technology to detect, forecast and alert end users to icy road conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will integrate multi-satellite precipitation (liquid and frozen) and
remote cloud sensing observations with a new physics-based road condition
forecasting model to produce timely, secure, and efficient prediction of icy
road conditions. Specifically, the proposed technology will use NOAA rainfall
observations and NASA cloud observation services to assess surface temperature
and water availability at a road surface, the two key parameters for ice
formation on a road. In addition, a model incorporating a new surface energy
budget and parameters to represent the physical and thermodynamic processes of
road energy transportation will be developed to forecast icy road conditions up
to 24 hours in advance. Furthermore, drone-mounted hyperspectral cameras using
visible and near-infrared bands to detect ice on road surfaces will be
developed. Collected black ice data from such cameras will be compared with the
ground measurements from Road Weather Information Systems (RWIS) for validation.
By combining these three new approaches, the technology is expected to reach an
accuracy of approximately 85% for icy road forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.