* 1931168
* NSF-BSF: UV Advanced Oxidation of Industrial Groundwater Contaminants: The Key Role of Nitrate as *OH Sensitizer and Scavenger
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2020,03/31/2024
* Karl Linden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2024
* USD 340,118.00

Groundwater is one of the Nation’s most important sources of freshwater.
However, many groundwater aquifers are threatened by contamination from
industrial and agricultural chemicals. Due to increased water scarcity,
municipalities may need to utilize contaminated water sources that require water
purification before use. Unfortunately, many of the most common water treatment
techniques are expensive, energy intensive, and may not completely remove the
contaminants. This can lead the abandonment of contaminated wells and the loss
of valuable water unless we can develop more effective and sustainable treatment
processes. To address this challenge, this study will utilize and evaluate
ultraviolet (UV) light – based oxidation as a treatment solution for
contaminated groundwater. While we know this technology can degrade organic
contaminants, there are gaps in our knowledge that need to be addressed for
sustainable and effective treatment. Most importantly, the complex nature of
groundwater that contains salts and other compounds that impact UV oxidation
treatment in unknown ways. This study provides a comprehensive investigation of
these chemical interactions through an international collaboration with
researchers from the United States and Israel that can lead to efficient
groundwater treatment. The findings will be broadly distributed and transferred
to water professionals and other relevant stakeholders to help build new
groundwater treatment facilities, improve groundwater quality, and increase
freshwater supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chemicals such as 1,4-dioxane and
chlorinated hydrocarbons are frequently used as industrial solvents. Release of
these compounds to the environment has resulted in them being detected in
groundwater at many locations in the USA. Treatment approaches for the removal
of these contaminants typically include air stripping and/or adsorption on
activated carbon. However, these techniques merely transfer contaminants to
another phase, and the residuals still need to be treated. Furthermore, the low
sorption potential and low volatility of contaminants such as 1,4-dioxane render
them unable to be removed by these technologies. In these cases, advanced
oxidation processes (AOPs) such as the use of UV/H2O2 are considered to be
attractive treatment alternatives. A key factor affecting UV-based AOP treatment
of groundwater is the presence of nitrate (NO3-). NO3- is frequently detected in
groundwater aquifers globally, mainly as a result of agricultural activity.
Nitrate absorbs UV light, and in the process produces OH radicals (•OH) and
nitrite (NO2-). While the production of •OH is desirable as the radicals are
responsible for the oxidation of the contaminant, NO2- is a strong radical
scavenger and results in reduction in oxidation potential. The collaborative
research in this proposal focuses on UV- NO3- photochemistry to elucidate the
impact of NO3- on the generation of •OH and halogenated organic contaminant
oxidation efficiency during UV-based AOP treatment. This will be achieved by an
international collaboration that leverages the complementary expertise of
researchers in the United States and Israel to identify the contribution of
nitrate and carbonate induced radicals to pollutant oxidation to elucidate the
underlying reaction mechanisms. Successful completion of this research will lead
to treatment optimization and the development of more sustainable approaches for
groundwater contamination and remediation. These results will be broadly
applicable to other fields such as water treatment and wastewater
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.