* 1931284
* 2019 Aspiring Computer Systems Research (CSR) Principal Investigators (PIs) Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Ananth Grama, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 05/31/2020
* USD 49,365.00

The goal of this project is to organize the 2019 Computing Systems Research
(CSR) Aspiring Investigator workshop. The workshop will bring together aspiring
CSR investigators with the goal of familiarizing them with the scope and scale
of CSR activities, the process of putting together compelling projects, suitably
describing their research, development, education, and outreach goals, and focus
on reproducibility and sustained impact. The workshop will also familiarize
attendees with crosscutting programs with major CSR components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop attendees will be drawn from diverse
backgrounds, including those from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU), Minority Educational Institutions (MEI) and other underrepresented
groups. The workshop is scheduled for June 20-21, 2019, at the National Science
Foundation (NSF) Headquarters in Virginia. The workshop program will include
presentations by NSF personnel on various CSR programs/ solicitations,
successful CSR investigators on the process of putting together compelling
proposals, and a session on the NSF panel review process. Workshop attendees
also have open time for questions with the CSR program
staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.