* 1931298
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Machine Learning Materials Innovation Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Michael Ferris, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,580,643.00

Machine learning is rapidly changing our society, with computers recently
gaining skills in many new tasks. These tasks range from understanding language
to driving cars. Materials science and engineering is also being transformed.
Many tasks are becoming increasingly accessible to machine learning algorithms.
These range from predicting new data to analyzing images. Many basic machine
learning algorithms are readily available. However the overall workflow involved
in the application of machine learning for materials problems is still largely
executed by hand. Getting results out is still done by traditional methods like
publishing articles. There is an enormous opportunity to accelerate the growth
and impact of machine learning in materials research. This requires improved
cyberinfrastructure. This project will develop an approach to accelerate the
entire machine learning workflow. Its output will include tools to easily
develop datasets, manage model development, and output models. These will be
reusable and reproducible for future use. This project will enable materials
scientists and engineers to rapidly develop and deploy machine learning models.
More importantly, the entire materials community will be able to quickly access
these models. It will transform how we discover and develop advanced
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will have three major technical
components: (i) A MAterials Simulation Toolkit for Machine Learning (MAST-ML)
with workflow tools that will enable local or cloud-based multistep, automated
execution of complex machine learning data analysis and model training, codified
best practices, increased access to machine learning methods for non-experts,
and accelerated model development; (ii) The Foundry Materials Informatics
Environment that will provide flexible, integrated, cloud-based management of
machine learning materials science and engineering projects, from organizing
data to developing models to disseminating results that are machine and human
accessible and reproducible in ways that support a networked materials
innovation ecosystem, (iii) Representative science applications of machine
learning materials science and engineering projects that will support
infrastructure development and promotion, as well as demonstrate best practices
on state-of-the-art materials science and engineering problems. In addition to
its impact on materials science and engineering, this project will develop
students and young researchers with the interdisciplinary skills of machine
learning and materials science and engineering, and promote these new ideas to
the broader materials community. This award is jointly supported by the NSF
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, and the Division of Materials Research
within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.