* 1931686
* SaTC: CORE: Small: New Techniques for Optimizing Accuracy in Differential Privacy Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Differential Privacy is an important advance in the modern toolkit for
protecting privacy and confidentiality. It allows organizations such as
government agencies and private companies to collect data and publish statistics
about it without leaking personal information about people -- no matter how
sophisticated an attacker is. The project's novelties are in the careful design
of new differentially private tools that provide more accurate population
statistics while maintaining strong privacy guarantees. The project's impacts
are in the ability to create datasets for social science and policy research
without sacrificing privacy of individuals. The project includes both graduate
and undergraduate students in this research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
technical ideas behind this project are that a careful analysis of privacy
proofs for many differentially private algorithms can identify additional
(noisy) information that can be released without changing the privacy
guarantees. In addition to this, noise that is correlated between different
stages of a differentially private algorithm can further reduce the variance of
the final result. These techniques will allow smaller organizations to optimize
the accuracy of their privacy preserving algorithms for practical deployment,
and customize existing algorithms by swapping in building blocks that have more
accuracy and that allow them to take better advantage of background
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.