* 1931603
* Student Travel Grant for the Seventh IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI 2019)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Rui Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2020
* USD 16,000.00

This project is to support doctoral student travel and participation in the IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI 2019). The ICHI 2019
conference provides a supportive scientific forum for students focusing on
computing, health- and bioinformatics. ICHI 2019 provides a forum for expert and
peer critique of students' research with the goal of improving their science.
Student participants will also have the opportunity to receive networking
support and career advice from internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the
travel support brings together students with experts who might not otherwise
engage with one another and engage in multidisciplinary science targeting the
area of health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports doctoral students by
providing a Student Doctoral Consortium focused on encouraging students to learn
from peers and experts from multiple perspectives to understand how innovative
computing and informatics combine to make the most impact in the area of health.
In addition, student participation in rapid talks and roundtable provided at the
conference enables students to explore their science and see different career
paths for researchers in this area. The ICHI 2019 conference exposes
participants to different disciplinary approaches, supports networking with
conference attendees and is designed to support the development of the next
generation of scholars in health- and bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.