* 1931950
* CPS: Small: Mitigating Uncertainties in Computer Numerical Control (CNC) as a Cloud Service using Data-Driven Transfer Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Chinedum Okwudire, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Computer numerical control (CNC) is a critical feature of modern manufacturing
machines. It provides automated control based on a set of programmed
instructions, which traditionally run on a local computer that is physically
tethered to the machine. This work envisions a future where manufacturing
machines are controlled remotely over the Internet using CNC installed on cloud
computers. Among several benefits over traditional CNC, cloud-based CNC holds
promise to significantly improve the speed and accuracy of manufacturing
machines at low cost. However, a major challenge with cloud-based CNC is that,
somewhat like video streaming, it controls manufacturing machines primarily
using pre-calculated commands that must be buffered to mitigate Internet
transmission delays. For this reason, cloud-based CNC is susceptible to
anomalies that result from delayed transmission of information on how the
controlled machine is actually behaving. The award supports a scientific
investigation into approaches for predicting impending anomalies from data
gathered from past experience, and using the predictions to avoid incorrect
control actions resulting from inadequate feedback. The U.S. stands to benefit
economically from a transition from traditional to cloud-based CNC, since the
U.S. is by far the market leader in cloud-based services. The project also will
include outreach to U.S. companies, educational curriculum development to
increase the U.S. talent pool in manufacturing and data analytics, and
activities for middle schoolers in the Detroit area to inspire them to pursue
careers in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
mitigate uncertainties associated with real-time control of manufacturing
machines from the cloud using data-driven transfer learning. The knowledge
gained will boost the performance of manufacturing machines at low cost by
providing the machines with reliable cloud-based CNC. In cloud-based CNC,
advanced feedforward control functionalities are transitioned to the cloud while
fast feedback loops are retained locally. However, with emphasis on feedforward
control, uncertainties in modeling the dynamic behavior of machines could
degrade the reliability and performance of cloud-based CNC by causing failures,
due to inaccurate control actions. The system will predict failures using
measured signals and mitigate them in a redundant, cloud-based CNC architecture
by switching control authority from a cloud controller to a back-up local
controller in the event of an impending failure. To this end, a data-driven
transfer learning framework will predict and minimize uncertainties using data
obtained from other machines connected to cloud-based CNC. Such transfer
learning leverages data from one source to learn a different, but related,
target source. The framework will allow cloud-based CNC to: (i) learn from a
combination of condition monitoring signals and past failure data to predict
impending failures, (ii) reduce uncertainties by leveraging condition monitoring
data to calibrate physical models whose parameters are functions of their
inputs, and (iii) plan feasible trajectories for switching from a cloud to a
local controller when an impending failure is detected. The project will address
the shortcomings of existing transfer learning methods by: (i) predicting
failure events from a combination of condition monitoring and past failure data,
and (ii) calibration of physics-based models with functional parameters from
condition monitoring data. The methods will be evaluated experimentally on a CPS
test bed consisting of a 3D printer controlled from the cloud using a cloud-
based CNC prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.