* 1931978
* Convergence: RAISE: A Flexible Framework for Instrumented Learning Environments: Enhanced Learning Through Advanced Sensing, Processing, and Cognitive Technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Sameer Sonkusale, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The National Academy of Engineering identified advancing personalized learning
as one of its 14 Grand Challenges for Engineering. To make progress on this
challenge, a research team with expertise in cognitive and learning sciences,
physics education, computer systems, bio-sensing, and machine learning will work
together to bring advanced data acquisition and processing technologies to
support rapid testing and evaluation of cognitive and learning science
hypotheses. The project will use a convergent approach to advance the study of
active learning and the role of stress in classes using active learning in
introductory physics. The effort is centered on two objectives. The first is to
develop technology to build a flexible framework for creating instruments to
measure stress for use in introductory college physics. The second is to pilot
studies to develop a joint cognitive and learning science-based understanding of
the role of stress and the mechanisms for learning in the context of multi-
perspective conversations (MPCs) among students in introductory physics. While
MPCs are known to play an important role in developing conceptual understanding
in disciplines such as physics, little is understood concerning the impact of
stimulation and stress during MPCs. Because dozens of MPCs occur simultaneously
in a classroom, they are challenging to record and study. The automated
transcript and machine learning tools developed by this project will allow for
the collection and study of significantly more conversations. Cognitive science
lab experiments using advanced bio-sensors will study stress and learning
initially in a controlled setting. Subsequent blending of biosensor and
audio/video data will allow the issues of stress and learning to be studied for
the first time in a larger classroom environment. One of the key broader
outcomes of the project will be the construction of an interdisciplinary
convergent team. Activities will focus around building shared vocabulary, cross-
disciplinary meetings, public workshops and the training of future convergent
researchers through graduate courses and participation in this project. The
award is supported by funding from OIA, EHR, ENG, and SBE.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology development efforts are divided into two
aspects each with an interdisciplinary team of cognitive scientists, learning
scientists and engineers. The Aspect I research team will develop advanced bio-
sensors to measure stress through unobtrusive wearable patches and classroom
cortisol sensors. These sensors will be used in the cognitive science lab to
study the effects of stress in learning by measuring attention, immediate
memory, and the ability to construct knowledge schemas. In Aspect II, machine
learning methods based on topological data analysis will be developed that
combine audio/video recording and the biosensors data to allow learning and
cognitive scientists to study active learning environments at scale. The focus
of these pilot efforts will be on the study of multi-perspective conversations
(MPCs) in an introductory physics classroom. Flexible framework for
instrumenting learning environments, complete with stress sensors and automated
transcripts and machine learning tools, will be tested first with a small number
of concurrent MPCs and then later at classroom scale. Researchers will verify
the technology and begin investigating the relationship between MPC and learning
outcomes, the conditions that foster MPCs between students, and the role of
stress in shaping cognitive processes underlying MPCs. The thread-based sensors
will use novel materials and are non-obtrusive and wearable and wireless. The
use of topological data analysis (TDA) will provide a flexible machine learning
framework that can grow and adapt both with the size of the data sets and their
heterogeneity. These technologies will be integrated and deployed in a
classroom-scale system by computer systems
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.