* 1931421
* Elements: MATPOWER for Integrated Smart Grid Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Ray Zimmerman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 10/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

The electric power system is one of the most fundamental and critical
infrastructures underlying modern society, and the economic, environmental and
societal impacts of advances in its planning and operations are potentially
enormous. MATPOWER is a set of open-source scientific software elements for
electric power system simulation, analysis and optimization. A version of
MATPOWER is widely used, especially for research and education. This
Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI) Elements award
supports the research needed to transition MATPOWER to a new flexible internal
modeling architecture. The new capabilities will enable MATPOWER to simulate and
optimize integrated smart grid networks consisting of both transmission
(balanced) and distribution (unbalanced) systems. These capabilities will serve
to expand the scope of MATPOWER's future impact as a successful research tool
for designing and analyzing the power systems of the future. As power grids
evolve toward more sustainable, economically efficient and environmentally
friendly systems, positioning MATPOWER to expand its role as a flexible research
and educational tool in this arena of innovation and change has the potential
for far reaching and transformative impact both nationally and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MATPOWER addresses some of the most fundamental
classes of problems in power systems analysis, namely the power flow, optimal
power flow, and related problems used to determine the steady state voltages,
currents and power flows arising from the interactions among system conditions,
operator control actions and the laws of physics. The aim of this work is to
broaden and extend MATPOWER's reach as a research-enabling tool for tackling
future power systems problems in two specific ways. The first is to restructure
the MATPOWER internals around a new unified MATPOWER element model, vastly
expanding the range of devices and controls modeled by MATPOWER and further
increasing its customizability. The second is to implement the modeling of
multiphase unbalanced systems and integrated balanced and unbalanced models.
This will expand the scope of MATPOWER?s usefulness to many current and emerging
research areas related to the modern smart grid, with its proliferation of
decentralized control and distributed energy resources (DER), such as solar PV,
plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, local energy storage, and various kinds of
actively managed demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.