* 1931366
* Elements: Libra: The Modular Software for Nonadiabatic and Quantum Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Alexey Akimov, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2023
* USD 449,546.00

This project endeavors to develop a modular open-source software library (Libra)
of reusable nonadiabatic and quantum dynamics (NA/QD) algorithms and methods
(elements). Sustained progress in scientific endeavors in solar energy,
functional, and nanoscale material sciences requires advanced methods and
software components that can be used to model the complex dynamics of excited
states, including charge and energy transfer. Providing researchers with
advanced expert-developed methods for modeling these processes via modular
software components can enable new breakthroughs in theoretical and
computational chemistry, computationally-enabled and data-driven material
sciences, and can foster further exciting innovations in the solar energy
materials domain and beyond. The Libra software will enable accurate, reliable,
and efficient modeling of excited states dynamics in atomistic systems and
should be suitable for the rapid and systematic development of new, improved
modeling approaches. The project will contribute to a broader specialized
scientific training and will support education and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of this project the PI will
enhance and extend the Libra code with modern nonadiabatic and quantum dynamics
methodologies, thereby enabling accurate and reliable modeling of electron and
energy transfer dynamics in solar energy materials. The interface of the Libra
code with the DFTB+ package will enable modeling excited states dynamics in
molecular and periodic systems with 1000+ atoms, thus providing access to new
classes of materials that can be studied computationally. The resulting software
will enable modeling new types of processes which were computationally-
prohibitive to study, such as photoinduced reorganization or exciton trapping in
nanoscale systems. The software will enable accounting for the many-body effects
in nonadiabatic dynamics, improving the reliability of computational predictions
in solar energy materials studies. The software and tools resulting from this
project will contribute to fundamental research and rational discovery of novel
photovoltaic materials. The large research community of NA/QD users will benefit
from the new, enhanced software and online educational materials created in this
project. Multiple research groups that develop in-house solutions that did not
gain much attention will directly benefit from the Libra library, which will
disseminate the expert groups' solutions in a modular, easy-to-use way, and will
facilitate their adoption and re-use by others. The project will foster
collaborations and help integrate the present-day research efforts and the best
software development practices into the computational and materials research
communities. Scholars of various levels will be educated during workshops on
excited state dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Chemistry
within the NSF Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.