* 1931272
* SaTC: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Hardware Oriented Security and Trust (HOST)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Gang Qu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 04/30/2020
* USD 18,000.00

Trusted hardware is the foundation of cybersecurity. The International Symposium
on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust (HOST) is a leading forum for hardware
security researchers. This travel grant enables student researchers to attend
the symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this proposed
activity includes professional development for undergraduate and graduate
students as well as continued growth of the symposium. Preparation has begun for
HOST 2019 to be held in the Washington, DC Metro Area. This project provides
opportunities for 50 students to receive travel support to attend HOST 2019.
Their attendance enables them to learn about the latest tools, design methods,
architectures, circuits, and novel applications of secure hardware.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical contributions from previous symposia have
covered topics such as: (1) counterfeit detection and avoidance, (2) side
channel analysis and fault analysis, (3) hardware architectures for
cryptography, and (4) physically unclonable functions (PUFs). The travel grants
would encourage more students to consider a technical submission, participation
in hardware demonstration to a large diverse audience, or even to attend as a
means to prepare for a technical submission in future
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.