* 1931278
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Advancing Data Science and Analytics for Water (DSAW)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Anthony Castronova, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2023
* USD 29,443.00

Scientific challenges in hydrology and water resources such as understanding
impacts of variable climate, sustainability of water supply with population
growth and land use change, and impacts of hydrologic change on ecosystems and
humans are increasingly data intensive. The volume of data produced by
environmental scientists to study hydrologic systems requires advanced software
tools for effective data visualization, analysis, and modeling. Scientists spend
much of their time accessing, organizing, and preparing datasets for analyses,
which can be a barrier to efficient analyses and hinders scientific inquiries
and advances. This project will develop new software that will enhance
scientists' ability to apply advanced data visualization and analysis methods
(collectively referred to as "data science" methods) in the hydrology and water
resources domain. The project will promote standardized software tools and data
formats to help scientists enhance the consistency, share-ability, and
reproducibility of the analyses they perform - all of which are important in
building trust in scientific results. The software developed in the project will
make data loading and organization for analysis easier, reducing the time spent
by scientists in choosing appropriate data structures and writing computer code
to read and parse data. It will enable users to automatically retrieve data from
the HydroShare system, which is a hydrology domain data repository, as well as
from important national water data sources like the United States Geological
Survey's National Water Information System. The software will automatically load
data from these sources into standardized and high performance data structures
targeted to specific scientific data types and that integrate with
visualization, analysis, and other data science capabilities commonly used by
scientists in the hydrology and water resources domains. The project will also
reduce the technical burden for water scientists associated with creating a
computational environment within which to execute their analyses by installing
and maintaining the Python packages developed within the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI)
HydroShare-linked JupyterHub environment. Finally, the project will demonstrate
the functionality and use of the software by producing a set of educational
modules based on real water-data science applications that provide a specific
mechanism for delivering the software to the community and promoting its use in
classroom and research environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific and related
management challenges in the water domain are inherently multi-disciplinary,
requiring synthesis of data of multiple types from multiple domains. Many data
manipulation, visualization, and analysis tasks performed by water scientists
are difficult because (1) datasets are becoming larger and more complex; (2)
standard data formats for common data types are not always agreed upon, and,
when they are, they are not always mapped to an efficient structure for
visualization and/or analysis within an analytical environment; and (3) water
scientists generally lack training in data intensive scientific methods that
would enable them to use new and existing tools to efficiently tackle large and
complex datasets. This project will advance Data Science and Analytics for Water
(DSAW) by developing: (1) an advanced object data model that maps common water-
related data types to high performance data structures within the object-
oriented Python language and analytical environment based upon standard file,
data, and content types established by the Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) HydroShare system; (2) two new
Python packages that enable users to write Python code for automating retrieval
of desired water data, loading it into high performance memory objects specified
by the object data model designed in the project, and performing analysis in a
reproducible way that can be shared, collaborated around, and formally published
for reuse. The project will use domain-specific data science applications to
demonstrate how the new Python packages can be paired with the powerful data
science capabilities of existing Python packages like Pandas, numpy, and scikit-
learn to develop advanced analytical workflows within cloud and desktop
environments. The project aims to extend the data access, collaboration, and
archival capabilities of the HydroShare data and model repository and promote
its use as a platform for reproducible water-data science. The project also aims
to overcome barriers associated with accessing, organizing, and preparing
datasets for data science intensive analyses. Overcoming these barriers will be
an enabler for transforming scientific inquiries and advancing application of
data science methods in the hydrology and water resources
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.