* 1931301
* Reducing the Human Impacts of Flash Floods: Development of Microdata and Causal Model to Inform Mitigation and Preparedness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Francisco Olivera, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2023
* USD 350,000.00

Flash floods hit with little lead time to warn the public and are of such
velocity and force so as to make them one of the most lethal natural hazards
(measured by the ratio of fatalities to people affected). The purpose of this
project is to better understand why unsafe conditions exist during flash flood
events, and how to reduce or eliminate these conditions. The premise is that
problems are best solved by correcting their root causes, rather than reacting
to their symptoms. Given the locality of flash floods, this approach to disaster
research requires finer resolution data than currently exists, a gap this
project fills. Such data are needed to understand the complete circumstances
leading up to fatalities and injuries and to design effective structural and
non-structural risk reduction measures. The new data and model principles
created by this project can be used to identify effective structural and non-
structural interventions for inclusion in hazard mitigation plans, emergency
response plans, and capital improvement plans. This research will advance the
scholarly momentum of an interdisciplinary team of investigators from civil
engineering, geography, public health, and sociology to improve public safety
and community resilience to flash flooding. Hence, the project supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance the nation's health,
prosperity, and welfare by reducing future fatalities from flash flooding.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to enhance public safety by
creating the data and framework for modeling the causal pathways of flash flood
fatalities and injuries to inform prevention. The research questions that guide
the design of this study are: (1) What are the causal pathways to flash flood
fatalities and injuries? and (2) How are communities in susceptible areas
preparing for and mitigating against flash floods? The project uses a mixture of
data types and research methods to address these questions. Using innovative web
technologies, new fine-scale data will be obtained from structured and
unstructured data sources on the web on each flash flood event and victim from
the past 10 years. The new data will be made available in the public domain,
while protecting the anonymity of individual persons and adhering to the terms
of data usage set by the original sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.