* 1931639
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Finding and Mitigating Side-channel Leakage in Embedded Architectures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Patrick Schaumont, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Electronic devices found in a smart home, automobile, airplane, medical, and
industrial applications are becoming more capable of on-the-spot processing
information with their own embedded processors. While embedded processors make
life easier, they also open the door to theft or corruption of our sensitive
data. Malign actors can monitor power or radiation signatures in and around a
device, and discover its secrets using side-channel attacks. This research
project will improve the embedded programmers' capability to write code with
side-channel protection and provides tools to verify their code's side-channel
resistance early in the design process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
exploit the potential of bit-sliced code to achieve highly deterministic
software execution on embedded platforms while facilitating automated insertion
of countermeasures against side-channel attacks. This work will develop a
process to reorder general-purpose code into bit-sliced form, where each bit of
an instruction word is effectively processed independently. Next, Boolean
countermeasures against power side-channel attacks will be inserted
automatically into the code. Effectiveness of embedded countermeasures will be
verified through a novel combination of side-channel leakage detection
methodologies during simulation and target prototyping stages. Finally, a
leakage mitigation algorithm will iteratively upgrade the bit-sliced
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research may lead to novel processor
architectures and instruction sets for secure embedded applications, in an era
where innate security is as important as performance and efficiency. The
techniques will support existing processor architectures, and they are
compatible with existing embedded design methodologies. Additionally, the
methods will lead to the integration of side-channel aware design in the
electronic design automation workflow, supporting the development of new and
improved architectures. The results of this project will enhance graduate-level
courses on cryptographic engineering and on hardware security. The project will
also leverage industry collaborations to transfer results, and design tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project, including publications, code,
and examples, will be hosted online at https://sites.google.com/view/bitslice-
mitigation. After the completion of the project, the website will remain online
as a reference repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.