* 1931163
* Uncovering the mechanisms driving co-flowering community assembly: integrating flowering and floral trait distribution patterns via a novel use of network analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2024
* Gerardo Arceo-Gomez, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2024
* USD 699,797.00

To predict how environmental change will impact the long-term stability and
species composition of plant communities it is critical to understand the
ecological processes that determine community membership. This research will
evaluate the combined importance of two ecological processes operating
simultaneously in multi-species communities. First, competition between plant
species for pollinators may result in the loss of the inferior competitor.
Second, facilitation may cause both species to receive more pollinator visits
and result in species co-occurrence. By measuring pollinator visits and flower
traits attractive to pollinators the researchers will quantify the simultaneous
action of competition and facilitation. These data will allow the researchers to
better understand patterns of species coexistence and community composition.
This research will also advance the science education of under-represented
groups and first-generation college students in the Appalachian region. In
addition, outreach activities associated with pollinator gardens at nature
centers will increase awareness of pollination as a key ecosystem
service.&lt;br/&gt;The project will use network analysis to identify co-
flowering and floral-trait modules within serpentine seep communities in
California. Observed modularity will be used to predict the roles of competitive
and facilitative pollinator interactions as drivers of species assembly. The
researchers propose that the distribution of flowering phenology and floral
traits in a community are determined by: 1) the strength and direction of plant-
plant interactions via pollinator visitation, and 2) the fitness cost of direct
plant-plant interactions via interspecies pollen transfer. These predictions
will be experimentally tested in the field by manipulating co-flowering
community composition and in the greenhouse via hand pollination experiments
with pure and mixed-pollen loads. The researchers make two predictions. First,
species membership in different co-flowering modules is the result of
competitive plant-plant interactions via pollinators. Second, species membership
in the same co-flowering module can result from facilitative, competitive, or
both types of interactions acting simultaneously. This research will help take
our understanding of co-flowering community assembly from a descriptive to a
more predictive stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.