* 1931078
* CAREER:  A Dynamic Program Monitoring Framework Using Neural Network Hardware
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Abdullah Muzahid, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 03/31/2023
* USD 315,726.00

Software bugs and security attacks cripple US economy by costing more than $150
billion a year. However, there has been no major innovation in this context.
This research project aims to change that fact with the help of neural network
based hardware. If the project is successful, it will significantly affect
current industry &lt;br/&gt;practices and spur a new trend. It will encourage
companies to invest in new techniques for debugging and security attack analysis
using neural network hardware and make a compelling use case for the hardware
implementation, thereby influencing continuous investment in neural network
hardware. In addition, the project will contribute to the research and
educational activities of a minority serving institution. Students will be
tightly integrated into the project through dissertation, thesis work, and
undergraduate research work. The PI will incorporate emerging architecture
design and its programming in undergraduate and graduate coursework. Moreover,
the PI will involve local high school students in computer science related
projects through summer internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neural network is a
machine learning technique that mimics human brain. Therefore, neural network
hardware provides some unique capabilities that can be utilized in many
different ways. This project proposes to utilize neural network hardware for
"program monitoring". Program execution monitoring is often used to detect
software bugs, performance issues, security attacks etc. Neural network hardware
will learn the normal "behavior" of the program. Then it will detect any
deviation of such behavior. Such deviation can be attributed to software bugs,
performance issues or security attacks. The proposed approach provides a general
framework for handling these issues. Due to online learning and testing
capability of neural network hardware, the framework will be adaptive to any
change in program inputs, code, and platforms.