* 1931292
* Collaborative Research:  Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Synthetic Micro/Nano-Swimmers in Shear-thinning Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* On Shun Pak, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 251,697.00

Synthetic swimmers are engineered microscopic or nanoscopic objects that mimic
how natural microorganisms swim through their environment. Synthetic swimmers
that can move through biological fluids show great promise in biomedical
applications such as drug delivery and microsurgery. Successful applications of
these swimmers to biomedical tasks rely on their ability to move through
biological fluids, such as blood, with complex and varying properties that
respond to their surroundings. While there have been recent studies on the
subject of locomotion in these fluids, much remains to be learned about the
influence of directional applied forces or other motions such shaking and
agitation, on swimming. This research project aims to quantify and elucidate the
impacts of complex (non-Newtonian) fluid properties on the locomotion of
synthetic micro-swimmers. The outcomes will enable the development of micro-
robots with robust swimming capabilities for next generation healthcare
applications. The project will integrate research and education through senior
design projects and undergraduate research participation. By leveraging existing
university programs with new activities derived from the research project, the
researchers will provide outreach to approximately 120 high-school students
annually. The project will also support an exhibition entitled "Swallowing a
Surgeon" at the California Science Center (Los Angeles, CA) in order to expose
the general public to the challenges and progress made towards designing
biomedical micro-robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative research
project between Santa Clara University and the California Institute of
Technology, computations and experiments will be used to understand locomotion
in shear-thinning fluids and to identify effective strategies to account for
this non-Newtonian fluid behavior in the design of synthetic swimmers. Existing
propulsion mechanisms can be broadly categorized into chemically-powered
swimmers that harvest energy from local chemical reactions, and swimmers that
require external fields for actuation. In this research project, representative
model systems from each category will be studied to evaluate the impacts of
shear-thinning rheology on major types of synthetic swimmers at small scales.
Theory and experiments will use catalytic motors and flexible magnetic nanowire
propellers to provide a comprehensive understanding of how distinct types of
non-Newtonian fluid behaviors and their interactions affect locomotion at small
scales. The completion of this project will lead to new fundamental knowledge on
fluid-structure interactions and phoretic motion in complex fluids. This
improved understanding will in turn guide the design of next-generation
synthetic swimmers that can move through biological fluids
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.