* 1931766
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating communication at a distance in the context of changing communication habits
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Lise Dobrin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 18,596.00

Sound-based, or phonological proxies for spoken language are attested worldwide,
generally as whistled speech or messages played on musical instruments. However,
research has identified a particular phonological proxy that appears to violate
the general principles by which these proxies encode speech. This proxy occurs
in the Abu' Arapesh [ISO 639-3 aah] language and the modalities used by Abu'
speakers to communicate across distance, which include whistling, blowing conch
shells, calling out, and playing flutes. This project will document and describe
these linguistically novel Abu' proxies, used only in the Prince Alexander
Mountains of Papua New Guinea, which may hold key insights into the nature of
human language. The knowledge sharing between the United States and Papua New
Guinea, identified by the U.S. State Department as a bilateral close friendship,
will continue to be strengthened via the ties this project builds between the
University of Virginia (UVA) and the University of Papua New Guinea (UPNG). The
project will also undertake community development at the research site via small
projects and hands-on training with electronic devices, computer programs, and
basic principles of science, as well as support for students at UPNG, effecting
"soft diplomacy" through scientific collaboration. Broader impacts also include
the training of a dissertation student, the education of undergraduate students
in a university course to be taught by the researcher, and the public archiving
of fully transcribed recordings at UVA's Arapesh Grammar and Digital Language
Archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One aspect of the scientific importance
of this study is the surprisingly sparse phonological resources used in the
proxy forms of Abu': two pitches, two vowels, two consonants, and rhythm.
Another aspect is its use not only by Abu' speakers but also by speakers of a
neighboring, mutually unintelligible language Miya [ISO 639-3 wmo]. This is
doubly surprising, as both languages are endangered and, according to global
trends of language loss, phonological proxies should be at even higher risk than
spoken language. Yet the proxies persist, even in the face of recently
introduced cell phones, which could easily supplant their role facilitating long
distance communication. This project asks: how do the Abu' proxies encode
speech? What is their linguistic role, such that they persist? To answer, the
researcher will spend eight months in the community in which Abu' proxies are
still used, and visit neighboring communities where Miya is used, producing an
audiovisual corpus of interviews, language lessons, word elicitations, and
recordings of daily life. Recordings will be transcribed with the help of native
speakers to achieve fine-grained linguistic analysis. The resulting case study
of linguistic resilience will contribute valuable information to endeavors to
ameliorate global language loss, and the resulting description of the structure
of the proxies as they relate to Abu', with supporting evidence from Miya, will
contribute valuable information to the study of human
language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.