* 1931372
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Multiphase Fluid-Structure Interaction Software Infrastructure to Enable Applications in Medicine, Biology, and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Neelesh Patankar, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2024
* USD 619,718.00

Physical systems in which fluid flows interact with immersed structures are
found in a wide range of areas of science and engineering. Such fluid-structure
interactions are ubiquitous in biological systems, including blood flow in the
heart, the ingestion of food, and mucus transport in the lung. Fluid-structure
interaction is also a crucial aspect of new approaches to energy harvesting,
such as wave-energy converters that extract energy from the motion of sea or
ocean waves, and in advanced approaches to manufacturing, such as 3D printing.
This award supports the development of an advanced computer simulation
infrastructure for modeling this full range of application areas. Computer
models advanced by this project could ultimately lead to improved diagnostics
and treatments for human disease, optimized designs of novel approaches to
renewable energy, and reduced manufacturing costs through improved production
times in 3D printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to enhance the
IBAMR computer modeling and simulation infrastructure that provides advanced
implementations of the immersed boundary (IB) method and its extensions with
support for adaptive mesh refinement (AMR). IBAMR is designed to simulate large-
scale fluid-structure interaction models on distributed memory-parallel systems.
Most current IBAMR models assume that the properties of the fluid are uniform,
but many physical systems involve multiphase fluid models with inhomogeneous
properties, such as air-water interfaces or the complex fluid environments of
biological systems. This project aims to extend recently developed support in
IBAMR for treating multiphase flows by improving the accuracy and efficiency of
IBAMR's treatment of multiphase Newtonian flows, and also by extending this
multiphase flow modeling capability to treat multiphase complex (polymeric)
fluid flows, which are commonly encountered in biological systems, and to treat
reacting flows with complex chemistry, which are relevant to models of
combustion, astrophysics, and additive manufacturing using stereolithography (3D
printing). This project also aims to re-engineer IBAMR for massive parallelism,
so that it may effectively use very large computational resources in service of
applications that require very high fidelity. The project will also develop
modules that will facilitate the use of image-derived geometries, and it will
develop novel fluid-structure coupling schemes that will facilitate the use of
independent fluid and solid solvers. These capabilities are motivated within
this project by models of cardiac, gastrointestinal, and lung physiology;
renewable energy; and advanced manufacturing. This software will be used in
courses developed by the members of the project team. The project also aims to
grow the community of IBAMR users by enhancing project documentation and
training materials, hosting user group meetings, and offering short
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is co funded by the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation to provide enabling tools to advance potentially
transformative fundamental research, particularly in biomechanics and
mechanobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.