* 1931541
* Elements: Data: Sustaining Modern Infrastructure For Political And Social Event Data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Latifur Khan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 588,032.00

This project extracts quantitative summaries of political and international
conflict events among national and non-state actors across the world by combing
news reports across the internet in multiple languages. This generates event
data, a machine-coded description of someone doing something to someone else as
extracted from news reports. The project focuses on political and social events
about conflict and cooperation between governments, individuals, non-
governmental organizations, rebel groups, and others. The main goal of this
project is to integrate and expand the end-to-end cyberinfrastructure for the
robust creation, validation, access, and analysis of political event data by
national security, government, academic, and non-governmental actors. A major
component of this proposal is to continue to grow the project's engagement with
the global event data community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project extends,
produces, and integrates a dynamic, robust system for event data to study sub-
national and international conflict processes at a global scale, with
applications to the needs of the national security and intelligence communities.
Using natural language processing software tools to code event data by
annotating the kinds of political events that are of interest to political
scientists, international relations scholars, sociologists, and the national
security community, the project analyzes contemporaneous news reports in English
and Spanish, automatically encodes relevant political events for data analysts,
and serves the data along with other open event data via the project websites.
The technical challenges include: (1) additional extensions of the multilingual
framework to more types of events; (2) smoother updates to political actor
dictionaries; (3) robust data querying and linking mechanisms, and analytic
tools for the broader research and user community; (4) improved methods for
focus location extraction across languages and resolutions. This will improve
event data quality and event detection through increased, multi-language
comparisons. The multi-lingual extensions of the event encoding software and
interface will produce novel methods for detecting and analyzing rare and local
events. The proposed database integrations and query optimizations will
streamline access to the many open access event datasets that exist, enabling
researchers across diverse communities to analyze and compare conflict and
political processes. The refinements of the geolocation modules will allow
detection of locations from biased training samples, which is an important
advancement since some political events, such as human rights violations, tend
to occur in locations with low news coverage. The robust and innovative
geolocation approaches can be carried over to other domain applications. Scaling
the related software and data infrastructure aids the political science,
national security and big data research communities. We also will provide robust
data linkages across a diverse set of event data from multiple and multilingual
news reporting services. The sustainable cyberinfrastructure not only includes
the event data coding from news reports, but also analysis tools that include an
R package and a thin-client browser-based analysis interface to the data. This
sustains the cyberinfrastructure and creates a workforce that is able to work in
both science, engineering, national security, and
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.