* 1931150
* RUI:  Collaborative:  A REAL Approach to Investigating Bacterial Degradation of PET Plastic Waste
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Jay Mellies, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 684,353.00

Reduce, reuse and recycle programs are important, but are not enough to address
the massive plastic pollution problem facing our planet, and thus this research
is focused on the biodegradation of plastics found in our environment. Toward
creating a more circular plastic economy, the investigators previously isolated
a consortium of bacterial species, five in total, that degrade polyethylene
terephthalate (PET), the material used to make plastic water bottles. It was
discovered that, collectively, the consortium grew faster on, and produced more
plastic-degrading enzyme activity than individual consortia or species alone.
This project entails determining the genetic and biochemical basis for these
observations. The project provides undergraduate and high school students
research opportunities aimed at accomplishing the goals of the research plan.
First generation and underrepresented minority students are recruited for summer
research and continued effort during the academic year. The genetic basis for
bacterial degradation of PET also will be investigated in the laboratory portion
of a general microbiology course, providing enrichment the curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synergistic degradation of PET plastic by soil bacteria is
unexplored but has the potential to aid in the removal of a portion of the
estimated 6.3 billion metric tons that currently exist in the environment. Three
Pseudomonas and two Bacillus spp. were previously isolated from petroleum
polluted soils near Houston, TX, by screening for lipase activity which is
associated with plastic degradation. The consortium of five bacterial species
were found to act synergistically, producing more lipase activity in degrading
PET plastic faster than individual consortia or strains. This project
investigates the mechanism of the bacterial degradation process by the
consortium. With the assistance of the KEGG pathways database, the project
involves mining the genomes of the five bacteria to understand the metabolic
pathways necessary for biodegradation of PET. The project uses NMR techniques to
determine the breakdown products of PET and related compounds in an effort to
identify the enzymes and genetic pathways necessary for this decomposition
process. Transposon mutagenesis, an unbiased approach, is used to identify genes
encoding lipases, esterases and other enzymes involved in PET degradation.
RNAseq analysis is used to determine the interactions between the regulatory
networks of the consortia members and the genetic pathways necessary for PET
degradation. With the use of RNA sequencing, the project investigates the
genetic regulatory network of the consortium bacteria required for ester bond
cleavage and the complete degradation of terephthalic acid and ethylene
glycol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.