* 1931300
* Collaborative Research: Transport Processes Affecting High-Energy Solar Energetic Particles Observed at Earth
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* James Ryan, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 120,967.00

The Sun occasionally has massive eruptions that are capable of producing very
high-energy particulate radiation. These "solar cosmic rays" are created near
the Sun, move through space between the Sun and Earth, and impinge on the
Earth's upper atmosphere. These particles pose a significant radiation hazard to
humans in space, space hardware, and may even increase the radiation dosage
received by airline crews. The project teams can measure these particles using
Earth-based detectors, known as neutron monitors, which are also used to measure
galactic cosmic rays that come from outside our solar system. Relating the size
of any given solar storm -- i.e. the amount of energy released or how big it is,
etc. -- to the intensity of the particles at Earth requires a careful and
thorough study of how these particles move between the Sun and the Earth. This
"transport" is not uniform, and the resulting intensity at Earth depends on a
number of factors, such as the nature of the magnetic field in space, that must
be studied carefully. That is what this three-year collaborative project is
about, and it involves numerical modeling and comparing those modeling results
with neutron monitor data. The research studies address the general problem of
understanding the space radiation environment and space weather especially that
from solar flares, leading to more accurate future
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year collaborative project will
investigate the role of interplanetary transport, in the form of pitch-angle
scattering, cross-field diffusion, field-line meandering, and drifts, of high-
energy solar particles in affecting the observed intensity and direction at
Earth, seen as ground-level enhancements (GLE) in Earth's neutron monitors. GLE
events can often show very unusual profiles in terms of the observed intensity
versus time and anisotropy. Some show an abrupt, short-lived peak followed by a
gradual decay, or even re-enhancement, followed by a decay. The observed
profiles provide important information about the nature of the particle
transport from the Sun to the Earth, which has not been fully explored. The
project teams will perform a large number of numerical simulations which solve
the equations of motion of a large number of individual particles moving in a
set of kinematically specified interplanetary magnetic fields. In parallel, they
will also analyze the neutron monitor data set for GLE events, characterizing
the intensity versus time at various stations. Through collaboration, they will
identify events to compare directly with the numerical simulations. The
numerical simulations will consider a number of important new effects which have
not yet been completely explored, including the heliospheric current sheet,
which likely has a profound effect on ~GeV-energy particles. In addition, the
researchers will consider the importance of field-line meandering, which can
lead to a non-uniform intensity of high-energy solar particles seen at Earth.
The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the
AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.