* 1931430
* Element: Computational Toolkit to Discover Peptides that Self-assemble into User-selected Structures
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Peptides are short chains (sequences) of naturally-occurring amino acids. They
are found in all living cells and tissues, where they perform vital biological
functions. Peptides are now being considered for use in nanotechnology as they
are able to assemble to form a variety of nanostructures - nanofibers,
nanosheets, and nanoparticles. Such structures have potential applications in a
wide variety of fields including medicine, electronics, enzyme catalysis and
drug release. The goal of this project is to develop an open software toolkit
that enables the identification of peptide sequences that are capable of
assembling into user-selected fiber-like structures. Users will be able to
screen potentially thousands of peptide sequences that assemble into the
nanostructure of their choosing, and rank order them according to their
stability. An algorithm, PepAD (Peptide Assembly Design) will be developed that
searches for sequences that assemble into structures specified by the user. An
accompanying software package will allow further analysis of the relative speed
at which a large number of these peptide sequences form the desired structure.
To establish efficacy and a basis for future improvement of computational tools,
selected designs will be validated experimentally using advanced biophysical
characterization techniques and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. PepAD will be open source and easy to run. Its use by the
developers and by members of the scientific and engineering communities should
lead to the ability to design the next generation of complex nanostructures. The
toolkit, which will be the first of its kind for these types of assemblies, will
be available on GitHub and on the NSF-sponsored Molecular Simulation and Design
Framework (MoSDeF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many peptides are known to adopt beta
strand conformations and assemble spontaneously into a variety of
nanostructures--- nanofibers, nanosheets, nanoparticles, etc. - with
applications in a wide variety of fields including nanomedicine, electronics,
drug release, and hydrogels. The goal of this project is to develop an open
software toolkit that enables the identification of peptide sequences that are
capable of assembling into user-selected beta-sheet-based structures. An
algorithm, PepAD (Peptide Assembly Design) will be developed that searches for
sequences that assemble into structurers specified by the user. PepAD will allow
users to screen potentially thousands of peptide sequences that assemble
spontaneously into the structure of their choosing, and rank order them
according to their stability. Discontinuous molecular dynamics (DMD) simulation
software along with the PRIME20 force field will also be made available to
enable analysis of the designed structures? assembly kinetics. To establish
efficacy and a basis for future improvement of computational tools, selected
designs will be validated experimentally using biophysical characterization
techniques and solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (ssNMR) spectroscopy.
There are four objectives: (1) develop an algorithm, PepAD, that identifies
short peptide sequences that are capable of self-assembling into user-determined
amyloid structures; (2) perform DMD/PRIME20 simulations to examine assembly
kinetics, (3) synthesize and test the peptide designs using biophysical
characterization experiments and ssNMR, and (4) community test and refine the
PepAD software and then install it on GitHub and on MoSDeF as a plugin. The
toolkit, which will be the first of its kind for beta-sheet assemblies, will be
open source and easy to use. Successful implementation of this software will
pave the way for the computational design of nanostructures that self-assemble:
(a) in response to a trigger such as a change in temperature, pH, or specific
ions, and (b) when the peptides are conjugated to functionalities like small
molecules, recognition elements, fluorophores or enzymes. Outreach activities
include the creation of a video for general audiences that describes how
molecular-level computer simulations can be used in the design of new materials
and an iPad app that allows users to computationally design model proteins and
then watch movies of them as they fold. The project will use the concept of
harnessing self-assembly and related ideas to design educational activities for
undergraduate STEM students. The project will work to broaden opportunities for
women and minorities, and to increase science awareness in K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.