* 1931680
* Conference Proposal - Integrative Smart Sensing using Non-Classical Behavior in Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Larry Nagahara, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2020
* USD 24,952.00

There is an increasing body of evidence that quantum mechanical behavior plays
non-trivial roles in certain biological functions. Examples range from
photosynthesis in plants to magnetoreception in animals. Incorporating quantum
and other non-classical behaviors found in living systems opens the possibility
of creating novel, non-traditional biosensing technologies that can sense beyond
our current detection capabilities to monitor our surroundings. Johns Hopkins
University (with support from also the Air Force Office of Scientific Research)
is to convene a 2-day workshop entitled "Getting a Deeper Sense for Non-
Classical Sensing", which will explore the opportunities and challenges of this
nascent field. This workshop is a follow up to the Non-Classical Behaviors in
Biological Functions: Potential for Smart Sensing Workshop held Arlington, VA on
April 12-13, 2018. The findings of the workshop will be disseminated and
accessible to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in sensor technology
has been long focused on transduction platforms based on "classical" chemical,
electromagnetic, and mechanical modalities. Despite the fact that many of these
sensor platforms have been successfully deployed, alternatives sensors systems
based on non-classical (e.g., quantum) modalities should be explored and
developed. The exploration at the intersection of non-classical behavior in
biology and smart sensing can be used to understand new phenomena in nature as
well as offer new opportunities for monitoring living system interactions with
its environment. It is, thus, highly desired to have a more interactive
discussion on integrative quantum and other non-classical phenomena in biology
and smart sensing. The overarching goals of this workshop are to assemble a
group of diverse, world-class scientific leaders to: (1) review the progress to
date in the field; (2) explore advanced tools and techniques need to identify
novel quantum biology behavior and other non-classical phenomena; (3) identify
challenges and potential approaches for the incorporation of non-classical
behavior appearing in smart sensors; and (4) develop a community to share ideas,
resources, and technologies to address challenges identified through the
workshop as well as to educate and train the next generation of researchers in
this area. Led by leading scholars and researchers, the workshop consists of a
series of panels (invited short presentations) followed by in-depth discussions
with all the participants. The output will be a workshop report that will be
accessible to the public on a website and as a published report. While there has
been increasing number of workshops and symposia in quantum biology, the
proposed workshop probes more deeply into issues relating toward the
implementation of measuring/detecting such quantum phenomena in biology. We
expect that this workshop will initiate and stimulate the discussion on
integrating quantum and other non-classical effects in biology with smart
sensing and initiating research toward potential impactful and timely quantum
technology needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.