* 1931937
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Advancing wastewater treatment resiliency and sustainability goals in the face of climate change
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Jeseth Delgado Vela, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 113,767.00

Wastewater treatment plants are increasingly challenged by extreme weather. Such
events will only become more frequent and intense in a changing climate. At the
same time, much of the Nation's wastewater infrastructure is past or near the
end of its design life. Many new treatment technologies have been proposed to
enhance the sustainability and efficacy of these aging treatment facilities. The
proposed research is focused on addressing the challenge of improving
sustainability in the face of increasing demands on service. This will be
achieved by addressing three specific objects. First, researchers will identify
factors that make wastewater treatment plants more resilient to extreme weather.
The objective will determine which technologies can improve resiliency,
sustainability, and treatment performance. The final objective will be to build
models to facilitate decisions on where to invest in infrastructure improvement
to maximize resiliency. Successful completion of this research will have broad
impacts on industry and society. These include improving treatment performance,
reducing plant downtime following extreme weather, and reducing the need for
overdesigned infrastructure. Added benefits to society include potential
improvements in public health and reductions in economic and environmental costs
associated with sewage pollution. In addition, the project will create
opportunities for underrepresented groups to work on nationally relevant
engineering challenges in major urban areas and engage directly with industry
and utilities via hands-on training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
advances fundamental engineering and science related to resiliency of wastewater
treatment plants (WWTPs). The objectives of the proposed research are to: i)
quantify the resiliency of a suite of full-scale WWTPs in Houston, TX and
Washington, DC to wet weather events and identify features of a resilient
system; ii) quantify the resiliency of emerging technologies using modeling and
pilot-scale studies; and iii) evaluate the impact of upgrading individual WWTPs
on community-wide resiliency as a function of scale, configuration, and
connectivity. Measures of resiliency account for both the magnitude of
performance reduction and the time to recover performance. Full-scale WWTP
sampling will be performed to quantify resiliency metrics for a range of
systems, and pilot-scale testing of emerging biofilm-based treatment strategies
will be performed to understand how process configuration and biofilm geometry
impacts resiliency. A priori, biofilm-based systems are expected to be more
resilient to wet weather events because the microbes carrying out the treatment
are immobilized and not prone to "wash out" compared to suspended-growth systems
ubiquitous to most urban WWTPs. Results from the pilot- and full-scale
resiliency assessments will be used as input to a systems-level model to
identify candidates for WWTP process intensification to enhance community-wide
resiliency. The proposed research is the first to perform a quantitative
assessment of resiliency for a range of WWTPs. Successful completion of this
research will lay the foundation for incorporating resiliency metrics in the
design, evaluation, and planning of future wastewater infrastructure to ensure
that advances in process intensification do not come at the expense of process
resiliency. Insights gained will inform best practices for the enhancement of
wastewater infrastructure resiliency in the face of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.