* 1931577
* Elements: Transformation-Based High-Performance Computing in Dynamic Languages
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Andreas Kloeckner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,688.00

A key capability in technical computing is the processing of large, regularly-
shaped arrays of numbers by a wide variety of different processes. This facility
is foundational in, for example, weather prediction, artificial intelligence,
and image processing. Correspondingly, modern computing hardware has evolved
advanced capabilities for carrying out such computations with high efficiency.
Unfortunately, the process of adapting a desired process to a given piece of
hardware thus far is costly, laborious, and error-prone. Differences of a factor
of 50 in performance between a naive realization and a careful one is the rule,
rather than the exception. Loopy, the subject of this project, attacks this
problem by using human-guided, automated program rewriting. Loopy has
demonstrated application impact in a number of applications ranging from the
simulation of natural and engineering phenomena to neuroscience, where it has
helped its users achieve higher performance with less effort. The present
proposal concerns several important improvements that will contribute to making
Loopy more effective and easier to apply, through enlarging the class of
programs that Loopy can transform, improving the means by which Loopy represents
on-chip communication, and permitting it to realize important basic operations
that routinely pose difficulty in efficient implementation. An important
component of the effort is making Loopy itself easy to use for its user
community, through the realization of an interactive user interface, so that
program transformations can be applied with the click of a mouse, rather than by
writing computer code. The proposed advances will be demonstrated through a
sample workload that is emblematic of many of the computational and software
challenges faced in technical computing
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multidimensional arrays (sometimes called 'tensors')
are a foundational data structure for much of scientific computing, with
applications ranging from weather prediction to deep learning, to image
processing and computational neuroscience. Even the efficient execution of one
of the simplest operations on arrays, matrix-matrix multiplication, poses
considerable technical challenges on modern computers. Through a polyhedrally-
based program transformation tool, the proposed software will provide separation
between mathematical intent and the technical challenges of program
optimization, allowing each task to be performed by a domain expert. In the
proposed project, the PI will develop means for more efficient on-chip
communication, code generation for prefix sums, reuse and abstraction in program
transformation, increasing the ease of use in transformation discovery and
performance analysis, and for expressing array computations in user programs.
The PI will validate the proposed techniques through a challenging application
with broad applicability. The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies
in (1) mapping out and extending the landscape of transformation-based
programming from one-off scripts to reusable transform components, (2) the
development of a unifying, loop/array-axis-based approach to expressing on-chip
communication while reducing redundancy in Loopy?s program representation and
transformation, (3) exploring the design space of high-performance languages
that establish a close link between execution placement and data placement, (4)
the development of an interactive program transform and performance analysis
tool, along with the discovery of potential implications for workforce training
in high-performance computing, (5) a demonstration that all the developed
components can be applied together in a practical and coherent manner. Through
graduate and undergraduate teaching as well as mentoring of the students and
postdocs supported by this project, the PI contributes to enlarging the talent
pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.