* 1931347
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Production quality Ecosystem for Programming and Executing eXtreme-scale Applications (EPEXA)
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2024
* Edward Valeev, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

A team of researchers from three institutions will work collaboratively to
design and develop a software framework that implements high-performance methods
for irregular and dynamic computations that are poorly supported by current
programming paradigms. The framework, titled EPEXA (Ecosystem for Programming
and Executing eXtreme Applications), will create a production-quality, general-
purpose, community-supported, open-source software ecosystem that attacks the
twin challenges of programmer productivity and portable performance for advanced
scientific applications on modern high-performance computers. Employing science-
driven co-design, the team will transition into production a successful research
prototype of a new programming model and accelerate the growth of the community
of computer scientists and domain scientists employing these tools for their
research. The project bridges the so-called "valley of death" between successful
proofs of principle to an implementation with enough quality, performance, and
community support to motivate application scientists and other researchers to
adopt the tools and invest their own effort into the community. In addition to
work on the framework development, the project includes training of postdoctoral
scholars, graduate and undergraduate students as well as education, outreach and
scientific community engagement activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the new powerful data-flow programming model and associated parallel runtime
directly address multiple challenges faced by scientists as they attempt to
employ rapidly changing computer technologies including current massively-
parallel, hybrid, and many-core systems. Both data-intensive and compute-
intensive applications are enabled in part by the general programming model and
through the ability to target multiple backends or runtime systems. Also enabled
is the creation by domain scientists of new domain-specific languages (DSLs) for
both shared and distributed-memory computers. EPEXA contributes to the design
and development of state-of-the-art software environments that leverage the
National Science Foundation's investments in cyberinfrastructure to enable
scientific discovery across all disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.