* 1931850
* Highly Sensitive Multiplexed Nanocone Array for Point-of-Care Pan-Cancer Screening
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Hsueh-Chia Chang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2022
* USD 381,449.00

Irregular amounts of specific molecules of micro-RNA (miRNA) in serum or plasma
are promising biomarkers for many chronic diseases, particularly cancers.
Different types of miRNAs have been found to be over-expressed for different
cancers. The goal of this research is to develop optical fiber-based biosensors
for point-of-care (POC) measurement of miRNA molecular biomarkers for a wide of
range of bio-sensing applications. This research will leverage the team's
previously developed pretreatment technologies for miRNA extraction from whole
blood. To achieve POC early cancer screening, these pretreatment technologies
will be integrated with the proposed sensor to achieve extremely high
sensitivity of detection. In this sensor, specific probes attached to
nanoparticles will be used to increase sensitivity. An integrated prototype for
measuring multiple miRNAs will be delivered at end of this project, and this
will be further developed to detect much larger libraries of miRNAs biomarkers
in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nanocone array is based on and
fabricated with several intriguing and poorly understood physical phenomena at
conic/wedge geometries. Like plasmonic resonance at metallic tips and scattering
at dielectric wedges/cones, evanescent wave mode at a conic tip can produce a
localized hotspot with high optical intensity. This tip evanescent mode is
coupled to specific optical fiber wave-guide modes that undergoes multiple
internal reflections. The resonant core-shell nanoparticles, which allows
further plasmonic resonant enhancement, are immobilized around the tip by a
unique laser bubble contact line deposition technique. The extreme curvature of
the conic substrate controls the size of the laser-nucleated bubble on the cone
tip and the subsequent contact-line receding rate. The deposition of the
nanoparticle in the bulk solution to the wedge-like moving contact line is also
controlled by singular heating and Marangoni effects at the wedge-like contact
line. All these phenomena driven by the infinite curvatures of cones and wedges
will be carefully studied combining computation and experiments. Within this
proposed project, the team will design such a nanoarray for a promising set of
cancer biomarkers, mi-RNAs, whose individual copy number ranges from 10^2 to
10^6 in a small-volume patient blood sample (~10 microliter). Leveraging their
past experience and industrial connections, the PIs will seek commercialization
opportunities for the proposed sensing platform. This project will also provide
research opportunities to students from under-represented undergraduate groups,
local community college and high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.