* 1931818
* PFI:AIR - RA:  Novel Halogen-free Replacement for Halobutyl Rubber
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Judit Puskas, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 1,987.00

This PFI:AIR Research Alliance project focuses on the translation and transfer
of the Allomatrix technology, derived from the NSF Center for Tire Research
(CenTiRe), an I/UCRC. The technology has the following market-valued features:
the Allomatrix family of polymers uses raw materials from renewable resources,
and is a potential replacement of halobutyl rubber, which is used to make the
gas-barrier inner liner of car tires and pharmaceutical stoppers. It also has
the potential to be used as a rubbery biomaterial that can be processed as
plastic and can be recycled, with better combination of properties than silicone
rubber. These features provide the following advantages: the performance of
commercial halobutyl rubber without the presence of harmful halogens, and an
improved cost-effective manufacturing process with a smaller carbon footprint.
The Allomatrix technology is important because it uses raw materials from
renewable resources, is expected to reduce the carbon footprint of current butyl
and halobutyl manufacturing processes (600,000 tons/year), may lead to improved
pharmaceutical stoppers and provide improved rubbery biomaterials for saving
lives. If successful, this project has the potential to bring back high value-
added manufacturing to the USA, creating jobs in the STEM disciplines. The
innovative ecosystem that will be created includes partners such as Honeywell,
Parker Hannifin, Bridgestone/Firestone, a small biotech company (Innovia), and
LG Hausys. Third party investors include the Rubber Division of the American
Chemical Society by creating the International Center of Advanced Elastomers for
Healthcare, and the Breast Cancer Innovation Foundation supporting the research
if integrating breast reconstruction with cancer diagnosis and treatment. The
potential economic impact is expected to be significant, creating new jobs in
high value added manufacturing, new commercial products and students well-
trained for the created jobs in the next 2-10 years Students (high-school,
undergraduate and graduate) will gain entrepreneurial and technology translation
experience through the transfer of the Allomatix technology into commercial
products. Students will be motivated and challenged to develop novel ideas, and
to defend the feasibility of their ideas in front of industrial partners. This
project addresses the following technology gap(s) as it translates from research
discovery toward commercial application: to produce halogen-free rubber on a
commercial scale that can compete with current halobutyl rubber; reduce the
carbon footprint of the manufacturing process; produce thermoplastic
biocompatible rubber with a much cheaper and simpler process. The proposed
objectives in the PFI:AIR are based on the Allomatrix technology. This new
family of materials is the basis for all objectives, thus the first step is to
scale up the polymerization and to produce sufficient material for product
development and testing. In objective II we aim to develop an optimized sulfur
curing system for tire applications, and non-sulfur curing systems for
biomedical and other applications. In objective III new application development
will be implemented with various partners based on the favorable properties of
Allomatrix family of polymers. In objective IV the potential of the reduction of
the carbon footprint of the polymerization system is examined. This objective is
based on the insight of the polymerization system that was acquired during the
development and optimization stages of the CenTiRe project. Lastly, objective V
focuses on the examination of the feasibility of the material to be used in
biomedical applications, such as investigation of cytotoxicity, material
stability under physiological conditions and other aspects.