* 1931408
* Elements: C++ as a service - rapid software development and dynamic  interoperability with Python and beyond
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* David Lange, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,608.00

A key enabler of innovation and discovery for many scientific researchers is the
ability to explore data and express ideas quickly as software prototypes. Tools
and techniques that reduce the "time to insight" are essential to the
productivity of researchers. At the same time, massive increases in data volumes
and computational needs require a continual focus on maximizing code performance
to realize the potential science from novel scientific apparatus. Programming
language usability and interoperability are omni-disciplinary issues affecting
today's scientific research community. As a result, a common approach across
many scientific fields research is for scientists to program in Python, while
steering kernels written in C++. This C++ as a service (CaaS) project brings a
novel interpretative technology to science researchers through a state-of-the-
art C++ execution environment. CaaS will enable both beginners and experts in
C++. It enables higher-productivity in development and extends the interactive
education and training platform for programming languages. CaaS will enable
existing technologies as well as truly new development and analysis approaches.
CaaS will directly support grow cyber-capabilities that advance scientific
research across a broad range of pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Performance-
focused languages, such as C++, are a critical infrastructure component for many
scientific fields that have either large computing challenges or the need for
low latency for results. The productivity of data scientists can be dramatically
increased by an easy to use dynamic programming and development environment,
together with a fully featured interoperability layer. The CaaS project provides
a dynamic C++ execution environment and enables runtime language
interoperability between C++ and other languages, such as Python, through a
native-like, dynamic environment. CaaS provides seamless offloading of work in a
heterogeneous computing environment, including hardware accelerators, which is
more and more often required by today's researchers. These advances will enable
researchers to more easily develop in, and use, large C++ codebases that are
critical infrastructure components in many scientific fields. CaaS also allows
true interoperability with C++ in Jupyter notebooks, and a robust prototyping
environment for C++ developments. It encourages analysis and code sharing and
facilitates scientific provenance tracking. By reducing the technical burden of
development, researchers can focus instead on their scientific productivity.
More broadly, notebook-based training in C++, or in a mixed programming
environment that includes C++, is a key functionality. Enhancements in technical
training will enable national advancements in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.