* 1931756
* Collaborative Research: Data Fusion for Characterizing and Understanding Water Flow Systems in Karst Aquifers
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/29/2024
* Tian-Chyi  Jim Yeh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/29/2024
* USD 454,047.00

Aquifers are geologic materials that store and transmit groundwater and supply
drinking water for 51% of the total U.S. population. Groundwater is also an
indispensable resource for energy production, agricultural and industrial uses.
A karst aquifer is a special type of aquifer that is formed in regions underlain
by soluble rocks, typically carbonate rocks. Karst aquifers hold 40% of U.S.
groundwater. The dissolution of soluble rocks through time creates a complex
groundwater flow system in karst aquifers, which is typically characterized by a
network of fractures and conduits that connect to the surface water through
sinkholes, sinking streams, and springs. Those characteristics make karst
aquifers potentially vulnerable to both climate change and contamination. The
proposed research seeks to enhance understanding of the complex network of
fractures and conduits in karst aquifers in order to advance the prediction of
water flow, surface water and groundwater interaction, contaminant transport,
nutrient cycle, and the carbon cycle in many karst aquifers under increased
stresses from human activities. This project will also greatly benefit the
economically distressed karst Appalachian region where students are
underrepresented in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics).
This project is jointly funded by the Hydrologic Sciences (HS) Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will be centered on conducting collaborative
research using a complementary data fusion approach. The approach fuses data
collected from hydraulic tomography, river stage tomography, electrical
resistivity tomography, and tracer tests to produce a more reliable map of
fractures and conduits in karst aquifers in a cost-effective manner. In turn,
the results will lead to improved understanding and prediction of flow and
solute transport in the karst aquifers. The overarching goal of this project is
to develop, test, and validate an innovative approach for characterizing karst
aquifers in detail based on the data fusion concept. To achieve this goal, this
research will design two new field surveys: surface and subsurface river stage
tomography and electrical resistivity tomography with moving current sources.
This research will also explore the feasibility of natural lightning tomography
for large-scale resistivity surveys. The data collected from these surveys will
be integrated into a geostatistical-based inversion framework to characterize
the distribution and morphology of fractures and conduits with great detail. The
fusion approach will be tested and validated at the Cane Run Royal Spring Basin
in central Kentucky. The validity of the characterized karst aquifers will be
evaluated using a separate model with the field-collected water level, water
chemistry, tracer, and stable isotope data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.