* 1932739
* EAGER: New possibilities for broadening the impacts of middle school engineering through a partnership between teachers and underrepresented minority engineering college students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Meredith Kier, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 296,460.00

Many schools include engineering design tasks in the science curriculum as one
way to provide opportunities for middle school students to contribute to finding
solutions to real-world problems. However, students who attend high needs
schools often have few opportunities to make such contributions. This condition
exists because sometimes teachers in high needs schools have difficulty creating
learning environments where students feel confident enough to engage in the
engineering design process. This exploratory project will address this issue by
looking at whether pairing middle school teachers with undergraduate engineering
students increases teachers' capacity to create this type of learning
environment. It will use a collaborative incubator model to examine pair
interactions and document when and under what conditions knowledge creation and
transfer might take place. The study will address a gap in the literature where
few studies have expressly looked at the use of undergraduate engineers from
this viewpoint. It will initiate the development of a pathway towards a deeper
understanding about how to improve teachers' knowledge and skills such that they
can implement these types of activities on their own. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
case study design will capture information about the project through interviews,
classroom observations, videos, audio recordings, and think-aloud protocols.
Information from these data sources will advance understanding regarding prior
experiences, individual beliefs and approaches about facilitating engineering
design tasks in high needs schools. Different strategies for analyzing data will
be used to establish a baseline for teachers and undergraduate engineering
students to maximize potential growth with respect to the design process through
pairing of the study subjects. Specifically, discourse analysis will be used to
code instances when tacit knowledge of pair members combines to produce
scaffolding questions and directions that promote creative problem solving
during each stage of the design process. This step will also be used to
corroborate verbal profile analysis and select cases that highlight exemplary
collaborations between teachers and undergraduate engineering students. It will
further help track changes in culture, language, and norms within the pairing
over time. Outcomes will include information about whether meaningful transfer
of knowledge and skills might occur within teacher-engineering student pairing
in contextually rich ways that inform change at the classroom
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.