* 1932889
* Understanding the effects of above- and belowground linkages on carbon cycling in a high latitude, coastal wetland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Karen Beard, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,548,878.00

The Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta of western Alaska is one of the largest river deltas
in the world and the summer home to millions of migratory birds. Although
grazing birds strongly affect the plant communities in river deltas, little is
known about how changing waterfowl populations in the Arctic affect the release
from soils of greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane. This project is
examining relationships among grazing birds, plant communities, soil microbes,
and ecosystem carbon cycling in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta to predict how these
ecosystems may change in the future. This project will produce on-line learning
modules about the relationships among geese, plants, microbes, and greenhouse
gases and disseminate them to middle school students in the local Alaskan school
district. Local students will also be trained in and produce local radio stories
about the research. Finally, the research will be broadcasted through on-line
media outlets and local TV channels. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
using a combination of field experiments, lab experiments, and biogeochemical
models to provide a mechanistic understanding of the effects of grazing on
greenhouse gas dynamics in a high latitude coastal wetland. This project is
quantifying the independent and combined effects of grazing, trampling, and
feces deposition by geese on microbial communities, soil microclimate, and
carbon dynamics using a two-year field experiment. A laboratory experiment is
being used to quantify how herbivore-mediated changes in the quantity and
quality of soil carbon inputs affect microbial community structure and carbon
dynamics. Finally, results from these experiments are being used to parameterize
a biogeochemical simulation model to predict how changes in herbivory will
affect carbon dynamics in subarctic wet sedge under future climates. By
examining the effects of herbivory with this holistic view, the predictive power
of ecosystem models will be increased, especially for high-latitude systems
where herbivory is a prevalent driver of primary production and plant community
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.