* 1932991
* Guiding Chaotic Swarm Dynamics in Evolving Networks of Agents with Privacy and Fairness Considerations
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Andrew Belmonte, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 551,335.00

Swarming systems are composed of many independent agents (robots, humans,
insects) that act in a coordinated fashion to accomplish common goals. Robotic
swarms now mimic the behavior of social insects or flocking birds, while
artificially intelligent agents interact in social networks. With the continuing
rise of multi-agent networked systems, such as commercial drones and autonomous
vehicles, swarming behaviors in the physical and cyber worlds will become
commonplace. Consequently, there is an increasing need to develop methods for
understanding and controlling the dynamics of swarming behavior. Agent
interactions dominate swarm dynamics, so it is critical to understand the
effects of network connectedness and whether it can cause or control chaos in
the swarm. Additionally, some agents will prefer to maintain information
privacy, or value fairness, which will affect swarm control protocols. This
project is concerned with developing and studying the dynamics of guided
networked evolutionary games for controlling swarming behavior. Applications
include controlling microscopic robot swarms in medical applications and
managing online social phenomena to decrease negative behaviors. The project
provides valuable interdisciplinary training for young researchers, and targeted
outreach activities towards high school students and
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the complex
chaotic behaviors that can emerge as a result of evolutionary dynamics on
networks, develops techniques for dynamic control, and studies the problems
associated with privacy and fairness among agents in these systems. The work
focuses on semi-autonomous agents that interact with each other in a network and
alter their instantaneous mixed strategies through evolutionary dynamics, with
an emphasis on flocking and consensus dynamics. Connections will be made
systematically between microscopic, agent-based behaviors, and macroscopic,
evolutionary equations, such as the network replicator and other alternatives.
Control of the population is accomplished by periodic actuation of the game
matrix governing the network-based interactions. The dynamics of control systems
that take agent privacy into consideration will also be considered. While
qualitatively similar to non-observability in classical control, agent privacy
is distinct because privacy affects the dynamic evolution among agents rather
than the high-level control inputs. A similar approach will be taken to the fair
allocation or contribution of resources among agents. The goals of this project
are to establish the control-theoretic preliminaries necessary to allow
equilibrium shaping in order to control populations of agents interacting in a
network, to determine the theoretical limits of control in this setting, and to
understand the impact agent privacy has on system
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.