* 1932659
* I-Corps: Bioreactor insert and biofilm support for improved biological and physical treatment of wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Steven Skerlos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of the I-Corps project is in
understanding the on-site industrial wastewater treatment market so that an
effective solution can be designed to ensure that a municipal wastewater
treatment plant can continue to function well and protect the environment and
public health. Worldwide, UNICESCO estimates that 80% of wastewater is released
untreated back into the environment resulting in harmful algal blooms, loss of
freshwater ecosystems, and polluted drinking water sources. Even in high-income
countries, roughly 30% of wastewater is released untreated. Not only are
wastewater treatment solutions necessary for environmental and public health
protection, they are fiscally sensible decisions, with investments in sanitation
often yielding significant return to society. Municipal wastewater treatment
facilities are often stressed by industrial discharge to sewers, and thus limit
the pollutant loading by industries. In turn, industries are often stunted in
growth by their wastewater production, which is especially a problem for smaller
industries. The I-Corps work will initially focus on the pain points experienced
by small industrial wastewater producers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project further develops a low-cost bioreactor to meet the wastewater treatment
needs of industry. The underlying technology relies on flow recirculation of
wastewater through meshes on which treating and filtering biofilms
(microorganisms) form. This new approach to an attached growth bioreactor, which
pushes wastewater through the biofilms, eliminates the mass transfer limitation
of diffusion of metabolites into the biofilm, as occurs in conventional attached
growth systems. Because the meshes on which the biofilms form allow for some
solids transport across them, they do not clog easily and allow for low-pressure
filtration. Therefore, this new approach offers improved biological and
effective physical treatment of wastewater. Sufficient solids and organics
removal have been observed at the lab-scale under challenging operating
conditions, anaerobic, low-temperature treatment of dilute wastewater, which
indicates promise for better performance in less challenging conditions of
higher temperature and higher strength wastewater, typical of many
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.