* 1932346
* CPS: Small: Human-in-the-Loop Learning of Complex Events in Uncontrolled Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2020,05/31/2022
* Hassan Zadeh, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 493,706.00

This project aims to advance knowledge of machine learning for human-in-the-loop
cyber-physical systems. Mobile and wearable devices have emerged as a promising
technology for health monitoring and behavioral interventions. Designing such
systems involves collecting and labeling sensor data in free-living environments
through an active learning process. In active learning, the system iteratively
queries a human expert (e.g., patient, clinician) for correct labels. Designing
active learning strategies in uncontrolled settings is challenging because (1)
active learning places a significant burden on the user and compromises adoption
of the technology; and (2) labels expressed by humans carry significant amounts
of temporal and spatial disparities that lead to poor performance of the system.
The research will address technical challenges in designing high performance
systems, and enable accurate monitoring and interventions in many applications
beyond behavioral medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops mixed-
initiative solutions that will enable learning of human behaviors in
uncontrolled environments through the following research objectives: (1)
investigating combinatorial approaches to maximize the active learning
performance taking into account informativeness of sensor data, burden of data
labeling, and reliability of prospective labels; (2) constructing a rich
vocabulary of complex behaviors based on knowledge graph embedding and semi-
supervised learning techniques; (3) developing network-graph-based learning
algorithms that infer complex human behaviors; and (4) validating algorithms for
off-line active learning, real-time active learning, behavior vocabulary
construction, and behavior inference through both in-lab experiments and user
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.