* 1932940
* A New Approach to Evaluate Student Learning Outcomes Resulting From Participation in Remotely Operated Vehicle Competitions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jill Zande, Monterey Peninsula College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 348,450.00

There is a growing national demand for students with the content knowledge and
skills needed to enter college level technician education programs and the
skilled technical workforce. Robotics competitions are popular venues for
engaging students in STEM disciplines. Such competitions can connect students,
mentors, and institutions to a variety of successful and engaging technology-
based programs. The Marine Advanced Technology Education Center (MATE) has
supported the Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) Competition since 2001. The goals
of the ROV competition include sparking student interest in STEM, helping them
develop 21st Century workplace skills, and enabling them to envision themselves
on STEM career pathways. This project will support the ability of participating
students to identify the knowledge and skills they need to gain through this
activity, to see clearly the areas where they need to improve, and to use this
knowledge to their advantage as they continue their education and/or prepare to
enter the workforce. The project focus includes high school, community college,
and college/university students who participate in national or international ROV
competitions. This project builds upon and extends findings obtained using
comprehensive post-competition surveys that support the value of the ROV
competitions for participating students, and is aligned with the goals of the
NSF ATE program. In addition to the MATE Center at Monterey Peninsula College,
the project brings together the State University of New York College at Buffalo,
and the technical resources available through the Science Education Resource
Center at Carleton College. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a
successful approach for evaluating of undergraduate research developed at SUNY
Buffalo State. This approach, Evaluate Undergraduate Research (EvaluateUR),
assesses desirable student outcomes, including both content knowledge and
workplace skills, such as communication skills, creativity, autonomy, an ability
to overcome obstacles, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills. EvaluateUR
also helps students develop metacognition skills, which in turn promote student
understanding of their academic strengths and weaknesses. The project will adapt
EvaluateUR to serve students participating in MATE's regional and international
ROV competitions, support faculty advisors as they mentor students who are
designing and building ROVs, and provide reliable feedback to MATE about the
academic value of the competitions. The following objectives will be supported:
1) Ensure that all students involved in the competitions know at the outset of
their participation what specific knowledge and skills they should be mastering
to prepare for additional education and/or the workplace; 2) Measure more
precisely how much growth each student participate has demonstrated toward
achieving such mastery; 3) Accomplish these goals in a way that strengthens
student metacognitive abilities; and 4) Use data from all institutions involved
in the competition to create a database of reliable, statistically validated
findings showing student growth on specific knowledge and skills. It is also
anticipated that other robotics competitions, such as FIRST, VEX, Botball, and
the Association of Unmanned Vehicle System International's suite of land, air,
and sea programs, represent potential users of this methodology. Dissemination
of project results will include these robotics communities as well as other
national associations and the NSF ATE community. This project is funded by the
NSF Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.