* 1932250
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Improving Efficiency of Electric Vehicle Fleets: A Data-Driven Control Framework for Heterogeneous Mobile Cyber Physical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Fei Miao, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 198,698.00

As electric vehicle technologies become mature, they have been rapidly adopted
in modern transportation systems, such as electric taxis, electric buses,
electric trucks, and shared-personal rental electric vehicles, due to their
environment-friendly nature. Since electric vehicles require frequent yet time-
consuming recharges, their dispatching and charging activities have to be
managed efficiently considering the high charging demand of large-scale electric
vehicles and the limited charging infrastructure. Therefore, an efficient
electric vehicle management framework has the potential to (i) reduce the
traveling distance to a charging station, (ii) reduce the wait time for electric
vehicles to charge, and (iii) balance the demand and supply for charging
infrastructure. However, current management strategies for electric vehicles are
mainly based on homogeneous electric vehicles, ignoring challenges and
opportunities introduced by heterogeneous electric vehicles, for example,
electric personal vehicles, electric taxis, and electric buses. In this project,
the research team will design and implement a set of management strategies for
heterogeneous electric vehicle fleets, which utilize real-time data from various
electric vehicles to improve the overall performance of heterogeneous electric
vehicle fleets. If successful, the research team will develop a clear
understanding of how to manage large-scale heterogeneous electric vehicles to
improve urban mobility efficiency from a fleet-oriented perspective, with
potential applications to future autonomous electric vehicles. Such an
understanding of heterogeneous electric vehicles will improve the quality of
every-day life such as more efficient commutes and lower energy usage, which
will benefit the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, researchers have
accumulated abundant knowledge on how to manage individual electric vehicles,
even homogeneous electric vehicle fleets, based on precise mathematical models.
Nevertheless, such models are over-simplified as they do not consider the cyber-
physical hybrid state space or model uncertainties for heterogeneous electric
vehicle fleets. Heterogeneous electric vehicle fleets are mobile cyber-physical
systems with heterogeneous properties, for example, mobility patterns, energy
consumption, and incentives to accept control decisions. However, the research
community has a limited understanding of how to make network control decisions
for heterogeneous mobile cyber-physical systems at large scale in a real-world
setting. In this project, the research team aims to investigate the fundamental
theories and applications to manage heterogeneous mobile cyber-physical systems
by utilizing electric vehicles as an example platform. Specifically, the
research team will (i) develop a set of data-driven cyber and physical models to
predict the essential status of heterogeneous electric vehicle fleets, for
example, mobility patterns and energy consumption rates and (ii) establish a
hierarchical control framework to achieve performance guarantees for
heterogeneous electric vehicle dispatching and charging management by developing
data-driven distributionally robust optimization methods for hybrid
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.