* 1932968
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Cold vapor generation beyond the input solar energy limit and its condensation using thermal radiation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Qiaoqiang Gan, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2021
* USD 120,000.00

In recent years, significant interest has developed in using sunlight for
electricity-free vapor generation due to its potential to address limitations in
fresh water availability around the globe. However, conventional techniques for
generating vapor from solar energy typically rely on costly and cumbersome
optical concentration systems to enable bulk heating of a liquid, resulting in
relatively low efficiencies. This project explores a new way to use solar energy
to generate vapor below room temperature ("cold vapor") for solar and thermal
energy management applications. Importantly, the interdisciplinary nature of
this project provides an excellent educational opportunity for Electrical
Engineering and Materials Science curriculum development, integrated outreach
activities and student training of the next generation researchers and
educators.

This project considers a new process of solar vapor generation, i.e., when the
evaporation temperature is lower than the room temperature. In this case, the
system does not lose energy through conventional conduction, convection and
radiation loss channels. Instead, the environment provides additional thermal
energy for vapor generation, resulting in a total vaporization rate higher than
the upper limit that can be produced using the input solar energy alone.
Therefore, the total vapor generation rate can surpass the upper limit set by
the input solar energy. This is the major research aim to be studied in this
project: i.e. how to realize cold vapor generation below room temperature under
regular sun illumination. Additionally, this project also explores moisture
condensation at temperatures below ambient using radiative cooling technologies.
In pursuit of these goals, this project identifies two major objectives: the
first is to explore the fundamental properties of a cold solar-vapor generation
system under different solar illumination conditions. The second objective is to
explore the possibility of moisture condensation in a cold environment using
radiative cooling technologies. The proposed research will offer a novel
direction to explore and develop different water evaporation strategies, which
may have applications in solar still technology, evaporative cooling and solar
evaporated mining applications, evaporation-driven generators and recently
reported water-evaporation-induced electricity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.