* 1932048
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Yupiaq Well-Being and Fisheries Management in Southwest Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Larry Nesper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2021
* USD 14,954.00

When many Alaskan Natives describe factors important to their health and well-
being, they speak about sustaining relationships with fish and wildlife.
Statistics about well-being, morbidity, and mortality of Alaska Natives have
been collected by the State of Alaska and federal agencies that manage fish and
wildlife, but the collected data are often limited in their definition of well-
being to state and federal specifications. Expanding upon fourteen months of
ethnographic research in an Alaska Native (Yupiaq) village in rural southwest
Alaska, this project explores these definitions further and focuses on how
salmon are central to Yupiaq peoples' understandings and experiences of well-
being. This research analyzes how resource management policy can affect the
well-being of Yupiaq peoples and how the management of fisheries in the State of
Alaska is related to Yupiaq food security and health. This study sheds light on
Yupiaq peoples' understandings and experiences of well-being that broaden
conceptions of health and illness beyond standard medical categories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ethnographic research has three primary objectives:
1) to investigate the relationship between well-being and fisheries management
among Yupiaq peoples; 2) to assess the effects of salmon fishing and related
practices on well-being; and 3) to understand peoples' relative capacity to
obtain and maintain well-being in the contexts of fishing regulations and
declining Chinook salmon populations. This project employs quantitative methods,
including participant observation, interviews, and focus groups. Data include
transcripts and recordings from interviews and focus groups, in addition to
field notes on fishing and other aspects of daily life. The researchers draw
upon scholarship on human-animal relations within anthropology to provide
insights into how Yupiaq peoples' understandings and experiences of well-being
encompass not only physical and material dimensions of fishing, but also
cultural and social dimensions. This knowledge is critical not only because
Alaska Natives experience severely high rates of morbidity and mortality, but
also because statistics can often obscure everyday practices of resilience and
care in rural Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.