* 1932685
* NSF INCLUDES DCL: RESET (Re-Enter Stem through Emerging Technology) Conference on Finding Re-Entry Pathways for Women in STEM
* EHR,HRD
* 10/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Farzana Rahman, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 11/30/2019
* USD 187,730.00

This NSF INCLUDES Conference on Finding Re-Entry Pathways for Women in STEM was
created in response to the NSF INCLUDES program's Dear Colleague Letter (DCL):
Supporting the Re-Entry of Women and Women Veterans in the STEM Workforce
through NSF INCLUDES (NSF 19-038). The number of jobs in our country requiring
substantial STEM expertise has grown nearly 34 percent over the past decade and
employers say they are having trouble filling jobs in occupations that depend on
skilled technical workers. Women and women veterans are a pool of talented
individuals who can fill STEM jobs nationwide. The project team is developing,
organizing, conducting and evaluating a conference supporting the re-entry of
women and women veterans in STEM emerging technology fields, such as
cybersecurity, data science, mobile development and cloud computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the two-day conference is to explore and
discuss challenges encountered by returning women with the objective of better
understanding their situations and identifying solutions to their problems in
accessing emerging technology education and employment. In addition to the many
women students who participate in the conference, there are also presenters and
invited participants from industry, NSF INCLUDES Alliances, social science and
policy fields, and from support organizations, such as university veteran's
affairs and academic services offices at universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
external evaluator, and a conference advisory board, are assessing the outcomes
and impacts of this project. Dissemination includes presenting findings at
national conferences and publishing in journals, as well as conducting a Webinar
on best practices for returning women in emerging technology fields. Resource
materials are published on a project website. Results from the meeting enhance
the understanding of processes for re-entry, and the related barriers and
opportunities women face entering and re-entering the STEM workforce, especially
in emerging technology fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.