* 1932808
* Cataclysmic erasure of mountain topography and major unrealized seismic hazards in the northern Basin and Range
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Edward Woolery, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 626,413.00

This multidisciplinary project will investigate the extent to which progression
of volcanism associated with the Yellowstone hot spot has truncated high-relief
mountain ranges of the northern Rocky Mountains. As the hotspot has progressed
northeastward through time, it has “erased” preexisting tectonic topography at
rates significantly faster than natural erosional processes and by doing so,
fundamentally reshape the topographic, fluvial, and climatic evolution of an
entire region. The research will focus on the present-day southern Teton Range
in northwest Wyoming, which is hypothesized to have extended farther south and
was subsequently removed by the post-2 million-year eruptions of the Yellowstone
caldera. In addition, the project will address the link between nascent faults
and seismic activity that have formed during the actively migrating Yellowstone
hotspot; thus, this project has the potential to greatly enhance the
understanding of potential seismic hazards associated with the Teton fault. The
Tetons and Yellowstone attract &gt;7,000,000 visitors annually and by linking
these two seemingly unrelated geologic features the investigators can provide
the public with a new way of understanding one of the most unique and diverse
natural landscapes in the world. The results of this research will be
incorporated into new public awareness campaigns and informal public education,
including visitor center exhibits, public talks, and development of a website
and a series of mini-documentaries. The project will also advance desired
societal outcomes by supporting advanced field and laboratory training for two
doctoral students, research training and collaboration experience for at
multiple undergraduate students, with an emphasis on including underrepresented
minorities in STEM education. In the final year of the project, all results will
be disseminated at a workshop that includes all regional stakeholders, including
Teton County and Jackson city representatives, university researchers, National
Park Service, U.S. Geological Survey, and the U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, the active Teton normal fault
is interpreted to follow the topographic break between the range front and the
adjacent Jackson Valley and this has been confirmed by recent LiDAR studies. The
commonly held belief is that the fault must always be present near the
topographic break at the range front, and thus slip on the northern extent of
the fault is often interpreted to diminish as the topography recedes in the
northern Teton Range. However; two key datasets indicate that the relict
topography preserved today may not reflect the northern extent of the Teton
fault, including: new data documenting the long-term fault slip and range uplift
history suggests that the Teton fault may have originally extended much farther
north than previously thought; and, recently acquired LiDAR imagery reveals
multiple candidate fault scarps that may represent the active northern extent of
the Teton fault. To test the hypothesis that the Teton Range originally extended
much farther north, the investigators are using thermochronology combined with
inverse thermal history and thermal-kinematic modeling to further refine the
slip history along the main segment of the Teton fault and determine the
possible lengths of a northern Teton fault projection. Second, the researchers
will use a grid of high-resolution seismic reflection data acquired from Jackson
Lake to define how the main Teton fault links with disparate fault scarps that
display similar modern offset. This survey will also allow the investigators to
develop footwall and hanging wall coring targets, the products of which will be
used with radiocarbon geochronology to develop an episodic fault slip history
that can be compared with previous trenching studies of other fault segments
both south and north of the proposed study area. Linking the timing of slip
events along the main Teton fault, the lake fault segments, and the northern
segments will allow the researchers to determine whether or not all of these
segments are seismogenically linked. The current catalog of fault slip events is
based solely on trenching studies, but it is likely that the fine-grained lake
sediments preserve a more complete seismogenic record, thus providing the
possibility for identifying slip events that have not been previously
identified. Finally, the investigators will acquire multiple onshore fault-
normal seismic reflection lines to demonstrate a northern extension of the Teton
fault.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.