* 1932905
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Urban Geography of Green Jobs
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Nik Heynen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 14,737.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project is about how urban job
training prepares workers for clean energy employment in cities. This research
investigates the career pathways of workers as the energy sector transitions
from fossil fuels to renewable energies. It analyzes contemporary job training
programs together with historical processes that limit access to jobs in the
energy sector. The benefits of this research will determine how economic
development and employment opportunities emerging from public and utility
investment can best support under-served communities. The research results will
be disseminated through academic publications, conferences, white papers and
policy reports developed in conjunction with local grassroots stakeholders and
through national environmental and labor organizations. As a doctoral
dissertation project this project advances the career of a junior
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral student will investigate how the
history of the civil rights movement shapes emergent energy and labor politics
in the formation of green jobs policy in U.S. cities. This research asks, how
can green jobs policies leverage public infrastructure programs to create
training opportunities that identify barriers to advancement in employment? This
project draws on political ecology and environmental justice to identify how job
readiness programs fail to consider everyday life situations that make it
difficult for workers to maintain a job. Questions of everyday experiences of
worker recruitment, training, and placement into jobs contribute to
understanding employment dynamics in the process of energy transition. The
research question will be answered through archival research and policy analysis
to follow green jobs programs through state agencies and advocacy organizations,
via interviews with key environmental and labor organizations, and from
participant observation to examine equity objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.