* 1932187
* CPS: Medium: Accurate and Efficient Collective Additive Manufacturing by Mobile Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Chen Feng, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,199,956.00

Aging civil infrastructure is a critical worldwide problem that affects daily
life, making it important to innovate more efficient and economical repair and
construction methods for civil structures. Additive manufacturing, or 3D
printing, offers a promising way to fulfill this compelling need. However,
almost all current additive manufacturing methods rely on gantry-based systems
that can only build structures within rigid frames, thereby restricting printing
speed and scale, thus hindering their use in maintenance and construction. This
award supports fundamental research to establish collective additive
manufacturing, a novel robotics-based approach for large-scale 3D printing.
Collective additive manufacturing uses a team of autonomous mobile robots to
jointly print large-scale 3D structures. The results of the research will have a
potentially wide range of applications in civil infrastructure maintenance and
construction, to post-disaster response and extraterrestrial construction. The
project is based on a convergent research approach involving robotics,
artificial intelligence, control theory, and dynamical systems, which culminates
in formal and informal learning activities to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collective additive
manufacturing envisions the use of teams of mobile robots to overcome key
limitations of existing gantry-based additive manufacturing, including its small
scale and slow printing speed. To unleash the full potential of collective
additive manufacturing, several scientific boundaries must be pushed, ensuring
optimal deployment of multiple mobile robots that print large structures
according to an engineered, virtual design. This research will fill critical
knowledge gaps in robotic localization, control, and coordination, to realize a
robotic team that intentionally and actively modifies its surroundings to
successfully complete its printing task. This interdisciplinary research program
will unfold along three thrusts: artificial intelligence for planning and
localization, model predictive control to adapt to printing disturbances and
substrate variations, and distributed control to elicit stable collective
dynamics. Theoretical advancements will proceed alongside with experimental
research toward demonstrating the potential of collective additive manufacturing
to accurately and efficiently print large structures in real-world
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.