* 1932264
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Frequency Domain Conversion of Computer Aided Design Files to Enable Encryption, Authentication and Feature Search Function
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Ramesh Karri, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 274,697.00

The additive manufacturing (AM) or 3D printing market has developed
exponentially from $1.1B in 2009 to $7.3B in 2018 and experts estimate this to
grow double in the next four years. Despite the strategic role that computer-
aided design (CAD) files play in AM, designers develop, store, and use the CAD
models as they do in any other manufacturing method. This study will research a
novel method of imparting new functionalities in CAD models by converting them
to the frequency domain using lossless algorithms. The frequency domain
representation allows searching the files for specific design features of
interest, which is not feasible in the current CAD file formats. Transformation
to the frequency domain opens up possibilities for developing new compression
and encryption methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis will be conducted to
determine the fundamental principles that lead to lossless conversion of CAD
files to the frequency domain and develop compression and encryption methods for
the files. Wavelet transform and dynamic time warping will be among the methods
used for implementing search functionalities. Dynamic window selection and
scaling methods will be used to perform feature search with and without scaling
of the object size. These algorithms are based on an exact match procedure and
do not rely on tuning or learning the algorithm. The project will help
industries that are using AM methods, for example, the aerospace, automotive,
medical and military equipment industries. Development of these unique
capabilities will by provide new capabilities for design, search, and security.
The project will involve post-doctoral fellows and graduate students in the
research. The dissemination plan will include publishing the results in
journals, conference presentations and press releases for public awareness using
the news media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.