* 1932010
* US-Africa Forum on Nanotechnology Convergence for Sustainable Energy, Water and Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Mamadou Diallo, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,513.00

NSF has identified Convergence Research and Education as one of the "10 Big
Ideas" for future investment. The overarching goal of this workshop is to
advance Convergence Research and Education in the United States (US) by
providing a platform for discussion and collaboration between researchers
(including graduate students, post-doctoral fellows, and faculty) from the US
and Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) through this first "US-Africa Forum on
Nanotechnology Convergence for Sustainable Energy, Water, and Environment". The
University of South Africa (UNISA) will serve as host for the forum. The
proposed forum will feature discussion between researchers conducting
fundamental research (experiments and modeling) in nanomaterials and nanoscale
phenomena and those using nanotechnology as a convergence platform to achieve a
sustainable energy, water, and environment nexus. To the Forum's Chairs
knowledge, this would be the largest gathering of researchers in these fields
from both the US and Africa. Both plenary and concurrent breakout sessions will
take place during the forum. During the final day of the forum, each participant
will be assigned to one of three concurrent breakout sessions devoted to energy,
water and environment. Each session will be led by a facilitator and charged to
develop a list of recommendations and topics to initiate collaborative research
activities between scientists/engineers from the US and SSA to advance
nanotechnology convergence for a sustainable energy, water, and environment
nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plenary and breakout sessions of the US-Africa
Forum on Nanotechnology Convergence will be held at the UNISA Science Campus in
Johannesburg from Monday August 11 through Thursday August 15, 2019. The
discussion will be guided by a transdisciplinary perspective that integrates
fundamental science and engineering applications. Topical and crosscutting areas
that will be discussed during the 4-day forum include: 1) nanomaterials for
energy generation and storage (e.g. photovoltaics, fuel cells and batteries), 2)
nanomaterials for water purification (e.g. treatment, reuse and desalination),
3) nanomaterials for CO2 capture and conversion and 4) nanotechnology for (i)
environmental sensing and monitoring, (ii) separation science and technology and
(iii) catalysis. In addition to the facilitation of collaborative research
between US and African scientists/engineers, the Forum Chairs will leverage the
conference discussion and presentations to edit and publish a special issue of
the Journal of Nanoparticle Research entitled "Nanotechnology Convergence in
Africa" with a focus on research that addresses global societal challenges in
energy, water, food, health and environment. The successful completion of this
workshop is expected to catalyze meaningful collaborations with great potential
for broader impacts in advancing Convergence Research and Education in the US
using Nanotechnology as a platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.