* 1932370
* CPS: Small: Real-Time Machine Learning-based Control of Human Cyber-Physical Balance Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jingang Yi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,950.00

The goal of this project is the advancement of machine learning dynamic models
and real-time control systems for human cyber-physical balance systems. Ranging
from biped walkers and human bicycle riding to human-controlled helicopters,
human cyber-physical balance systems maintain challenging tasks of
simultaneously trajectory-tracking and unstable platforms balancing. Although
many physical models were developed in past decades, it is still challenging to
safely and effectively operate these human-in-the-loop balance machines in
highly variable, uncertain environments. This project will develop machine
learning-based mathematical models and robust control strategies for human
cyber-physical balance systems. The researchers will also develop a number of
integrated research and education programs to attract students from
underrepresented groups into engineering and involve undergraduate students into
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human cyber-physical balance systems involve
human movements as physical and forceful interactions with unstable,
underactuated platforms. It is challenging to capture and control physical
human-machine or human-robot interactions in complex, uncertain environments.
This project will focus on: (1) development of machine learning-based models and
characterization for human cyber-physical balance systems; (2) development of
new hardware/software co-design accelerated learning-based real-time control to
handle human cyber-physical balance system dynamics in highly variable,
uncertain environments; and (3) robotic testbeds development, experimental
validation and performance evaluation. The integration of data-driven model and
learning-based control strategies, along with the hardware/software co-design
enabled real-time implementation, provides new perspectives on performance
enhancement of safety-critical or mission-critical cyber-physical systems in
dynamic, uncertain environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.