* 1932458
* CPS: Medium: Data-driven Causality Mapping, System Identification and Dynamics Characterization for Future Power Grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Manimaran Govindarasu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The overarching goal of the proposed research is to derive critical information
and characterization of large scale generic nonlinear dynamical systems using
limited observables. In the present state-of-the-art in data-driven dynamical
system analysis, all the underlying state measurements and the time evolution of
these states are required. Access to all of the dynamical states measurements in
real-world is impossible or expensive. The objective of the proposal is to
develop data-driven tools for dynamic system identification, classification and
root-cause analysis of dynamic events, and prediction of system evolution. The
research team will specifically conduct research on using available measurements
to perform near real-time applications for various dynamic events that occur in
electric power systems. The data analytics proposed are applicable to general
non-linear dynamic systems and can be easily applied to other cyberphysical
systems (CPS). More broadly, there is a large effort in the CPS and control
community to model real world systems that we all interact with on a daily basis
(such as transportation systems, communication networks, world wide web, etc.)
as dynamical systems and thus, the theory and techniques developed through this
project will enable online monitoring of these critical systems, allowing
operators to quickly analyze these systems for any unstable/anomalous behavior
from minimal data streams. The project will promote various educational and
outreach activities including developing new courses, short courses, activities
in schools, and scholarships for women and underrepresented minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overview: The goal of this proposal is to develop operator
theoretic data analytics techniques for dynamic systems with limited
measurements to identify the underlying non-linear dynamical system and
characterize their behavior such as causal interactions between constituent
components, stability monitoring, identifying targets for control. The proposed
research is in the domain of "Technology for cyber-physical systems". The
novelty of the proposed methods is that they do not require the dynamic states
but can utilize system outputs, making it applicable to real-world dynamical
systems. Power systems are rapidly evolving with increased deployment of sensors
like the phasor measurement units (PMUs) that have high accuracy and high
sampling frequencies (up to 120 Hz). These measurements will be used to develop
an equivalent linear representation in a higher dimensional function space that
can be used for online identification and characterization of nonlinear dynamics
of the power grid. Further, machine learning techniques will be formulated to
learn effective dictionary functions for the scalable deployment of proposed
method. Using the proposed system identification method, the project will
develop the theory and methodology for data-driven Information Transfer based
causality mapping for detection and localization of system stress and dynamic
coupling between the systems components. Specific applications for power grids
will include stability monitoring, trajectory prediction and identification of
targets for controlling adverse dynamic behavior. The methods are evaluated by
an integrated power-cyber co-simulator (IPCC) that integrates power
transmission, distribution and communication systems to generate synthetic
sensor data for large systems under various dynamic scenarios. The IPCC will be
able to model intermediate communication networks that cause measurement
inconsistencies like delays, packet drop, etc. The Iowa State University's
hardware in the loop cyber-physical testbed will be used to validate and
evaluate some of the online applications like stability monitoring and
trajectory prediction for large power grid topologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.