* 1932296
* CPS: Small: Performance Monitoring Cyber-Physical System for Emerging Fitness Spaces
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Stephan Olariu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

The proposed research focuses on harnessing the growing fitness spaces in
support of form, performance and injury prevention in exercise, therapy, and
rehabilitation. The ability to monitor body dynamics and to provide real-time
feedback is instrumental in fitness training and injury prevention. Motivated by
the lack of fitness training models that understand the key factors related to
human motion in the cyber realm, this project aims to leverage the cyber-
physical components of fitness monitoring to track and encourage proper movement
during strength training. The proposed framework distills body dynamics into
form and performance measures that can assist application developers with the
design of novel fitness and movement-based applications. This project will
create knowledge that can be ported across the fitness, therapy and
rehabilitation domains and will have a broad impact in the health community. For
example, the findings of this project can potentially help devise a training
regimen for breast cancer and other post-surgery rehabilitation
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes three key thrusts that aim
to bring the advancements in cyber-physical systems to the realm of fitness
monitoring. First, exploring and understanding fundamental metrics in
biomechanics, which form the foundational tools to measure longitudinal
performance changes. Second, developing stochastic models to faithfully capture
the dependencies of various attributes during physical motion for analyzing user
progress. Third, designing a feedback system that engages the user, leading them
to improved form and performance. The core contribution of this research is in
monitoring and creating models to understand factors pertaining to users' motion
that affect their progress over time. Access to real-time feedback on fine-
grained motion will transform the way people perform targeted physical
movements, reducing their injury risks and enhancing users' experiences in any
fitness environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.