* 1932620
* CPS: Small: Uncertainty-aware Framework for Specifying, Designing and Verifying Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Paul Bogdan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 10/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to improve how perception uncertainty is modeled in
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS). Complex autonomous CPS, from airplanes and
unmanned aerial vehicles to future self-driving cars, permeate our daily lives.
These systems consist of many interdependent components operating in highly
uncertain environments and exhibiting complex dynamics. This interdependency
makes not only their modeling harder but also quantifying their robustness more
difficult. A single undetected faulty reading in sensors, delay in processing or
error in communication protocols can lead to catastrophic events such as
airplane or car accidents. Such events can lead to loss of life as well as fear
or loss of confidence in the public. The approach of this project is to consider
uncertainty as a function of time, rather than static estimates, which will
enable researchers to quantify the robustness of the overall system. The broader
impacts of the project include organization of a drone competition to be held at
the University of Southern California (USC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modeling
of uncertainty and reasoning about the robustness of highly complex CPS designs
is crucial. While post-hoc analysis calls for improving sensing technology or
fault tolerance through redundant sensors (or sensor fusion), in this project,
we construct mathematical and algorithmic foundations to address research
challenges in (1) mathematical models of time-varying uncertainty; (2) modeling
of interdependent CPSs for analysis of interdependence as well as environment
uncertainty; (3) quantification of robustness against such uncertainty; and (4)
design of control strategies for these systems. Our approach is to develop a
temporal logic-based framework for these complex interconnected CPS models.
Augmenting formal specification techniques based on temporal logic with notions
from statistics and information theory enables our framework to engineer high-
confidence CPS applications that are adaptable and
resilient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.