* 1932074
* CPS: Medium: Computation-Aware Autonomy for Timely and Resilient Multi-Agent Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Changhee Jung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,197,661.00

We are entering an age of unprecedented access to information, where
transformational methodologies are demonstrating a clear vision of an autonomy-
driven future. Self-driving cars, precision agriculture, robotic monitoring, and
infrastructure inspection are but a few areas experiencing an autonomy
revolution. To continue in this promising direction, it is critical that we
facilitate the safe and reliable coordination of diverse cyber-physical systems
(CPS).&lt;br/&gt;Unfortunately, at present there is a wide gap in our
understanding that limits this goal: a stark divide exists between algorithms
for decision-making, sensing, and motion, and underlying computational
resources. This project therefore seeks to define computation-aware autonomy by
answering the following questions: (1) How does an environment impact
computation? (2) How should autonomy adapt to improve computational awareness?
(3) How are computational resources optimized at run-time in support of
autonomy? and (4) How is autonomy software rendered resilient to errors? This
project aims to answer these questions through optimization, computational
resource management, and software resilience, with evaluation in an outdoor
robotic testbed. Finally, the broader impacts of this work include: (1) K-12
academic experiences for underrepresented students in collaboration with
Virginia Tech's Center for Enhancement of Engineering Diversity; (2) autonomy
curriculum and design projects; and (3) participation in a series of symposiums
through the Ridge and Valley chapter of the Association for Unmanned Vehicle
Systems International.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
investigation of: (1) a unified theory and scalable algorithms for multi-agent
task allocation and motion planning with constraints on run-time resource
optimization and software reliability; (2) efficient analysis and optimization
techniques for run-time resource optimization in time-critical CPS; (3)
lightweight and flexible methodologies for achieving soft error resilience in
computational kernels for autonomy; and (4) a heterogeneous multi-agent testbed
for target tracking and infrastructure mapping missions. This project will
advance knowledge in the largely unexplored areas of computation and
reliability-aware task allocation and motion planning, run-time resource
optimization, and flexible software reliability. The new unified approach closes
the loop for robust task allocation and motion planning as it acts as a
fundamental tool to advance scalability, adaptability, resiliency, safety,
security, and usability of CPS with provable behaviors in increasingly complex
multi-agent missions across dynamic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.