* 1932929
* A New Approach to Evaluate Student Learning Outcomes Resulting From Participation in Remotely Operated Vehicle Competitions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Jill Singer, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 751,458.00

There is a growing national demand for students who possess content knowledge
and skills that prepare them to enter college level technician education
programs and the skilled technical workforce. Robotics competitions are popular
venues for engaging students in STEM disciplines, and they connect students,
mentors, and institutions to a variety of successful and engaging technology-
based programs. The Marine Advanced Technology Education Center (MATE) has
supported the Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) Competition since 2001 as a way to
interest and engage students in STEM, help them develop 21st Century workplace
skills, and enable them to envision themselves on career pathways. This project
will support high school, community college, and college/university students who
participate in regional and international ROV competitions to identify the
knowledge and skills they need to gain through this activity, to see clearly the
areas where they need to improve, and to use this knowledge to their advantage
as they continue their education and/or prepare to enter the workforce. This
project builds upon and extends findings obtained using a set of comprehensive
post-competition surveys that support the value of the ROV competitions for
participating students, and is strongly aligned with the goals of the ATE
program. In addition to the MATE Center at Monterey Peninsula College (MPC), the
project brings together the State University of New York College at Buffalo
(Buffalo State), and the technical resources available through the Science
Education Resource Center (SERC) at Carleton College. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on EvaluateUR, a successful evaluation method
developed at SUNY Buffalo State. EvaluateUR provides detailed data measuring a
broad range of desirable student outcomes that include both content knowledge
and outcomes that are critically important in the workplace, such as
communication skills, creativity, autonomy, an ability to overcome obstacles,
critical thinking, and problem-solving skills. EvaluateUR also provides students
with "metacognition" skills - the ability to understand their academic strengths
and weaknesses and take greater ownership of their own learning. The project
will adapt the innovative design of EvaluateUR to serve students participating
in MATE's regional and international ROV competitions, support faculty advisors
as they mentor students who are designing and building ROVs, and provide
reliable feedback to MATE about the academic value of the competitions. The
following objectives will be supported: 1) Ensure that all students involved in
the competitions know at the outset of their participation what specific
knowledge and skills they should be mastering in order to prepare for additional
education and/or the workplace; 2) Measure more precisely for each student how
much growth he or she has demonstrated toward achieving such mastery; 3)
Accomplish these goals in a way that strengthens student metacognitive
abilities; and 4) Create a database, for each institution participating in the
competitions, of reliable, statistically validated findings showing student
growth on specific knowledge and skills. It is also anticipated that other
robotics competitions, such as FIRST, VEX, Botball, and the Association of
Unmanned Vehicle System International's (AUVSI) suite of land, air, and sea
programs, represent potential users of this methodology, and dissemination of
project results will include these robotics communities as well as other
national associations and the ATE PI community. This project is funded by the
NSF Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.