* 1932823
* Doctoral Consortium at the 2019 International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Theodora Chaspari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 05/31/2022
* USD 8,000.00

The International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction
(ACII) is the premier international forum for interdisciplinary research on the
design of systems that can recognize, interpret, and simulate human emotions and
related affective phenomena. Its broad scope includes: multi-modal recognition
or synthesis of human affect, psychological, cognitive, and neurological affect
modeling, affective computing for social and behavioral sciences, and affective
interactions for social robotics and virtual agents. The conference presents
latest research in these and related areas and it plays an important role in
shaping related scientific, academic, and educational programs. ACII 2019 is
based around the theme of Affective Computing for ALL (AC4ALL) and will focus on
inclusive technology, inclusive design principles and inclusive user interfaces
which consider the full range of human diversity with respect to ability,
language, culture, gender, age and other forms of human difference. Besides the
main conference program, the conference will also feature workshops, tutorials,
exhibitions, and a doctoral consortium. This project is to support the travel of
approximately 8 U.S. Ph.D. students to attend the 8th ACII conference to be held
from October 3rd to 6th, 2019 in Cambridge, UK. Besides attending the main
conference program, the Ph.D. students will also attend the Doctoral Consortium,
where they will share their research results with the community and receive
feedback from senior researchers in the field. This will help the students not
only learn the state of the art in affective computing research but also have an
opportunity to present their own work to, and receive feedback from, an invited
committee of faculty and industry researchers along with other students working
in related areas. The event organizers will make a particular effort to engage
underrepresented students (in particular, women and minorities) to maximize the
benefits of the NSF support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the
doctoral consortium are to provide an opportunity for face-to-face interaction
and constructive feedback for doctoral research of student participants; to
promote networks among Ph.D. students working in the related area; to promote
networks between Ph.D. students and researchers from academia and industry
working in the related area; to develop a supportive community of scholars in
the affective computing field; to support the next generation of researchers and
provide advice on academic, research, industrial, and non-traditional career
paths in the field; and to support technical and culture interactions between
American students and their counterparts from other countries. The Doctoral
Consortium solicits extended abstract (4 pages, plus 1 page for references) from
students from any U.S. Ph.D. granting institution whose research falls within
the Affective Computing field. Students are expected to be the sole authors on
their submission. For student selection, the DC committee is committed to
student and research diversity. The event organizers will make a particular
effort to achieve a diversity of research topics, disciplinary backgrounds,
methodological approaches, and home institutions in ACII 2019 Doctoral
Consortium cohort. Each student participant will be assigned a mentor based upon
similarity of research interests and experience, and have a one-one-one meeting
to discuss the work. There will be a Doctoral Consortium poster session, in
which all participants will present their doctoral work or a recent paper that
is part of their doctoral work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.