* 1932033
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Active Shooter Tracking &amp; Evacuation Routing for Survival (ASTERS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Stephen Gilbert, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 701,982.00

Most preK-12 school districts in the United States dedicate significant
resources to safeguard against active shooters, e.g., school hardening,
community planning, identification of suspicious behavior, crisis training for
law enforcement, and training exercises for students, teachers, and all school
personnel. However, when such an active-shooting event is in progress, only
vague guidance is available to students and school personnel in the form of
directives such as the "run-hide-fight" protocol. The Active Shooter Tracking
and Evacuation Routing for Survival (ASTERS) project will complement these
efforts by tracking a shooter in real time across multiple cameras and
microphones, calculate the optimum evacuation path to safety for each student,
teacher, and staff member, and communicate this information through a mobile app
interface that is co-created in partnership with a connected community of
students, parents, educators and administrators as well as school resource
officers and school safety officers. ASTERS will incorporate multi-modal
sensing, machine learning and signal processing techniques to accurately
localize a gunman and weapons while preserving privacy of school community
members. It will also use new computer vision and high-performance computing
solutions to estimate crowd density and movement of people, and novel
optimization and real-time simulation algorithms to predict ideal evacuation
routes based on the building layout and predicted movement of the shooter.
ASTERS will collaborate with schools to develop an annotated, multi-modal active
shooter data set using a combination of digital simulation data and real-life
practice drills. The research team will also partner with first-responders to
ensure that ASTERS aligns with their needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing
customized and actionable commands to each group of civilians through a mobile
app will potentially vastly improve chances of safe evacuation. Messages will
provide clear actionable information and suggestions, such as "Shooter is
leaving the cafeteria heading to the gym. Your best exit is out the Main
Entrance", rather than leave it up to individuals' panicked judgement. Moreover,
ASTERS will enable automated and instantaneous reporting of location and
physical attributes of shooter and type of weapons being used, to a 911 call
center. This will provide responding patrol officers with critical strategic
information for planning a tactical offensive and alleviate, if not overcome,
the dependence on unreliable eye-witness accounts. Data from previous mass
shootings demonstrate the important of providing people accurate information and
guidance about evacuation. The ASTERS project will enable the realization of
smart safety systems that integrate sensors, communication, algorithms, and
human factors research to provide life-saving information to vulnerable
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.