* 1932707
* Collaborative Research:  Functional morphology of a high-efficiency filtration mechanism identified in manta rays
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* James Strother, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 09/30/2024
* USD 274,273.00

Mantas and devil rays are large fishes that feed by engulfing massive volumes of
seawater, extracting plankton with a specialized filter structure, and expelling
filtered water through the gill slits. These animals utilize a highly-efficient
filtration mechanism, ricochet separation, that is distinct from previously-
described biological or industrial filtration processes. This project will use a
multidisciplinary approach to examine the fluid dynamics and filtration
mechanics of this unique system. This project will characterize the anatomy of
the filtering structure, identify how the shape of the structure affects the
flow around the filter, and determine how the resulting flow patterns affect
particle filtration. This work will provide critical insights into the
physiology of an ecologically important and threatened group of animals. In
addition, there is substantial need for improved filtering strategies for use in
applications ranging from mitigating large-scale environmental contamination
events to routine wastewater treatment. This project will elucidate the
mechanics of a novel and highly-efficient filtration process, and has
considerable potential to lead to advanced, bioinspired filtration systems. This
research will also provide valuable training for undergraduate, graduate, and
post-doctoral scientists and support activities to engage school-aged students
and expose them to biomechanics and bioinspired
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The filtering apparatus of mobulid
fishes (mantas and devil rays) is a highly-specialized gill-raker structure. It
has long been believed that the raker functioned as a sieve filter, simply
trapping particles larger than the pore size. However, recent work has shown
that the raker utilizes a unique filtration mechanism, ricochet separation, in
which complex flow fields cause plankton particles to recoil off the filter
surfaces and become concentrated within the buccal cavity. This filtration
process has several favorable properties including that it efficiently separates
particles smaller than the pore size, is highly resistant to clogging, and has
low hydrodynamic resistance. This project will examine the fluid dynamic
processes underlying this mechanism and the morphological factors that influence
its performance. This research uses a multipronged approach that includes
anatomical studies (micro computed tomography), experimental fluid mechanics
(particle image velocimetry and filtration efficiency measurements), and
theoretical modeling (computational fluid dynamics). Aim 1 will investigate the
small-scale physical processes at the surface of the filter, identifying how
individual plankton particles interact with the filter and how this interaction
is affected by the morphology of the filter. Aim 2 will examine the large-scale
flow patterns that develop in the mouth and will determine how this flow
influences the filtration mechanics. Aim 3 will use an understanding of these
processes to create and optimize bio-inspired engineered filtration
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.