* 1932105
* CPS: Medium: Data-Driven Adaptive Real-Time (DART) Flow-Field Estimation Using Deployable UAVs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jesse Hoagg, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,150.00

The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster and the Aliso Canyon natural gas leak are
recent high-profile examples of emergency situations that resulted from the
unplanned release of an airborne contaminant. In such emergency scenarios,
accurate real-time prediction of contaminant movement is invaluable for planning
emergency response, protecting emergency workers, and assessing environmental
impact. However, accurate prediction of contaminant dispersion is challenging
because of atmospheric turbulence, ground terrain topology, and changing wind
conditions. This project addresses the problem of predicting atmospheric
contaminant dispersion in real time by using a fleet of autonomous unmanned air
vehicles (UAVs) to obtain sparse physical measurements of the atmospheric flow
and contaminant concentrations. Then, these sparse physical measurements are
used in real time to continually improve a computational fluid dynamic model in
order to produce an accurate real-time prediction of the contaminant dispersion.
This represents a tight integration of real-time sensing of airborne
contamination with multi-vehicle swarm control and cloud dispersion prediction
to generate optimal vehicle paths.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this
project is to develop and demonstrate a new data-driven adaptive real-time
(DART) system that produces accurate real-time micro-meteorological estimates
and forecasts contaminant dispersion near its source. The DART system will
consist of a computational-fluid-dynamic cyber system and a physical system of
autonomous UAVs instrumented with flow sensors and contaminant-concentration
sensors. Together, this DART system will produce accurate flow-field estimates,
which can be used to predict contaminant dispersion. Developing the DART system
requires new techniques for real-time data-driven model adaption, advances in
computational turbulence modeling, improvements in UAV-based sensing and data
processing, and new UAV formation flying methods that use cyber-feedback from
the computational-fluid-dynamic cyber system. The project includes multiple
levels of experimentation including simulation, wind tunnel, and live flight
demonstration to provide proof of concept. This project is jointly funded by the
Cyber Physical System Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.