* 1932750
* I-Corps: Powered-Mobility Device for Infants and Very Young Children
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Sharon Stansfield, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to transform
the provision of early mobility devices to infants and very young children with
motor impairments. There is currently no mobility device commercially available
that is reasonably priced and that can be controlled by very young children,
despite the growing belief that early mobility is necessary for the development
of cognition, perception, language, and socialization. This project can
potentially benefit the 35,000 or more children born each year in the US who
require significant assistance with mobility when very young, including those
who may eventually be able to move on their own. Availability of this device
could change the way physicians and therapists approach the treatment of these
children.

This I-Corps project further develops prototype early mobility devices designed
for infants and very young children with motor impair. The device is innovative
in that it provides an intuitive control method. Infants control the device by
leaning in the direction they want to move. Mobile robot technology provides the
powered mobility base. A set of force sensors on the top of the robot support a
seat and are used by custom software to determine if the child is sitting
upright (as measured during an initial calibration phase) or is leaning forward
or to the left or right. If the child is determined to be leaning, the software
moves/turns in the desired direction. The software also permits the device to be
customized so that if the infant is only able to make very small postural
changes, the robot will still respond. The device leaves the child's hands free
to interact with objects in the environment. Two safety features are also
integrated: Range sensors stop the robot if an obstacle is detected; the child
can then move in any direction other than into the obstacle. A remote control
allows an adult to take control of the robot at any time.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.