* 1932298
* Workshop/Collaborative Research: Computational Mechanics Vision and Future Challenges; Ann Arbor, Michigan; October 31 to November 1, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Harold Park, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2020
* USD 62,838.00

This grant provides support for the workshop entitled "Computational Mechanics
Vision and Future Challenges", to be held on October 31-November 1, 2019 at the
University of Michigan campus in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Computational mechanics is
a diverse field with different methodologies and techniques that are used to
solve fundamental and important problems in various application areas. Because
of the constant need for predictive computational modeling in both established
and newly emerging research fields, computational mechanics plays a key role in
many future scientific developments. However, it faces new challenges and
opportunities from the rise to prominence of artificial intelligence, complex
infrastructure, additive manufacturing as well as a newly urgent focus on
health. This has created a significant need to identify the future challenges
and research and educational opportunities facing the computational mechanics
community in these areas. The objective of this workshop is to solicit and
synthesize directions for computational mechanics research and education in the
United States over the next decade and beyond. Funding from this grant will
support planning activities, production of a report, and travel of invited
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this one-and-a-half-day workshop, leading
experts across a wide cross-section of the computational mechanics community
will convene in an interactive setting to discuss ways to address emerging
challenges in the areas of data-driven modeling/machine learning, additive
manufacturing, risk and uncertainty-based engineering, and medicine. We will
ensure the participation of a diverse audience through various means, including
specifically targeting women and underrepresented minorities and early career
professionals, along with mid-career and senior faculty and representatives from
industry and government, such that all stakeholders participate in the future
directions of the computational mechanics community. The product of the workshop
will be a report with recommendations for NSF and the larger computational
mechanics field, which will be widely disseminated across the spectrum of
academia, government, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.