* 1932947
* Collaborative Research: Design and Development: The Skillful Learning Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2022
* Holly Matusovich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2022
* USD 39,807.00

The Skillful Learning Institute is a virtual short course experience for 25-30
engineering educators to expand the explicit engagement of engineering students
in their metacognitive development. Such intentional engagement with students,
helping them become more skillful learners, is critically lacking at present.
Metacognition is instrumental in being able to independently assess and direct
one's learning - a lifelong skill to propel ongoing growth and development. As
such, metacognition is important for engineers because it empowers them (i.e.,
builds their agency and self-efficacy) to handle ambiguity inherent in
navigating and solving engineering problems. The ultimate goal is to enhance the
education of engineers through explicit metacognitive training, and the focus is
on educators for their enduring and multiplicative impact on current and future
engineering students, and, secondary impacts on their colleagues. The experience
is designed to build educators' capacities to teach metacognition and to
continue to use and develop engaging metacognitive activities. Intentional
elements are included to build a sense of community and mutual support where
participants are actively engaged with each other and the facilitators. The aim
is to enhance the translation of the resulting metacognitive activities into
practice and to develop a lasting community of support after the completion of
the short course. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will create a diverse
virtual community of scholars organized around the desire to see metacognition
explicitly integrated into existing curriculum. By eliminating the time and cost
of travel, this project will enable populations that might otherwise be limited
in attendance such as professional-track faculty, teaching focused faculty,
community college faculty, adjunct faculty. In turn, the diverse participants
will reach a diverse mix of engineering students with metacognitive training -
supporting all students' success. The short course consists of three two-hour
synchronous virtual workshops over a six-week period in the summer. These three
virtual workshops will use a flipped classroom pedagogy. During the virtual
short course educators will be mentored through the design and implementation of
one unique metacognitive activity for their context using a backwards design
process. At the end of the short course, participants will have an intervention
they can use immediately with their students and the skills to continue to
design, develop, and adapt additional interventions they believe will be
successful in their contexts. This level of personal ownership, emergent from a
supportive and scaffolded environment, greatly increases the likelihood of
success. The variety of different metacognitive interventions resulting from the
project and that have been tried and tested will be captured in a repository for
sharing with the engineering education community. Evaluation data will
illuminate the effective elements of virtual, synchronous meetings in
facilitating a community of scholars organized around metacognition and aid
transferability of workshop features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.