* 1932849
* Collaborative Research: Forest-Atmosphere Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Exchange for a Coniferous Ecosystem - Closing the Flux Budget
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Delphine Farmer, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 449,568.00

This project is focused on the two-way exchange of biogenic volatile organic
compounds (BVOCs) between coniferous forests and the atmosphere. Recent
observations include ecosystem-atmosphere fluxes for many hundreds of organic
species, vastly more than are included in current chemical transport models. The
impacts of these "missing" organic species is unknown, resulting in models that
are fundamentally limited in their ability to simulate forest-atmosphere
volatile organic carbon exchange. This research will better define the
ecosystem-atmosphere fluxes that take place in coniferous forests, enabling
models to better predict the carbon exchange that is taking place. Carbon is an
essential element for all life, so understanding how it moves helps us to
understand biological processes and factors that influence
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address the following scientific
questions: (1) What is the reactive carbon flux budget across the mass spectrum
for a coniferous forest? What is the importance of these two-way fluxes for
atmospheric OH reactivity? Is there a significant role for previously
unidentified or unmodeled compounds? (2) How do the emissions and deposition of
individual organic molecules, classes of BVOCs (by O:C ratio, OH rate constant,
degree of unsaturation, etc.), and the overall reactive ensemble, vary
temporally and as a function of environmental drivers? To what extent do current
models capture these dependencies? (3) How do individual ecosystem components
(e.g., overstory, understory, soils), in-canopy chemistry, and deposition
combine to drive the overall net forest-atmosphere flux budget? Can we close the
ecosystem-level BVOC flux budget by reconciling these different terms? And (4)
What are the broader implications of this full suite of BVOC fluxes for
atmospheric composition, near-surface ozone, and HOx chemistry? The research
plan combines two high-resolution TOF-CIMS to measure canopy-level BVOC fluxes
across the entire mass range over a coniferous forest to assess the importance
of those fluxes for OH reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.