* 1932730
* Carbon-Detected NMR Studies of Intrinsically Disordered Protein Post-Translational Modification
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Scott Showalter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 958,803.00

Carbon-Detected NMR Studies of Intrinsically Disordered Protein Post-
Translational Modification&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to the genetic
information encoded in DNA must be both rapid and under tight control so that a
cell can readily adapt to its environment, or rapidly respond to growth signals.
One regulatory mechanism involves the use of proteins that have highly flexible
regions that can be chemically modified in response to signals. These chemical
modifications impact how these proteins associate with, or access, DNA and thus
determine whether genetic information is accessible and expressed or hidden and
suppressed. Thus, chemical modifications of these highly flexible proteins can
exert timely control over cellular responses, acting to toggle their targets
between active and inactive states and allowing the cell to quickly mobilize the
resources it requires at the moment. Highly flexible regions are difficult to
observe with current technologies; this fact significantly limits our
understanding of how they function. The investigator will push the boundaries of
current technologies and explore the structural consequences of chemical toggles
of highly flexible proteins that control the expression of genetic information.
This program addresses a significant gap in our knowledge of how gene expression
is regulated. The research will train junior scientists at multiple education
levels to seek fundamental insight into the biochemistry of biological processes
using the principles and quantitative laws from the physical sciences. Among
other outreach efforts, the investigator will bring middle school students from
underprivileged backgrounds to Penn State to demonstrate the opportunities that
arise from higher education in science and engineering fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this project's objectives, new experimental
methodology will be implemented for nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy of highly flexible proteins. While protons are relatively easy to
observe by NMR, the PI has shown that the comparatively more challenging direct-
detection of carbon yields more quantitative and complete information for
intrinsically disordered polypeptides. Recently, the PI used this technique to
demonstrate how serine phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II provides a
structural switch that plays a role in regulating the critically important
enzyme. The PI will now broaden the diversity of the highly flexible proteins
that can be studied with carbon-detected NMR. Specifically, methods will be
developed to overcome a current blind-spot for the aromatic amino acids tyrosine
and phenylalanine. Second, the project will extend these studies to address the
structural consequences of threonine phosphorylation. Finally, proteins that
acquire phosphate in response to cellular and environmental signals often also
acquire methyl groups. These modifications can exert combinatorial control,
often in competition. Therefore, experiments will be performed to test the
hypothesis that addition of methyl groups to the amino acid lysine also induces
structural transitions, akin to those the PI has observed in association with
phosphate incorporation. As a result, this research and associated training
activities will yield fundamental, molecular level insights into gene
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.