* 1932953
* Collaborative Research: DASI Track 2: An Optical Network to Study the Vertical Propagation Resulting in Spatio-temporal Variability in the Thermosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jonathan Makela, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 668,212.00

This Distributed Arrays of Small Instruments (DASI) project will support
observations of the middle atmosphere. This collaboration between academic
institutions and a private company will deploy instruments across the
Southwestern US. These instruments will be used to measure the dynamics of a
complex region of the middle atmosphere where the thermosphere and ionosphere
are coupled to each other and to the neutral atmosphere. The data will
ultimately help inform our understanding of the space weather events in the
atmosphere and inform improvements to global whole atmosphere models. The
project leverages a previous NSF-supported effort which successfully placed
instruments at high schools across the nation. This project includes planned
public seminars and supports undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of this project is to investigate thermosphere-ionosphere coupling by
deploying an array of Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPIs) and all-sky cameras
across the Southwestern U.S to enable investigations of plasma-neutral dynamics
caused both by lower atmospheric and magnetospheric forcing across a range of
spatial and temporal scales in the mid-latitude region. Ten OI 557.7nm airglow
imagers will form a contiguous field of view spanning 15-20 degrees in
latitude/longitude and three FPIs with OI 630.0nm and 557.7nm capabilities. This
augments an existing network of 630.0nm imagers that covers some portion of the
US and Mexico. Data will be made publicly available through several websites and
the NSF funded Madrigal database. Software products will be made available
through GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.