* 1932619
* Convergence: RAISE: WIN: a Window Into Neuroregulation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Andrea Chiba, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Classroom learning is impacted by a child's ability to appropriately self-
regulate and adjust their state for the task at hand. Self-regulation relies on
an individual's ability to fluidly maintain balance between the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous system. The primary nerve involved in signaling between
systems is the vagus nerve. The efficacy of the vagus nerve, called "vagal tone"
has been associated with the ability to maintain appropriate balance between
systems. Children who grow up in compromised circumstances, including maternal
malnutrition or stress and early trauma or malnutrition often have poor vagal
tone at the outset, placing them at a biological disadvantage when they enter
the classroom setting. A multi-disciplinary team will converge on design and
practices for creating technology and algorithms to better assess vagal tone and
the balance between the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. Best
practices for conducting continuous collection of simultaneous behavioral and
physiological data from multiple children in a natural classroom setting will be
addressed as will analysis of the resultant data from both dynamical systems and
information theory perspectives. This undertaking should reveal the association
of vagal regulation of the nervous system and a child's ability to regulate
their cognitive state for classroom learning in a natural social setting. The
creation of cyberinfrastructure and tools for collaboration and creation will
support the project, training of future scientists, and the scalability of the
project. The discovery of clear patterns of data will allow future efforts to
address equity in learning by devising ways to facilitate development of vagal
tone and/or the ability to regulate the balance of the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous system in those for whom it is compromised at the
outset. Data analytics might also reveal recommendations for optimizing the
classroom setting to facilitate early self-regulation and learning. Partnerships
will allow the broader dissemination of the research findings for inclusion in
teacher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a biological perspective, the
ability to self-regulate is dealt with through the balance of the brain and
bodily systems by effectively balancing the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems. The primary perpetrator responsible for maintaining this
balance is thought to be the vagus nerve, and its efficacy can be approximated
through a variety of heart rate and respiration rate comparisons often referred
to as vagal tone. Compromised maternal environment, poor nutrition, or early
trauma are amongst the conditions that can lead to early developmental
differences in vagal tone, posing the question of equity as it relates to the
development of regulatory function. This multidisciplinary team led by Dr. Chiba
will investigate the role of vagal tone in classroom self-regulation and
learning, through convergent scientific approaches that includes development and
augmentation of nano-sensor technology to achieve high quality, unobtrusive
measurements of vagal tone, and new algorithms for measurement during testing
and learning experiences in the classroom. The sensor network will be supported
by the development of classroom mapping and cyberinfrastructure for large-scale,
real-time data collection and predictive modeling. To scaffold the gap between
laboratory hypotheses and contextually-based evidence, an embedded network of
sensors for studying physiology as it relates to self-regulatory skills (e.g.,
executive functions) in the classroom will be developed. Analytics to measure
vagal tone across time will enable understanding of the variability in vagal
tone and how it relates to concurrent measures of classroom self-regulation.
Once conclusions from resultant data are considered to be scientifically
reliable, information will be disseminated in a form that is useful for
educators. To support the interdisciplinary efforts, this project also includes
development of cyberinfrastructure to support convergence
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.