* 1932908
* Collaborative Research: Bioinspired Catalysts with Earth-Abundant Metals for Reductive Treatment of Waterborne Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2020,05/31/2024
* Yin Wang, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 109,999.00

A collaborative team of researchers will develop a novel class of catalysts
inspired by nature. These “bioinspired catalysts” will be designed for the
destruction of toxic waterborne oxyanion pollutants including perchlorate,
nitrate, and bromate. Oxyanions are detected worldwide in surface water,
groundwater, tapwater, and wastewater. These compounds represent a substantial
risk to water supplies because they are highly mobile and toxic at low
concentrations. Conventional oxyanion removal technologies include selective ion
exchange, reverse osmosis, and biological reduction. However, these approaches
face numerous drawbacks including the disposal of secondary waste and low
treatment efficiency. The catalysts will use common molybdenum (Mo) and tungsten
(W) metals and novel carbon and silica-based support materials in their
construction. These wil result in significantly improved reactivity and
stability compared to the currently used catalysts. Successful development of
effective and inexpensive catalysts will decrease the associated economic and
social burdens of removing oxyanions from water. These catalysts also hold
promise in the development of a new generation of bioinspired Mo/W-based
materials for environmental and energy-related fields. Additional benefits
include the training and development of graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students through participatory research opportunities, thus improving the
Nation’s science and technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of
this research is to develop a novel class of Mo- and W-based bioinspired
catalysts for water and wastewater treatment. The specific research objectives
are to: (i) introduce Mo and W precursors into rationally designed support
materials to achieve high reactivity for the removal of recalcitrant oxyanion
pollutants; (ii) investigate reaction mechanisms through detailed material
characterization, kinetic studies in variable water matrices, and reaction
modeling and validation; and (iii) build engineered flow-through reactors to
further evaluate the performance of the new catalysts for practical
applications. The bioinspired catalysts use the same metal catalytic elements
found in biological enzymes together with electrons from hydrogen gas to carry
out the reduction of oxyanions under ambient conditions. Successful completion
of this research will generate new knowledge for the development of catalytic
reactors that can accommodate novel catalysts for a variety of water and
wastewater treatment scenarios. This holds potential to develop new research
directions in designing and applying functionalized carbon and silica materials
for sustainable water purification. Beyond these research outcomes, the project
will support the training and development of graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students in STEM fields. Their participation in this project will prepare
them for careers in industry, academia, or government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.