* 1932351
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: SecureNN: Design of Secured Autonomous Cyber-Physical Systems Against Adversarial Machine Learning Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Xue Lin, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 10/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Cyber-physical systems such as self-driving cars, drones, and intelligent
transportation rely heavily on machine learning techniques for ever-increasing
levels of autonomy. In the example of autonomous vehicles, deep learning or deep
neural networks can be employed for perception, sensor fusion, prediction,
planning, and control tasks. However powerful such machine learning techniques
have become, they also expose a new attack surface, which may lead to
vulnerability to adversarial attacks and potentially harmful consequences in
security- and safety-critical scenarios. This project investigates adversarial
machine learning challenges faced by autonomous cyber-physical systems with the
aim of formulating defense strategies. The project will collaborate with the
Center for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) Education at
Northeastern University and the Office of Access and Inclusion Center at
University of California at Irvine to engage undergraduates, women, and minority
students in independent research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
composed of two interdependent research thrusts, one for investigating
adversarial attacks and one for devising countermeasures, aiming to secure the
key deep learning-equipped software components of autonomous cyber-physical
systems, such as perception, obstacle prediction, and vehicle planning and
control. The main deep learning techniques of interest to autonomous cyber-
physical systems include convolutional neural networks for detection, recurrent
neural networks for prediction, and deep reinforcement learning for control. The
technical innovations of the project include ADMM (Alternating Direction Method
of Multipliers) based attack generation, concurrent adversarial training and
model compression, and multi-sourced defense schemes incorporating adversarial
training and ensemble learning. This project will implement and evaluate the
proposed attack and defense approaches on real-world prototypes of autonomous
cyber-physical systems for autonomous vehicles and unmanned aerial vehicles in
the investigators' labs. The investigators will release all the developed
models, algorithms, and software to GitHub to facilitate community
usage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.