* 1932189
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Learning and Verifying Conformant Data-Driven Models for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sina Aghli, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 624,229.00

This project investigates fundamental techniques for building mathematical
models that can be safely used to make trustworthy predictions and control
decisions. Mathematical models form the foundation for modern Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS). Examples include vehicle models that predict how a car will move
when brakes are applied, or physiological models that predict how the blood
glucose levels change in a patient with type-1 diabetes when insulin is
administered. The success of machine learning tools has yielded data-driven
models such as neural networks. However, depending on how data is collected and
the models are learned, it is possible to obtain models that violate fundamental
physical, chemical, or physiological facts that can potentially threaten life
and property. The approach of the project is to expose these model flaws through
advanced analysis. The project seeks to broaden participation in computing
through mentoring activities that will encourage undergraduate women and members
of underrepresented minority groups to consider a career in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research combines falsification methods for
exposing failure to conform with verification approaches for rigorously proving
conformance. Furthermore, approaches for learning models of dynamical systems
from data and imposing core cyber-physical domain knowledge are under
investigation. The project is applying these data-driven models with conformance
guarantees to the design of safe controllers for autonomous vehicles, models of
human insulin glucose regulation and robotic swarms. The effort is advancing CPS
education by creating a framework for distance education focused on CPS. The
researchers are developing a series of low cost hardware testbeds and self-paced
learning tasks that will expose students to the process of building highly
reliable and safety critical CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.