* 1932630
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Mining for Patterns in Graphs and High-Dimensional Data: Achieving the Limits
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jiaming Xu, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2021
* USD 345,168.00

While modern datasets are very large, the amount of information per variable is
often relatively small. This includes datasets from genomics, social networks,
and many applications in machine learning and artificial intelligence. For
instance, in genomics we often track hundreds of thousands of genes, but only
have a few hundred independent samples for each one. Similarly, online social
networks are massive, but the structure of friendships only gives us a
relatively small amount of data per individual. This kind of data is called
"high-dimensional", and poses new challenges for mathematics, statistics, and
computer science, especially when (as with all real data) they are noisy or
incomplete. This project will identify exactly when and how it is mathematically
possible to find patterns in these massive but noisy datasets, giving scientists
across many fields a useful guide to how much data they need to draw reliable
conclusions, and to develop new algorithms that will solve modern data science
problems efficiently and optimally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the study of
community detection, noisy graph isomorphism, and matrix/tensor factorization,
this project will develop a general framework to 1) locate the information-
theoretic limit below which the observation is too noisy to detect the
underlying pattern, or even to tell if a pattern exists; 2) devise efficient
algorithms that succeed all the way down to the lowest possible signal-to-noise
ratio; 3) prove that important classes of algorithms need super-polynomial time
in certain hard regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.