* 1932467
* Collaborative Research: Ants of the World
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Brian Fisher, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 147,920.00

Ants are dominant elements of most terrestrial ecosystems. They have prominent
roles in agricultural environments, controlling pests or being pests themselves.
Ants in natural habitats comprise a major fraction of the total animal biomass
and have important roles as predators, scavengers, and soil movers. Many ant
species have hitchhiked into new surroundings with humans, becoming invasive
species that can harm both agricultural and natural ecosystems. Ants are also
renowned for their complex societies. Because of their overall importance to
human interest and welfare, ants are the subjects of scientific research on a
wide variety of subjects, including behavior, robotics, immunochemistry,
neurobiology, development, community ecology, biology of invasive species, and
sociobiology. Knowledge of the evolutionary relationships among ant species (the
"ant tree of life") adds great value to ant study findings. Advances in DNA
sequencing technology have dramatically accelerated the discovery of
evolutionary relationships among plants and vertebrates. Such knowledge is
currently incomplete for ants, hampering research progress. The Ants of the
World project will provide a comprehensive tree of life and classification of
ants. The results will also address basic questions about how life spreads and
diversifies across the planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A powerful new approach for
revealing evolutionary relationships among animals uses genome reduction
techniques and high-throughput sequencing to obtain thousands of loci called
"UltraConserved Elements" (UCEs). Evolutionary trees based on UCEs reliably
uncover relationships at all time depths. The Ants of the World project will
acquire UCE data for 4,500 ant specimens, increasing the portion of sequenced
species to 96% of the 334 genera and about 45% of the 13,500 described species.
Specimens will be selected to include nearly all major species groups from all
terrestrial biomes. The result will be a comprehensive evolutionary tree of ants
delineated to the smallest branch tips. The tree will inform a revision of all
generic boundaries and deliver the long-sought goal of a stable generic
classification. The tree will also be linked to geography, morphological
characters, and climate data, enabling exploration of fundamental evolutionary
and ecological processes. The Ants of the World project will also become a major
component of Ant Course, a brief but intensive field training program in ant
diversity and identification. The Ants of the World project will support three
new Ant Courses, in Cameroon, Vietnam, and Australia. A novel component of these
courses will be the addition of undergraduate training in science communication:
each course will include an undergraduate trainee who will document activities
in the field and hone their science communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.