* 1932753
* High resolution, large spectral range on-chip Mid-infrared Fourier transform spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Ray Chen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

The mid-infrared spectrum represents a fingerprint of a material with absorption
peaks corresponding to the frequencies of vibrations between the bonds of the
atoms making up the material, and thus can identify and quantify all kinds of
materials. Mid-infrared spectroscopy has a vast range of applications including
pharmacy, biotechnology, industrial chemistry, food safety, and environmental
monitoring. The preferred infrared spectroscopy method is Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. However, conventional FTIR systems with moving
components are bulky, heavy, and sensitive to environment fluctuations
(vibration, etc). These disadvantages make it mainly a laboratory-only tool
requiring extensive human involvement and therefore unsuitable for field
applications. In this project, the team at the University of Texas at Austin
proposes to use integrated photonics technology to build the FTIR on a chip. The
weight of the FTIR can be amazingly reduced to a few grams and the size to less
than 1 cm2. Moving parts are no longer needed. With these revolutionary
improvements, FTIR can be used in many unprecedented areas such as toxic gas
detection in battle fields, greenhouse gas monitoring on airborne platform, and
standalone environment monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated photonics
has been experiencing explosive growth in the past few years. While many
components and systems have been demonstrated with impressive performance, the
development of on-chip spectroscopy is slow due to the limited absorption length
and strength on a chip, and the lack of high resolution, wide wavelength range
spectrometers. To address these issues, the proposed on-chip FTIR involves two
major innovations. First, subwavelength grating metamaterial waveguide is used
as an absorption enhancement medium for the first time. It solves the dilemma
between guiding (which requires the optical field to be constrained inside the
high index dielectric region) and absorption (which prefers that the optical
field propagates outside of the waveguide). The absorption of light by the
analyte can be enhanced over 400 times compared to a conventional strip
waveguide. Second, on-chip FTIRs formed by an array of asymmetric MZIs with
increasing path differences between the two arms suffers from the extremely
limited wavelength bandwidth. In this project, a thermo-optic phase shifter is
added to each MZI. The combination of thermal phase shifters and incremental
waveguide length differences makes it possible to achieve high resolution and
large spectral range simultaneously, which has never been demonstrated before.
As a proof-of-concept demonstration, this project will design, fabricate and
experimentally demonstrate a subwavelength grating metamaterial waveguide
enhanced, on-chip FTIR centered at 3.4 microns on the silicon-on-sapphire
platform for Methane detection. The concept can also be readily extended to
cover other wavelength ranges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.