* 1932524
* CPS: Small: Worker-in-the-loop real time safety system for short-duration highway workzones
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hamed Tabkhi, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project proposes a novel safety system that enables real-time prediction
for safety risks near highway work zones, through recent advances in Artificial
Intelligence (AI). The proposed safety system provides real-time notification to
highway workers through smart glasses when a work zone intrusion is about to
happen. In particular, this project focuses on short-duration highway work zones
which cause higher safety risks due to lack of proper safety mechanisms. This
project enhances the health and prosperity of the nation by making highways
safer places for workers and preventing potential fatalities or injuries caused
by highway work zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project departs from existing
reactive safety systems to a true proactive safety system. It makes fundamental
contributions in real-time deep learning algorithm design and processing, edge
computing, and assisted reality systems to enable real-time prediction of work
zone intrusions and notification of highway workers. The proposed worker-in-the-
loop safety system will be co-designed and co-created with the direct help of
highway work zone workers, leading industries, and human factors experts to
identify the best feedback mechanisms for alarming workers regarding upcoming
safety risks. This project will play a key role in the development of the next
generation cyber-physical systems with powerful edge computing for many emerging
safety and security-related applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.