* 1932765
* CIBR:Accelerating the discovery and utility of the timescale of life
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2020,01/31/2024
* Stephen Hedges, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,325,157.00

Scientists require an accurate timescale for the tree of life to calculate rates
of change in genomes and to better understand the evolution of biological
systems, ecosystems, and life overall. The timescale comes from genome
information assembled and compared among individuals and species. However,
information on the timescale of time is scattered among thousands of articles in
the scientific literature in a form that is difficult to retrieve. The TimeTree
project overcomes this problem by collecting and synthesizing this information
into a computational database accessible to scientists and the public. Users may
obtain timetrees (trees calibrated to time) of any group, or of a custom list of
species. They may also obtain a timeline showing evolutionary branches from the
perspective of any selected species, going back in time to the origin of life.
Events in geological and astronomical history are synchronized in the same
timescale with biological timetrees and timelines, facilitating cross-
disciplinary discovery. Ongoing advances in TimeTree expand on this theme by
serving study data, allowing data mining by researchers, and facilitating its
use as a public and educational resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new TimeTree
resource brings the fast-growing knowledge on species divergence times to
researchers and the public through major technology and data expansion. This
ensures access to the most up-to-date information on divergence times of
species, subspecies, and populations. The expansion is accomplished with new
tools and application programming interfaces to facilitate data mining, allowing
comparisons among study timetrees and the synthetic timetree of life. Research
exploration is facilitated by conducting common analyses in-house, such as
lineages-through-time plots and diversification analyses, so that researchers
may immediately see the results for any group. Maintenance costs are minimized,
and sustainability is improved with new software and application programming
interfaces, automating the data submission and assimilation process, and making
TimeTree a sustainable community-contributed resource. TimeTree
(www.timetree.org) enables researchers worldwide to query, retrieve, visualize,
and explore patterns and formulate hypotheses, and improves scientific and
societal return on the collective investment in evolutionary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.