* 1932649
* Collaborative Research: Tracing Coal Ash Solids in the Environment - Implications for long-term contamination of the aquatic ecosystem
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2020,02/28/2023
* Avner Vengosh, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 02/28/2023
* USD 298,953.00

Coal combustion residuals (known as coal ash) is the largest industrial solid
waste generated in the U.S., with production rates of over 100 million tons per
year. While some fraction of the generated coal ash is recycled, mostly for the
cement industry, over half is stored in coal ash impoundments and landfills.
Since coal ash contains high concentrations of heavy metals that are easily
transported into water, the disposal of coal ash in leaky impoundments can
damage the environment and water resources. Hurricane storms and large floods
have been shown to cause spills of coal ash into Sutton Lake in eastern North
Carolina and contamination of the lake ecological system. This NSF project seeks
to detect coal ash contamination in sediments within different lakes throughout
North Carolina and to evaluate the possible environmental impacts of coal ash in
these lakes. The project will develop novel methods to detect coal ash in the
environment. Understanding the potential occurrence of coal ash outside the
major disposal sites and the ecological impact in the lakes is important for the
communities living near coal ash ponds and the impacted lakes. The use of
scientific methods to detect coal ash in the environment is important for an
unbiased and scientific-base evaluation of the risks of coal ash to residents
living in rural areas of North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
study aims to collect sediments and pore water samples from lakes near major
coal ash disposal sites in North Carolina in order to detect the presence of
coal ash and its impact on the ecosystem. The study is based on developing novel
geochemical and physical methods for tracing coal ash and its contaminants in
the environment through integration of independent proxies for the presence of
coal ash in the bottom sediments including trace metals distribution, strontium
isotope ratios (87Sr/86Sr), lead stable isotopes (206Pb/208Pb, 207Pb/206Pb),
radionuclides (228Ra, 226Ra, 210Pb, 137Cs), magnetic susceptibility, and
magnetic granulometry. This reconnaissance study will investigate the spatial
and temporal distribution of coal ash and contaminants likely introduced during
extreme hydrologic events into lakes near coal ash storage impoundments in North
Carolina. The study will also evaluate the mobilization of contaminants from
coal ash solids into the ecosystem through leaching experiments and measurement
of pore water from the lake bottom sediments. The objectives of the study are
(1) to develop methods for identification of coal ash in sediments and
associated contaminants in pore water extracted from lake bottom sediments; (2)
to evaluate the magnitude of unmonitored coal ash spills in the impacted lakes;
(3) to determine the residence time of sediments in lakes impacted by coal ash
spills; and (4) to evaluate the long-term ecological effects that could result
from unmonitored coal ash spills into lakes in North Carolina. The environmental
legacy of coal ash is one of the emerging topics in the southeastern U.S.
Leaking of coal ash ponds and spills have shown to have environmental effects on
the quality of groundwater and surface water near coal ash disposal sites. The
expected decommissioning of the operating coal-fired power plants during the
next decade requires permanent solutions for the large volumes of coal ash
commonly stored in coal ash impoundments near lakes and streams. The evidence of
a coal ash spills to Sutton Lake has further raised public concerns about the
environmental and human health safety. This NSF project will establish
scientific-based criteria for environmental risks assessment associated with
coal ash storage and management. Graduate and undergraduate students from Duke
University, and undergraduate students from Appalachian State and Montclair
State University will take active roles in the project. The results of the
project will be used to construct a module on coal ash pollution to “Water on
the Move”, a K-12 outreach program in the Department of Geological and
Environmental Sciences at Appalachian State. In addition to publication in
scientific journals and presentation in professional conferences, the results of
this project will be disseminated to the general public and communities living
near coal ash impoundments and impacted lakes through press releases following
scientific publication, communications with environmental NGOs working with the
local communities, townhall meetings with communities at larger risks with
direct dialogue with residents, a designated website and social media,
communication and presentation of the results in federal (U.S. EPA, Congress)
and state (NC House of Representatives) agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.