* 1932615
* CPS: Medium Collaborative Research: Smart Freight Transport Using Behavioral Incentives
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Petros Ioannou, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,109,871.00

The purpose of this project is to develop new methods to increase the efficiency
of freight activity, thereby reducing air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions
associated with the freight sector. There are widespread inefficiencies in the
freight transport system, many due to lack of coordination across actors in the
system: railroads and trucking firms, shipping companies, cargo owners, and port
operators. There is a need for a centrally coordinated freight management system
that will optimize the flow of freight across the rail and road transportation
networks. These networks are very complicated: freight and passengers share the
same infrastructure; there is temporal and spatial variation in demand; there
are many decision-makers affecting the system. We use optimization and control
theory and techniques combined with behavioral models to develop a centrally
managed control system. The fundamental concept is efficient freight load
balancing, meaning allocating freight demand across time and space to serve the
entire set of demands as efficiently as possible. In order to accomplish optimal
load balancing, we must address two questions: 1) What is the most efficient and
sustainable spatio-temporal allocation of freight shipments across the road
network, and 2) what incentives and pricing tools will motivate users to accept
this allocation. The second question is necessary, because a system optimization
requires changes in behavior for some users relative to each user optimizing
independently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our research approach is co-Simulation,
Control and Optimization with BEhavioral incentives (SCOBE). We use simulation
models as part of a closed loop optimization system where the system dynamics
and user behavior are monitored and updated. Once we allow for variation in user
preferences, conventional approaches to solving the system optimization problem
are inadequate. Rather, we must take user preferences directly into account in
order to determine the best combination of shipment allocations and user
incentives. This project makes the following contributions: First, it advances
science by developing a method for system optimization with variation in user
preferences. Second, the resulting method will be demonstrated through the
participation of at least one trucking company to evaluate its value in a real-
world context. Third, particulate emissions from heavy duty trucks are one of
the largest sources of human health impacts in urbanized areas. Increasing
freight efficiency will reduce particulate and other emissions, as well as
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Fourth, the research will be used to promote
under-represented undergraduate students to pursue graduate studies, and promote
under-represented high school students to pursue careers in the science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.