* 1932572
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Wireless Magnetic Millibot Blood Clot Removal and Navigation in 3-D Printed Patient-Specific Phantoms using Echocardiography
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Aaron Becker, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 547,059.00

Human blood clots kill an estimated 100,000 to 300,000 Americans each year.
Current treatments rely on medications that break down clots, which can be
combined with a surgical procedure that mechanically alters the clot. However,
clot-busting medications and surgery are both linked to unintended adverse
events. This project designs and studies miniature magnetic swimmers as a
minimally invasive alternative to these treatments. These devices are
millimeter-scale objects that have a helical shape and contain a small permanent
magnet. A rotating magnetic field is used to remotely control the swimmers. The
field makes the swimmer rotate and the helical shape converts the rotational
movement into a propulsive force (much like a boat's propeller). The swimmers
can be steered by changing the orientation of the applied magnetic field. They
can precisely navigate within liquids along pre-defined 3D paths and could
potentially navigate within the bloodstream toward a blood clot. The rotational
movement can be used to abrade the clot and restore an appropriate blood
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces new biomedical paradigms and
investigates the robust high-speed tetherless manipulation of magnetic swimmers
in complex, time-varying environments. It requires multiple swimmer designs,
innovative controllers, and integrated, dynamic sensing modalities. The project
is divided into three synergetic objectives. First, a fluid-dynamics model for
the swimmer must be created and validated experimentally. This model will be
used to optimize the swimmer's geometry. Secondly, a robust swimmer controller
will be built. The controller must be able to compensate for the variable blood
flow present in the arteries. An ultrasound scanner will be used to track the
position of the swimmer and obtain useful information about its environment. For
example, the velocity of the swimmer can be used to infer the blood flow
velocity. Finally, the feasibility of several surgical procedures will be
studied via ex-vivo experiments. 3D navigation together with the removal of
human blood clots will be performed inside a human heart phantom. Several
swimmers end effectors will also be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.