* 1932091
* CPS: Medium: Safety-Critical Cyber-Physical Systems: From Validation &amp; Verification to Test &amp; Evaluation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Richard Murray, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,199,209.00

The goal of this project is to advance the state of the art in autonomous Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS) by integrating tools from computer science and control
theory. With the rise in deployment of autonomous CPS--from automotive to
aerospace to robotic systems--there is a pressing need to verify and validate
properties of these systems and thereby ensure their safe operation. The work
will help establish the scientific basis for test and evaluation methods
applicable to CPS, especially as they interact with other agents and the world
in highly dynamic ways. This has the potential to inform the development and
deployment of complex CPS in a variety of application domains: from (semi-)
autonomous cars, to safety features in aviation, to robotic systems for
industrial applications and space exploration. The appeal of dynamic CPS will be
utilized to broaden participation in computing and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of this project is to establish the
scientific foundations for the verification and validation of highly dynamic
safety-critical CPS operating in complex environments. The key novelty is a
rigorous approach that leverages control barrier functions on the underlying
nonlinear dynamics to provide guarantees of set invariance yielding: safety-
critical abstractions on which to specify and verify desired properties, formal
methods certifying system-level designs against those properties, and design
rules that allow adaptation and machine learning to be integrated with control
barrier functions thereby preserving system safety and performance
specifications. Proof-of-concept experimental demonstrations will be performed
on CPS that are autonomous, dynamic and safety-critical, e.g., robotic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.