* 1932326
* CPS: Small: Trajectory-Based Cyber-Physical Networks: Theoretical Foundation and a Practical Implementation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Hossein Pishro-Nik, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 520,878.00

Many emerging cyber physical systems are composed of a large number of mobile
intelligent agents. In these systems, each agent travels along a trajectory that
is often not pre-determined. At any time interval, new agents might appear in
the system, and some existing agents might disappear. Additionally, these agents
are normally capable of communicating with each other or outside stations using
wireless communications. We refer to these systems as Trajectory-Based Cyber-
Physical Networks (TCN). Examples of such systems are abundant and range from
future generations of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) to networks of human or
robot agents that are deployed in an area to perform missions such as disaster
recovery. The goal of this research is (1) to develop a unifying theory called
"Trajectory Process Theory" for TCNs, and (2) to design, implement, and test two
specific real-life TCNs based on the proposed theory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research has two main thrusts: Thrust 1 builds the foundations of Trajectory
Process Theory. Thrust 2 applies the theory to UAS technologies, specifically
aerial base stations and unmanned aircraft delivery systems. This research
brings together concepts from probability theory, stochastic geometry, wireless
networks, and transportation engineering. The proposed research can directly
impact the design of important emerging real life systems such as UASs.
Educational and outreach activities including workshops for underrepresented
groups as well as creating open educational content are
undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.