* 1932196
* CPS:Medium:Collaborative Research: High-Fidelity High-Resolution and Secure Monitoring and Control of Future Grids: a synergy of AI, data science, and hardware security
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Joe Chow, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

The increasing presence of renewable generations and distributed energy
resources in transmission systems heightens the need for fast-timescale
situational awareness for system reliability, resiliency, and both the
operational and cyber security. Despite the invention of phasor measurement
units that promised close-to-real-time monitoring of the system states, the
limited deployment of phasor measurement units had hampered the ability of the
system operator to uncover trends of instability, react to system contingencies,
and detect malicious attacks on the power grid. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research develops new hardware and software solutions for high-fidelity, high-
resolution, and secure monitoring and control of the future grid. By harnessing
and exploiting the increasingly abundant and diverse data sources and through
novel applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence, this
research advances the state-of-the-art monitoring of cyber-physical systems in
three fronts. First, this research develops machine learning approaches to high-
resolution state estimation for power systems that are unobservable by existing
phasor measurement units. Second, this research offers new solutions to
detecting and mitigating data anomaly caused by malfunctions of sensors,
communications systems, and cyber attacks by adversarial agents. Third, this
research develops a new hardware architecture and prototypes for future digital
substations that provide hardware-based security. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research has broader impacts on enhancing national security in critical
infrastructures, promoting economic competitiveness through accelerated adoption
of phasor measurement technology, and broadening participation of women and
under-represented minority groups in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.