* 1932480
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: A Secure Communication Framework with Verifiable Authenticity for Immutable Services in Industrial IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Song Han, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 265,866.00

Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) systems are used in a wide range of
mission- and safety-critical applications, thus imposing stringent requirements
on the security of the underlying communication infrastructure. An IIoT network
consists of multiple communication parties and follows a two-way communication
model, including delivering sensing data on the uplink and transmitting control
messages on the downlink. Tampered sensing data or control messages by outside
attackers will result in wrong decisions, potentially causing significant harm.
The recent trend in industrial automation to connect interdependent industrial
plants together to provide decentralized, verifiable and immutable services
further exacerbates the problem. This project aims to design 1) efficient
signature schemes to support verifiable authenticity, integrity, and uniformity
for intra-plant two-way communications, and 2) hierarchical and scalable
blockchain protocols to support inter-plant immutable services. The close
collaboration of the research teams will lead to a publicly available IIoT-
enabled advanced manufacturing testbed, effective dissemination of research
results among practitioners, and initiation of technology
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address existing limitations, the proposed
secure communication framework aims to (i) ensure authenticity, integrity, and
uniformity of sensing data in IIoT networks by designing novel signature schemes
that are fast and efficient for both the signer and the verifier; (ii) enable
public-key cryptography (PKC)-based fast control message authentication by
extending the control border of IIoT networks to the cloud/Internet and solving
the new security challenges; and (iii) provide inter-plant immutable services by
developing a hierarchical blockchain structure and scalable lightweight
consensus protocols. The proposed solutions will be implemented and deployed on
a unique IIoT-enabled advanced manufacturing system testbed for thorough design
validation and performance evaluation. Successful design, implementation and
demonstration of the proposed security solutions should advance the adoption of
IIoT network infrastructure, accelerate the transformation of legacy security
architectures to PKC-based security architectures and lift the security
protection of the industrial communication infrastructure to the next
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.