* 1932288
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research:Virtual Sully: Autopilot with Multilevel Adaptation for Handling Large Uncertainties
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Evangelos Theodorou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

During normal operations an aircraft is operated by its autopilot. When the
autopilot sense a dangerous condition, near or outside of the flight envelope,
the autopilot disengages itself, returning control to the pilot. Well-trained
pilots typically can deal with modest out-of-envelope challenges. A pilot who
can deal with a significantly compromised flight envelope is very remarkable as
happened with Captain Chesley Sullenberger ("Sully") and co-pilot Jeffrey Skiles
on US Airways Flight 1549 in 2009 when the aircraft struck a flock of geese just
northeast of the George Washington Bridge and suddenly lost all engine power
over Manhattan. The pilots glided their plane extraordinarily skillfully to a
ditching in the Hudson River off Midtown Manhattan, saving all the passengers
and averting a catastrophic crash in New York City. The National Transportation
Safety Board official described it as the most successful ditching in aviation
history. This capability to operate safely despite the exceptional situation
well-outside the norm is the essence of this project, Virtual
Sully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtual Sully technology is a development towards
full pilotless autonomy, capable of identifying the failure/fault, estimating
the remaining control authority, assessing the environment and planning a new
feasible mission, doing path planning and executing it safely within the
compromised flight envelope. This architecture replaces the traditional top-down
one-way adaptation between mission planning, trajectory generation, tracking and
stabilizing controller, with a two-way adaptation between mission planning,
trajectory generation, and the adaptation of controller parameters to improve
the stability and robustness of the control system. The following thrusts are
considered: 1) monitoring and capability auditing; 2) high-assurance control
with multi-level adaptation; 3) fault-tolerant architecture for unmanned
autonomous systems (UAS) with real-time guarantees; 4) development of hardware-
in-the loop simulation environment and flight tests using unmanned air vehicle
(UAV) prototypes. Fault-tolerant computing infrastructure that can withstand
high-stress situations will be integrated within flight control architecture
that adapts at multiple levels. The feasibility evaluation of the missions and
regenerated trajectories within UAV's remaining capabilities is pursued with
real-time guarantees. The testbed is based on hardware-in-the-loop simulation
for various failures, as well as extensive tests using real
UAVs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.