* 1932631
* Design and Development: Engineering and Empathy Pre-K/K
* ENG,EEC
* 11/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Michelle Cerrone, Childrens Museum Boston
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 10/31/2022
* USD 342,938.00

Effectively solving engineering problems requires application of a broad array
of skills. Recently, college-level engineering education researchers, as well as
professional engineering organizations such as the National Academy of
Engineering, have highlighted the important role of empathy in the engineering
field. Children begin to build the foundations for exhibiting empathy early on,
that is, between the ages of 4 and 6. This is also a time when children are
exploring their world through building with blocks and designing their own
instruments; naturally exhibiting tendencies to engineer. The Creating
Integrated Engineering and Empathy Curriculum for Pre-Kindergarten and
Kindergarten Classrooms project will research the potential to positively impact
educators and students through the teaching and learning of integrated
engineering and empathy curriculum in pre-kindergarten (pre-K) and kindergarten
(K) classrooms. Early education teachers have an opportunity to introduce and
positively position engineering as an engaging discipline, but they can only do
so when supported with high-quality curriculum and appropriate training.
Explicitly integrating engineering and empathy at the pre-K/K level represents
an innovative approach that leverages early childhood educators' strengths in
supporting social development, which could increase educator comfort and
likelihood of implementation. This work could also have profound impacts on
participating students. Integrating empathy and engineering helps to position
engineering as a caring profession, which can have positive impacts on interest
in future careers, particularly for females. Better understanding the potential
for early framing of engineering as a caring, empathic profession could have
significant implications for broadening participation in engineering careers.
Increasing the ability to incorporate integrated engineering and empathy in
pre-K/K classrooms will pave the way for our youngest learners, the engineers
and engaged citizenry of tomorrow, to practice and deepen the empathic
capacities critical for the global workforce of the
future&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boston Children's Museum, in partnership with
Education Development Center|Center for Children and Technology and Boston
Public Schools, will apply a design-based research approach to creating
developmentally appropriate, hands-on engineering activities that explicitly
integrate empathy (which, for purposes of this project, will be defined as the
ability to imagine, describe, and understand the emotions of another) and
engineering for prekindergarten and kindergarten classrooms. The project
research and development teams will work closely with stakeholders (educators,
curriculum specialists, and district representatives) to achieve three main
goals: (1) design an integrated engineering and empathy intervention model that
meets the needs, priorities, and contexts of each stakeholder group, (2)
establish preliminary evidence about the potential of the intervention to impact
teachers and children, and (3) contribute to nascent research about what high
quality, integrated engineering and empathy instruction looks like in early
learning settings, specifically pre-K and K. This project will develop a set of
engineering activities (the curriculum module) and teacher supports (including a
professional development workshop) to support early childhood educators in
bringing integrated engineering and empathy to their young students, and a set
of design principles for the development of integrated engineering and empathy
activities for the pre-K/K classroom. Project research will contribute to
understandings in two main areas: (1) design considerations for developing high-
quality integrated engineering and empathy resources for pre-K/K and the
educator and student supports needed, and (2) establish the potential for these
resources to impact pre-K/K educator understandings and perceptions of their
ability to introduce engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.