* 1932129
* Time-dependent Effects of Wildfire Ash and Root Decay on Hydrologic Behavior and Shallow Landslide Susceptibility of Wildfire-Burnt Slopes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Idil Akin, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 196,286.00

An increased incidence of wildfires combined with high-intensity storms due to
climate change has increased the wetting-induced shallow landslide
susceptibility of hillslopes. Post-wildfire landslides and debris flows in
recent years in the Western US have caused dozens of fatalities and tremendous
economic loss. This project will deliver a framework specific to wildfire-burnt
slopes for analyzing shallow landslide susceptibility of hillslopes with time.
The new framework could be used to identify critical slopes and prevent
catastrophic events that threatens human life, infrastructure, or natural
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand why
and how the shallow landslide susceptibility of wildfire-burnt slopes changes
with time and saturation due to root decay and transport of wildfire ash. A
hillslope will be instrumented with suction and water content sensors
immediately after a wildfire to determine the evolution of water retention
behavior over time. Field samples will be collected monthly and scanned using
X-ray computed tomography (XCT) to quantify macropore volume over time. The
decay rate of fine roots will be quantified using laboratory-controlled burn
experiments and XCT scans. The migration of wildfire ash into soil will be
identified through saturated hydraulic conductivity tests. A suction-based slope
stability analysis will be used to evaluate the change in the shallow landslide
susceptibility of a wildfire-burnt slope with time and saturation. The
understanding generated in the proposed research will be the first step toward
forming a novel and complete framework specific to post-wildfire slope stability
analysis as a function of time and saturation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.