* 1932984
* Development and Application of Multi-scale Modeling to Biomolecular Association
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Chia-en Chang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 542,658.00

Accurate and timely molecular recognition is fundamental to all biological
processes. In metabolic assembly (or disassembly) lines, sequential participants
are thought to co-localize to maximize the rate at which a final product can
emerge from a multi-step pathway. The investigator proposes to computationally
simulate biosynthetic pathway networks in an effort to understand how, despite
the complexity of the cellular milieu, binding partners are able to find each
other, and biosynthetic pathway flux can be maximized. Through iterations of
experiments with collaborators and computation, the investigator will model and
predict the effects of co-localization of enzyme activities (the participants)
on pathway flux. The overarching goal of the work is to develop software that
allows one to accurately simulate how molecular partners find each other in the
complex environment of the cell. The work has application to biosensor
development, as sensors must also be able to detect their specific targets in a
congested and chaotic environment. The project will also contribute to the
training of graduate and undergraduate students. A summer workshop will be
organized to train students from local community colleges, universities and high
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular association, in which two or more
molecules must find one another, is the first critical step for all biochemical
catalysis and (bio)sensing techniques. The project combines multi-level
simulations, theoretical work and experimental collaboration to investigate
molecular recognition and kinetic enhancements in multi-enzyme systems. To
accelerate the overall product synthesis rate, several factors may be considered
in designing a multi-enzyme scaffold, including geometry, local charge
distribution, and network motions. The design of biosensors is informed by the
binding mechanisms of a target and probe. The project explores novel ideas and
incorporates results from experiments, atomistic molecular dynamics (MD), and
Brownian dynamics (BD) simulations to investigate multi-enzyme nanostructures
and large-scale membrane bound biosensors, either in vitro or a cell-like
environment. The results offer insight into multi-enzyme and biosensor systems
that will inform engineering and biosensor design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.