* 1932689
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Research funding, organizational context, and transformative research: New insights from new methods and data
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* julia lane, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 323,749.00

A major goal of research funding is to support transformative science. A
challenge to achieving this goal, however, is determining what kinds of research
funding will lead to such transformations. This work examines the extent to
which funding acts to change the organizational context within which research
takes place and how that stimulates transformative science. The results of this
work will help inform the practice of both science and innovation policy by
building better understanding of such organizational factors as team size,
composition, seniority and gender in stimulating innovation. The resulting
practical insights should help inform how to direct funding to support
collaborative networks and support the careers of junior and female scientists.
Access will be available through both the Virtual Data Enclave at the Institute
for Research on Innovation and Science and the Federal Statistical Research Data
Centers; the work should act as magnet for junior researchers who are developing
their career research agendas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis is made
possible by a new longitudinal dataset containing information about research
scientists, their organizations, their career trajectories and their
productivity--particularly their patenting activity. A major innovation is a new
method that measures transformativeness by capturing the degree to which new
ideas in the patents make existing work obsolete. The combination of the new
data and new methods are used to (1) describe the broader formal and informal
context within which research takes place, (2) characterize transformational
research, and (3) describe the link between the two. The econometric approach
makes use of two novel instruments - quasi-random variation in the geographic
and organizational distribution of potential collaborators both within and
outside of an institution - to control for potential selection and other
confounding factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.