* 1932312
* Benchmark Data Set for Damage Mechanics Challenge on Brittle-Ductile Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Laura Pyrak-Nolte, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 89,853.00

The reliability and sustainability of civil infrastructure, the human body and
the Earth's subsurface all depend on our ability to monitor existing and
evolving damage. Damage is a key mode of failure of civil infrastructure,
components of the human body and subsurface storage, but it is of the highest
importance for the success of enhanced energy production from geothermal and
traditional subsurface reservoirs. As artificial intelligence methods advance in
the detection of anomalous signals in data from sensors, methods are needed to
link these readings to the underlying physics/mechanics of failure to determine
if failure is imminent. This requires robust computational methods that capture
the physics of failure and identify the measurable signatures of failure. While
there are many computational approaches for simulating damage, few have been
ground-truth tested with either known experimental data or with blind data sets.
This research will generate a benchmark laboratory data set to initiate a damage
mechanics challenge to compare computational approaches on damage evolution in
brittle-ductile material. The generation of this dataset will be of great
benefit to the advancement of material models, to the comparison of predictions
among different numerical approaches, and most importantly create a high-quality
database of experimental data that can be used in the future by the engineering
community. The broader impact is critical testing of an array of computational
methods used to predict damage and failure. Understanding the failure of
materials is particularly relevant today with the current interest in the
nation?s aging infrastructure and in enhanced geothermal systems which require a
network of fractures to optimize production. Our outreach objective is to obtain
a benchmark dataset for a computational challenge and for training graduate and
undergraduate students in methods for verification of computational models; to
provide a forum for open discussions of numerical approaches for failure, and to
provide a vetted computational community of scientists and engineers to address
damage/failure issues and to work with industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
benchmark laboratory data set will be generated for a damage mechanics challenge
to compare computational approaches on damage evolution in brittle-ductile
materials. The experimental design was developed as a community effort at a
Damage Mechanics Workshop held at Purdue University in February 2019, which
included lead computational scientists and engineers in the field of damage
mechanics. The benchmark laboratory datasets will include spatial and temporal
measurements from traditional digital load-displacement sensors, 3D digital
image correlation to map surface deformations, 3D X-ray microscopy to ground-
truth the crack-failure geometry, and laser profilometry to capture surface
roughness. The samples will be fabricated through additive manufacturing methods
(e.g. 3D printing) to produce repeatable samples designed to fail in controlled
ways. These methods were selected to ensure that participant-defined repeatable
and unbiased metrics were available to quantitatively assess and measure the
quality of the theoretical and data-driven models, given the significant
influence of inherent uncertainty and variability on the onset and mode of
failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.