* 1932602
* CPS: Medium: Deep Integration of Thin Flexible Autonomous Microsystems for Vision Correction
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Carlos Mastrangelo, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,199,998.00

The goal of this work is the realization of autonomous cyber-physical,
microsystems for automated correction of blurred vision using flexible
electronic contact lenses. The vision correction system integrates thin variable
power lenses with object distance microsensors and computation and control
software to continuously produce sharply-focused images in individuals suffering
from presbyopia. Presbyopia, or loss of the eye's ability to change focus, is an
inevitable and universal age-related condition that affects aging adults,
causing blurred images and visual impairment. In 2018, two billion people
worldwide were estimated to suffer from presbyopia. The proposed vision
correction microsystem operates autonomously while collecting energy from its
surrounding environment in order to provide continuous vision correction for an
entire day. Realization of such microsystems advances our scientific knowledge
of autonomous microsystem engineering for medical applications, ultimately
improving the daily lives and well-being of billions of aging adults while
reducing the cost of treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The implementation of
autonomous microsystems for vision correction requires deep integration of
ultrathin state-of-the-art inhomogeneous microtechnologies including variable
power liquid-crystal lenses, paper-thin embedded microprocessors and
communications circuits with tens of millions of transistors, paper-thin
microsensors to detect light level, user orientation and focal distance, and
thin photovoltaic cells with power management circuits, all integrated onto a
single flexible package that conforms to the surface of the human eye. The
system must be able to scavenge power and manage its operation completely
autonomously, in the best possible way, in a resource-limited biological
environment. Advancements in systems with these characteristics are widely
applicable to many future cyber physical systems (CPS) for medical and health
monitoring applications. This extremely ambitious project pushes the frontiers
of inhomogeneous microtechnology integration to a level that has been repeatedly
dreamed of, but never realized before, to produce a highly integrated CPS that
can benefit billions of people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.