* 1932775
* Conference: Planning and Development of a Nearshore Extreme Event Reconnaissance (NEER); Arlington, Virginia; August 5-6, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Britt Raubenheimer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 49,650.00

This grant funds a conference to be held August 5-6, 2019 in Arlington,
Virginia, titled Planning and Development of a Nearshore Extreme Event
Reconnaissance (NEER). The objective of the conference is to bring together
experienced members of the extreme event community, and a broad group of
scientists to develop a coordinated effort to address key hypotheses, to support
pre- and post-storm site characterization and collection of socio-economic data,
to plan for deployment of instruments to record during-storm measurements, to
consider interactions and feedbacks between the natural and built environments
and human actions and reactions, and to enable safe, pre- and post-storm
activities. This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to
promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare. In this
case, the benefits will be insights to improve resilience of coastal
communities, which will save lives and economic losses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework for a coordinated response to extreme
coastal storms that is developed during this conference will enable collection
of perishable data needed to understand storm impacts on the natural and built
environments and human residents which ultimately will lead to more resilient
coastal communities. During the conference, participants will meet in groups of
5 to 8 where smaller groups will focus on: 1) organizational structure, 2)
protocols, 3) issues for pre-event deployments, and 4) integration and
coordination. This conference connects researchers from several disciplines who
study the impacts of hazardous storms enabling convergence of research methods
and ideas within the fields of engineering, geosciences, biology, and socio-
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.