* 1932769
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Knowledge Work and Coordination to Improve O&amp;M and IT Collaboration to Keep Our Buildings Smart AND Secure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Carrie Dossick, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 753,104.00

Government organizations, businesses, and universities are increasingly adding
Internet of Things (IoT) devices, such as room occupancy sensors, into their
buildings. As these sensors are connected to the internet and networked to
building technology (such as heating and lights), an attacker could shut down a
building or steal sensitive information. While technical solutions exist,
implementation of these solutions are impeded by the challenges that an
organization's information technology (IT) staff and a building's operations and
management (O&amp;M) staff have when they fail to work closely together and
share their knowledge about computer security and how buildings operate. These
difficulties arise from different ways of working and different points of view
about how technology works. This project addresses these challenges through
studying two critical areas: (1) how O&amp;M and IT currently share their
knowledge and skills and work together to improve IoT security and (2) how
public policies and an organization's own rules regarding privacy and security
impact how IT and O&amp;M collaborate. The results of this study will generate
knowledge around how IT and O&amp;M professionals can work better together to
improve the security of our nation's buildings and offer insights into how
public policy may affect professional cybersecurity
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify how legal and
organizational policies and procedures interact with daily work practices to
either support or limit how O&amp;M and IT staff share their expertise and
coordinate their work to collaborate on IoT security issues. The research team
will conduct observations, interviews, and document analyses, first observing
and interviewing IT and O&amp;M staff on collaborative cybersecurity efforts in
three U.S. universities and analyzing university documents related to IoT
cybersecurity. The research team will concurrently conduct interviews with IT
and O&amp;M security experts from across the U.S. as well as create a set of
comparative case studies of university O&amp;M and IT IoT security efforts. This
research will be followed by a final set of expert interviews. The research team
will identify key methods that support IT and O&amp;M collaboration and develop
a theoretical model to provide a holistic view of how organization, policy, and
practice interact and affect collaboration intended to keep IoT safe and secure.
This research will also provide clear examples of how policies, procedures, and
practices used in organizations today are supporting or impeding collaboration
between IT and O&amp;M professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.