* 1932899
* Low-Temperature Laser-Sinterable Nanostructured Feedstock to Improve the Speed of Metal 3D Printing, and to Enable Polymer-Metal Concomitant Printing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Bruno Azeredo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Metal additive manufacturing (AM) technologies rely on high-energy laser
sintering of powder feedstock to fabricate high-strength, complex shaped, metal
components for the aerospace, defense and medical industries. Laser enabled AM
requires large amounts of energy to generate sufficiently high temperatures
(500-1500 C) to sinter the feedstock, thus making it a notably slow process
sometimes needing days to print 0.3 cubic meters of material. Recent studies on
metal nanomaterials revealed they have unique properties that include reduced
sintering temperatures (200-750 C), and enhanced heat generation resulting from
laser light-matter interaction at the nano-scale. In this project, the laser
interaction with a new class of AM-compatible nanostructured metal powder
feedstock will be investigated. Attention will be given to tailoring the new
feedstock so as to reduce the thermal energy and processing time requirements
for sintering. If successful, this approach could eliminate the need for high-
energy laser sources in additive metal processes, bringing capital and
operational costs down, improving safety and expanding its industrial
application. Further, realizing low-temperature sinterable metal feedstock is a
step towards generating viable polymer-metal interfaces via additive processes;
currently this is challenging as the polymer can undergo thermal degradation at
current metal sintering temperatures (&gt;500 C). Metal-polymer co-processing
would allow academics and the medical industry to print bio-inspired knee-
implants mimicking not only human hard tissues (e.g. bone) but also soft ones
(e.g. ligaments). In addition to the technical aspects, this project supports a
summer graduate student traineeship, and a high-school competition in additive
manufacturing; both activities aim to attract and train the next-generation of
manufacturing engineers and scientists required for future US workforce
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoporous metal powders, e.g. with ligament size
smaller than 50 nm, can be generated via dealloying methods. As their surface
topography differs from solid particles generated via gas atomization they
interact differently with incident laser beams. This project seeks to understand
both the synthesis and laser sintering of nanoporous metal powder. Research
focused on the synthesis of mesoporous metal powders will determine the physics
and limitations of pore formation and control via chemical dealloying. The
interaction of these novel particles with the laser source will be studied to
elucidate how localized surface plasmon resonance within the ligaments of the
pores can promote light-matter interaction during the sintering process, and how
size-dependent melt-point suppression reduces the laser energy density and dwell
requirements for processing. Research tasks include: 1) an investigation of the
process-structure mapping of dealloying of metal alloys to quantify the role of
adatom clustering in the pore formation theory, 2) experimental work to
understand the scaling laws of mesoporous metal joining, 3) characterization of
the stages of microstructural morphology evolution upon laser exposure such as
pore coarsening, and 4) mechanical characterization of 3D printed specimens to
elucidate the fundamental limit on the interfacial strength of low-temperature
welded metal-metal and metal-polymer parts. If successful, this fundamental
knowledge can be leveraged to improve the speed of metal AM and increase its
combability with thermoplastics for simultaneous printing of polymers and
metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.