* 1932762
* Support for Participation of US Students to the 11th International Conference on Porous Metals and Metallic Foams (MetFoam 2019); Dearborn, Michigan; August 20-23, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Justin Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial travel support for 10 graduate
students, post-docs and young investigators to attend the 11th International
Conference on Porous Metals and Metallic Foams to be held from August 20-23,
2019 in Dearborn, Michigan. The conference focuses on new developments in the
field of metallic foam and porous metal manufacturing science and engineering.
The students present their research at the conference and exchange ideas with
leading researchers and engineers from U.S. and international institutions.
Travel grants for the students are based on diverse institutional
representation. Priority is given to student participants who are women or who
come from underrepresented groups. This approach promotes diverse participation
at the conference. This award benefits the nation through the education and
training of a skilled and diverse engineering workforce better prepared to
provide transformative solutions to challenges in their chosen
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to benefit
the students' professional, scientific and technical development. Participants
are given an opportunity to nurture a global vision in advanced manufacturing
and learn about the latest developments in the field. A wide range of topics are
presented to stimulate learning and training. These include additive
manufacturing, freeze casting, fabrication, scalability, design,
characterization, properties and industrial applications. Participating students
learn by attending technical presentations by leading international experts in
porous metals and metallic foams, and by interacting with fellow researchers
from around the world. These experiences foster new ideas and a deeper
fundamental understanding, which helps shape future of research in advanced
manufacturing science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.