* 1932185
* SaTC: EDU: Collaborative: An Educational Initiative on Cybersecurity in Additive Manufacturing
* EDU,DGE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2022
* Xiangdong Li, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 35,966.00

Additive manufacturing (AM), widely known as 3D printing, is the process of
making three dimensional objects from a digital file. AM is enabling product
innovation in a wide range of fields including automobiles, aircraft,
spacecraft, toys, consumer products, food and medical implants and devices. A 3D
printer is now located on the International Space Station to print parts on
demand. Such high-value parts are designed by making extensive use of design,
simulation and analysis tools, including high-performance computing, and make
use of cloud-based resources throughout the process chain. In this project, New
York University (NYU) is partnering with New York City College of Technology
(City Tech) to educate students and to engage a wide range of stakeholders as
the project builds capacity in the emerging field of AM security. The project
will first develop an introductory graduate level course on AM security to be
taught at both schools. This course will be part of a new Master of Science
program and a new certificate program, both in AM. An on-line version of the
course will also be offered. Complementing the course, the project will organize
the HACK3D hackathon to build the security mindset of students for approaching
digital manufacturing. In addition, the project will start an annual workshop
and undergraduate summer research program in innovative research on the
cybersecurity of digital manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational
framework in this project will be first of its kind to address the security
challenge in AM field by a collaborative team of a mechanical engineer and a
computer science cybersecurity expert. The NYU team has pioneered the AM attack
taxonomy and design-based security scheme that are the core areas of this
project. The security scheme requires a collaborative approach because
innovative design features are embedded in the 3D solid models and extensively
tested for possible breaches according to the proposed taxonomy of threats. The
interdisciplinary framework by this project enables the creation of a cross-
disciplinary course on cybersecurity in AM. The associated educational and
continuing resources will prepare many undergraduates and graduate students as
well as working professionals in cybersecurity in AM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.