* 1932963
* Electrobiofabricated thin films for redox-linked bioelectronics
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Biology uses reduction-oxidation (redox) reactions (reactions in which a
reactant in a chemical reaction gains one or more electrons) to perform
important functions: energy harvesting (respiration); biosynthesis (production
of a chemical compound by a living organism); defense (inflammation); and
communication (redox signaling). The investigators' unique insight is that the
electrical features of this redox modality--the "flow" of electrons through
redox reactions--is accessible through simple electrode-based instrumentation
and that applications can be developed to both observe (sense) and intervene-in
(actuate) biological systems. The research team plans to develop the fundamental
theories and methods needed to build and characterize a materials-interface for
the "redox-based translation" between the molecular language of biology and the
electrical language of modern devices. The investigators envision that redox-
linked bioelectronics will enable a new generation of bioelectronic applications
for medicine (e.g., for point-of-care diagnosis), commerce (e.g., wearable
electronics), and the environment (e.g., remote sensing). Through this project
the investigators will continue nurturing their research ecosystem that: (i)
crosses disciplines and spans the globe; (ii) generates new theories/methods and
iteratively accelerates their testing through diverse collaborations with
problem-focused researchers; (iii) leverages contributions from basic and
applied scientists/engineers from government, academia and the private sector;
and (iv) disseminates these advances through individualized training (e.g., of
graduate, undergraduate and high school researchers as well as teacher-training
summer programs), integration into undergraduate curricula (at the community
college, undergraduate college and minority serving university levels), and
transfer to the public (by hosting specialized technical conferences and
generating videos for the general public).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
vision of this project is to fuse the orthogonal information processing
capabilities of biology and electronics through redox-linked bioelectronics. The
focus of this project is on a subset of problems involving communication through
a redox-signaling modality that is used by the immune system for inflammation
and wound healing. The Research Plan is organized under three objectives. The
FIRST objective is "Electro-bio-fabrication to Build the Bio-Device Interface."
Hydrogel-based interfaces (i.e., films) will be created using an iterative
approach that "teaches" how electrical signals can guide the emergence of
complex structure from self-assembling polysaccharides (chitosans). The
investigators propose to optimize the chitosan-based fabrication by controlling
the local electrical field, salt concentration and electrostatic crosslinking.
Advanced computational simulation and machine-learning will be implemented to
gain mechanistic understanding of the fabrication process. The ability to
controllably organize and reconfigure bio-based soft matter will enable the
creation of adaptive, compatible, high-performance and sustainable materials
systems for a range of life science applications. The SECOND Objective is
"Electrochemistry to Discover and Characterize Materials." Novel electrochemical
methods will be used for the automated, adaptive and ultimately autonomous
discovery and characterization of materials that can control the transport
(i.e., flow) of electrons and molecules. The simplicity, speed and data-richness
of redox-based electrochemical measurements facilitates coupling to machine
learning, and these capabilities could shift the paradigm for "chemical
information" from a chemistry perspective (composition and concentration) to an
information theory perspective. Such a paradigm shift could both improve
reliability and facilitate translation for point-of-care and wearable
electronics. The THIRD Objective is "Redox to Link Bio-electronic
Communication." Test bed demonstrations will integrate activities across
objectives. Synthetic biology constructs will be generated as observable
"information processors" for a microfluidic gut-on-a-chip model of the
microbiome. The immediate goal is to demonstrate that these multilayer films
allow a bi-directional "flow" of molecularly-based redox information. These test
bed studies are expected to provide the technical knowledge needed to build
devices (e.g., capsular endoscopy systems) that can survey a redox environment
and contribute to sculpting this environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.