* 1932638
* Synergy between oxide and nitride phases of a novel composite cathode for high-temperature electrocatalytic NH3 synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Umit Ozkan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 490,360.00

This project focuses on a strategy for producing ammonia from N2 and H2O
electrocatalytically at atmospheric pressure. The conventional route for ammonia
(NH3) production is the Haber-Bosch (HB) process, which involves converting
nitrogen and hydrogen through a thermo-catalytic reaction at high temperatures
and high pressures. The demand for ammonia has been continuously increasing due
to its widespread use in several industrial sectors including agriculture
(approximately 80% of the produced ammonia is used to make fertilizer),
transportation, pharmaceuticals, explosives, as well as the energy sector as a
promising indirect hydrogen storage medium. Considering the increasing demand
for NH3 and the highly energy-intensive nature of the conventional process with
significant CO2 emissions, a cleaner and less energy-intensive alternative will
have a significant economic and environmental impact. In addition, this project
has the potential to provide new insights into the material synthesis and
characterization, the mechanistic steps and the electro-catalytic phenomena,
which can be translated to other catalytic and electrocatalytic systems for
environmentally-important processes such as electrocatalytic reduction of NOx
and CO2 electrolysis. Research activities proposed here will be integrated with
established education and outreach programs at the Ohio State University with
the ultimate goal of increasing student participation, retention and graduation
in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
develop highly active and selective cathode electro-catalysts for the high-
temperature electrosynthesis of ammonia in solid oxide electrolysis cell
(SOEC)-type reactors. The high-temperature (400-600 degrees C) electrocatalytic
ammonia synthesis will involve dissociation of H2O to form H+ and O2- and the
electrocatalytic activation of N2, followed by reaction with H+ to form NH3. In
this scheme, O2- ions are conducted through the oxide ion conducting electrolyte
to the anode, where they form molecular oxygen. In this study, we will examine a
composite cathode system which is composed of perovskite oxides and
metallic/bimetallic nitride/oxynitrides and we will investigate the synergy
between these phases. The rationale of using a composite system is that the
perovskite oxide phase will catalyze the H2O dissociation and provide oxide ion
and electronic conductivity while the nitride/oxynitride phase will promote the
N2 activation and provide nitrogen ion mobility. To the best of our knowledge,
such a synergistic effect has never been reported before. Our approach to study
the high-temperature electrocatalytic production of ammonia concept and to
investigate an oxide/nitride composite cathode for this purpose will involve an
iterative process of material synthesis, ex-situ/in-situ/operando
characterization and electrocatalytic activity tests. The knowledge gained in
this project will help open up a new route ammonia synthesis from N2 and H2O. It
will also help develop similar electrolysis/electrocatalytic cells for
environmentally-important processes such as electrocatalytic reduction of NOx
and co-electrolysis of CO2 and H2O for syngas production. In addition to its
potential contribution to the high-temperature electrocatalytic ammonia
synthesis literature, the proposed study has significant potential to provide
valuable insights in electrocatalysis, materials synthesis, surface chemistry
and kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.