* 1932482
* CPS: Small: Intelligent Prediction of Traffic Conditions via Integrated Data-Driven Crowdsourcing and Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Qi Han, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 11/30/2023
* USD 530,204.00

This project aims to radically transform traffic management, emergency response,
and urban planning practices via predictive analytics on rich data streams from
increasingly prevalent instrumented and connected vehicles, infrastructure, and
people. Road safety and congestion are a formidable challenge for communities.
Current incident management practices are largely reactive in response to road
user reports. With the outcome of this project, cities could proactively deploy
assets and manage traffic. This would reduce emergency response times, saving
lives, and minimizing disruptions to traffic. Efforts are planned in
Kindergarten-12 outreach, undergraduate education, outreach to women and
minority students, and incorporation of the research into courses, with the goal
to inspire and train a diverse cohort for the next-generation of scientists and
prepare them for taking on challenges arising from smart and connected
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the envisioned system, an
integrated research approach is taken to tackle the following closely related
research tasks: (1) integration of heterogeneous data streams using a new sparse
multi-task multi-view feature fusing method; (2) prediction of traffic incidents
by designing a novel high-order low-rank model; (3) teaming of connected
vehicles and roadside sensor systems; (4) verification of traffic condition
prediction by crowdsourcing the ground truth from user reports in real-time; (5)
selection of crowdsourcing participants that recruits and selects voluntary
operators of instrumented connected vehicles to provide onboard sensing
readings; (6) selection of high quality and diverse images and videos from
crowdsourcing vehicles to provide better data for traffic prediction; and 7)
design of optimal rerouting strategies to improve commuters' routes in the time
of potential traffic disruption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.