* 1932780
* Molecular Characterization of Interacting Bacterial Regulatory Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Lydia Contreras, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2024
* USD 663,024.00

Bacteria have networks of regulatory systems to facilitate survival in a variety
of potentially harmful environments such as those containing low levels of
essential nutrients or high levels of anti-bacterial agents. Ultimately, these
regulatory systems allow bacteria to cope with damaging environments by
mediating expression of stress-associated genes, which in turn make the bacteria
more resistant. The long-term goal of this project is to better understand how
stress-associated regulatory systems alter gene expression and promote bacterial
resistance. This project focuses on two RNA binding proteins that are involved
in post-transcriptional regulation and are part of different global stress
response systems; the mechanisms of co-regulation by the RNA binding proteins
and stress response pathways will be determined. This project will support the
training of three undergraduates and the interdisciplinary training of two
graduate students. This project will also facilitate broader outreach to a low-
income underrepresented community through the existing "Raising Future
Scientists" program and to a senior living center where public science talks
will be given.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of the decisions that are
"computed" in cells in response to the environment is one of the main objectives
of modern cellular and biomolecular engineering. Although an important feature
of environmental stress responses is that they are mediated by dynamic "DNA
decoding networks," understanding of the molecular mechanisms that regulate
their coordination is in its infancy. For instance, two fundamental questions of
global biological stress-response networks are: (i) how exclusive are target
interactions amongst different regulators in the cell and, (ii) how do targets
compete for regulators, particularly under different stresses? Moreover, is it
is intriguing to think about: how could different interactions between a target
and competing regulators change the fate (i.e. stability, degradation patterns
etc.) of the target, particularly during stress? To get insight into these
questions, the researchers propose to use the E. coli carbon storage (Csr) and
the Hfq networks as model systems given their regulatory interactions, broad
target scope, biological relevance and their mechanistic diversity.
Specifically, the researchers propose to: (1) Characterize molecular regulatory
features of dually recognized targets, and to (2) Establish the impact of dual
regulatory function of the regulation of the dual targets via formal network
analysis using a combination of traditional RNA-protein biochemistry methods as
well as recent methods and tools developed by their research group involving
high-throughput omics characterizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.