* 1932677
* EAGER: Distributed Feedback/Distribute Gain Fabry-P?rot Microcavities for Organic Light Emitting Diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Matthew White, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 124,467.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic semiconductors are a novel class of
materials with attractive properties such as low-cost processing and
flexibility. This has led to the widespread adoption of organic light-emitting
diodes (OLEDs) into displays for mobile phones and TVs. One important
application, however, has not been possible: lasers. This project will lay the
foundations for electrically-driven organic lasers by investigating the
interaction of light and matter in periodic optical microstructures. A series of
mirrors will create a distributed optical structure that only allows certain
colors of light to pass through at specific angles. These mirrors will also
function as the electrodes for OLEDs, confining light emission to specific
locations within the mirror structure. The team will combine modeling with
device fabrication and characterization to determine the effect of the optical
microstructure on light emission. The project will push the combination of
materials and device structure toward the lasing threshold. The project will
also produce a publicly-available database of optical and electronic properties
of materials for research and development. A summer workshop on organic
optoelectronics will be organized, providing hands-on experience for high school
STEM students to explore a cutting-edge research
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrically-pumped
organic diode lasers offer immense potential and remain one of the major
unsolved challenges in organic optoelectronics. Microcavity geometries show
significant promise in optically-pumped systems, yet low carrier mobility and
optical losses prevent devices based on organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)
from approaching the lasing threshold. This project uses a distributed feedback
and distributed gain geometry, decoupling the electrical transport from the
optical path length. The electrical conduction occurs through only 100 nm of the
OLED thickness, while the functional optical path length may be many orders of
magnitude higher, depending on the number of stacked layers and the reflectivity
of the mirrors. Standing-wave modes with nodes at the mirror surfaces minimize
optical losses. The corresponding antinodes at the emission layer maximize the
possibility of stimulated emission. Multiple modeling techniques will be used to
optimized the microcavity design, driven by feedback from angle-resolved
electroluminescence spectra of fabricated devices. The project will first
explore the effects of cavity thickness and emitter position within the cavity
for single-layer devices spanning multiple half-wavelength modes. The feedback
mechanism and gain medium will then be distributed over multiple stacked
devices, targeting the half-wavelength mode with resonance coincident with the
electroluminescense peak of a given emitter molecule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.