* 1932821
* Energy Efficient (sub)mm-Wave Transceiver Phased Array for High Speed and Secure Wireless Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Omeed Momeni, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In today's Big Data Era, the relentless exponential increase of data generation,
especially of real-time data from personal daily activities coupled with
emerging applications, not only offers great and unprecedented opportunities,
but also imposes a significant challenge to process and transmit the ever-
increasing large volume and varieties of data in timely manner and avoid being
drown in the constantly fast-expanding gigantic data sea. One of the key
enablers to achieve this goal is an energy-efficient and ultra-high-data-rate
wireless communication system that matches and, at the same time, scales with
the data generation rate. Moreover, wireless communication systems are
vulnerable to data intrusion with the increasing number of access networks and
nodes in dynamic and open communication environments. This forms a big challenge
to wireless cybersecurity. Therefore, to satisfy the needs in the Big Data Era,
the next generation wireless communication systems with improved energy
efficiency and ultra-high data rate while achieving enhanced security is
demanded. The research will develop a new reconfigurable and scalable
transceiver phased array system, operating at mm-wave to sub-mm-wave
frequencies, to achieve these three objectives. To overcome the many performance
challenges at such high frequencies, this project will develop several key
enabling and new techniques at different design levels, including system
configuration, transceiver architecture, and circuit design. The success of this
research will advance scientific understanding and create a new design
methodology to achieve unparalleled data rates and energy efficiency, which will
broadly impact the wireless industry and benefit the society. Moreover, this
project will train future engineers and scientists for the fast-growing data-
driven industries, with special efforts to promote diversity by training more
female and minority students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
reconfigurable and scalable wireless communication system, operating at mm-wave
to sub-mm-wave frequencies, that can be efficiently reconfigured into three
operation modes: ultra-high data rate for short distance, high data rate for
medium distance, and medium data rate for long distance. The array architecture
is based on coupled oscillators for high-efficient frequency tuning and beam
forming. The unique tuning scheme allows the array size to be scaled effectively
for different operation modes to be deployed in different application scenarios
without redesigning the whole system. The new direct antenna modulation scheme
enables ultra-high data rates and boosts transmitter energy efficiency by
mitigating conventional antenna bandwidth constraints and eliminating linear
power amplifiers. And the proposed high gain and low noise mixer structure
extracts signal phase information to enable high-order demodulation scheme with
enhanced receiver noise and gain performance and reduced power consumption. In
addition, the proposed redundancy mapping scheme offers secure wireless
communications without extra power and communication overheads. If successful,
the system's data rate and energy efficiency will be orders of magnitude higher
than existing technologies and therefore the new system will open a new door for
secure and ultra-high-speed wireless applications. This project will also
investigate the design methodologies on how to achieve the highest
frequency/speed with the best energy efficiency systematically, from system and
circuit levels down to device level. The transformative design methodologies are
expected to benefit other wireless applications, such as radar, imaging, and
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.