* 1932711
* Workshop on Control for Networked Transportation Systems, To Be Held At The American Control Conference, July 8-9, 2019, in Philadelphia, PA.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Daniel Work, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 01/31/2020
* USD 67,619.00

This workshop will bring together leading academic, industry, and government
representatives with the goal of identifying the research challenges and
opportunities for the next generation of networked transportation systems.
Examples of networked transportation systems include shared mobility services,
electric vehicles and their integration with the power grid, near-real-time
e-commerce delivery, and autonomous vehicles. Networked transportation systems
may make transportation more sustainable, more resilient to disruption, more
equitable, and more efficient, but this will only occur with the right
fundamental insights to aid their design, deployment, and management. This
workshop will identify the research challenges that need to be addressed before
truly smart transportation systems can emerge and enable practical benefits to
society at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid technological innovation
occurring in nearly all modes of mobility is uniquely defining the present time
as a period of dynamism in transportation systems. As networked transportation
systems grow in complexity, the need for convergence between the decision
sciences and the transportation science communities becomes paramount. The
purpose of this workshop is the creation of a forum where the networked controls
community and the transportation science community can begin to exchange ideas
and perspectives on recent advances in the field as well as the core challenges
inhibiting research progress on current and future networked transportation
systems. The workshop will consist of a series of talks and panel discussions
from leading academics in each domain, as well as short perspectives from
participants representing industry and government. The themes include i) how to
control transportation systems in an age where components are connected and
increasingly autonomous; ii) understanding the role of data driven models and
decision tools in transportation systems that need to be safe, resilient, and
equitable; and iii) recognizing the significant role of humans in the networked
transportation system. The talks and discussions will be used as the basis of a
final report that will be published and shared with the research communities
involved in networked transportation systems research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.