* 1932206
* Unifying Principles for the Design and Manufacture of Chemically-Patterned Polymeric Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* William Phillip, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2023
* USD 362,580.00

Due to their ability to control molecular transport, membranes are essential
components of modern separations (e.g., water treatment) and sensing (e.g.,
glucose monitoring) processes. As their application has advanced, a need for
more selective membranes has emerged. In this regard, engineered systems that
take inspiration from biological membranes provide one route toward realizing
more selective membranes. To bring this new paradigm to fruition, processes for
patterning the surface chemistry of membranes in a manner that is consistent
with proven manufacturing methods are needed. This award leverages recent
advances in the fields of nanostructured polymers, membrane manufacturing, and
ink-jet printing to address fundamental scientific issues related to the
production of charge-patterned mosaic membranes. The fundamental knowledge to be
gained has broad implications for manufacturing of multifunctional membranes
that address critical challenges needed to ensure the well-being and prosperity
of the American people. For example, by changing the formulation of the reactive
inks, unique functions are possible leading to the development of therapeutic
medicine or chemical and biological threat detectors. This project is
multidisciplinary and involves polymer chemistry, transport phenomena, and
nanostructured materials. It helps revolutionize the manufacturing landscape of
the U.S. by training the next generation of interdisciplinary scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charge-patterned mosaic membranes consist of
discrete positively-charged and negatively-charged domains that traverse the
membrane thickness. They are used to initiate this line of inquiry because their
ability to transport salts selectively emerges directly from their patterned
chemistry. Despite their potential utility in separations and sensing
applications, the selective transport mechanisms of these membranes are poorly
understood. This critical knowledge gap is a direct result of challenges related
to manufacturing chemically-patterned membranes. In particular, morphological
changes induced during the harsh chemical treatments required to introduce
charged functionality have hampered prior efforts to generate this class of
membranes. Here, this engineering opportunity is met by integrating
nanostructured copolymer substrates that are amenable to functionalization using
'click' reactions with ink-jet printer-mediated deposition of reactive inks.
This research enables the systematic design and manufacture of charge-patterned
membranes. It studies the fabrication of self-assembled copolymer membrane
substrates that are molecularly-engineered to enable chemical-patterning using
ink-jet printing. It evaluates the performance of charge-patterned membranes in
model chemical separations to correlate membrane performance with pattern design
and composition. The project advances the use of additive manufacturing within
the field of membrane science and delivers a versatile membrane technology that
offers improved selectivity in traditional and emerging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.