* 1932661
* Roles of subcellular amino acid transporters in source and sink function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Mechthild Tegeder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2024
* USD 664,826.00

Plants require large amounts of nitrogen for growth and development. The
nitrogen is generally taken up from the soil and then used to produce amino
acids. These amino acids play highly diverse and essential roles in plants. They
are the basic units of proteins and enzymes, and thereby fundamental to cellular
structure and metabolism. Moreover, they are crucial for the synthesis of a
large variety of compounds, such as chlorophyll, vitamins and other products
needed for plant function as well as for human nutrition. In addition, amino
acids serve as signaling molecules triggering physiological processes including
plant responses to environmental stresses, and they present the main long-
distance nitrogen forms transported to seeds for growth. This project intends to
provide pioneering insights on the mechanisms of amino acid partitioning within
the cell and their importance for leaf and seed development, and plant survival.
It is expected to discover strategies on how amino acid movement can be
manipulated to alter nitrogen supply into specific metabolic and transport
pathways, with consequences for plant growth, productivity and responses to
environmental stresses. The activities will further promote student teaching and
training, and foster effective integration of plant biology education and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental process in plants is the selective
partitioning of amino acids among different organelles, cells, tissues and
organs. Various transport mechanisms must exist within the cell to accommodate
their directional transport, and these mechanisms must be coordinated and
regulated at different levels to achieve normal physiological functions. In
Arabidopsis, more than 100 putative amino acid transporters have been identified
but physiological functions in nitrogen transport have only been demonstrated
for relatively few transporters, and these are mainly plasma membrane-localized.
This project intends to identify novel subcellular amino acid transporters and
resolve their substrate specificity and mechanisms of transport. Plants, in
which the transporters are knocked-out, knocked-down or overexpressed will be
analyzed using molecular, cell-biological and biochemical approaches to unravel
the physiological functions of the membrane proteins and their importance for
plant growth and development. Finally, amino acids have been shown to play
important roles in plant performance under environmental stress conditions. The
transporter mutants or overexpressors will be exposed to abiotic stresses and
their responses will be examined. Together, this project will help to resolve
the function of intracellular membrane transporters and their role in nitrogen
partitioning between cellular compartments to promote source leaf function, and
in long distance amino acid transport in support of seed development. Evidence
will be found on how specific amino acid transporters interconnect nitrogen and
carbon metabolism, and other biochemical pathways, and if and how they influence
plant responses to abiotic stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.