* 1932858
* Photonic Tensor Accelerators for Artificial Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Guifang Li, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 474,997.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) and artificial neural networks (ANNs) have
dominated conversations about the future of science, technology, economy,
society and culture, and even humanity itself. Excitement about AI comes about
because it recognizes patterns and even discovers solutions that are superior to
those based on human intelligence. The rapid progress of AI is greatly
attributed to increased computing capabilities. In recent years, the computation
power of integrated circuits (ICs) have been unable to sustain the growth rate
according to Moore's law. Hardware accelerators, with processing units and
optimized memory architecture designed specifically for parallel computing,
played a key role in the implementation of machine learning (ML) models.
However, electronic hardware accelerators have already been pushed to their
limits in term of scalability, unable to keep up with the exponential growth of
data volume. Against this backdrop, there have been renewed efforts in exploring
the role of optics in computing, motivated by the large bandwidth and low loss
of optical transmission. This project proposes the photonic tensor accelerator
(PTA), a highly-parallel photonic architecture capable of matrix-vector
multiplication and matrix-matrix multiplication, that offers a computing power
several orders of magnitude higher than existing electronic accelerators. Thanks
to its high degree of parallelization, PTA is specifically suited for batch
matrix multiplication for the implementation of ANN models. The technology
developed in this proposal could demonstrate the cooperative roles of advanced
hardware and software and attract more students into hardware-related areas. The
research proposed is interdisciplinary in nature and can serve as a platform for
training both graduate and undergraduate students at UCF, a Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI) designated by the U.S. Department of
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
construct photonic accelerators that 1) offer orders-of-magnitude higher
scalability over electronics, 2) are fast, programmable, ideally compatible with
training as well as inference, and 3) lower the power-consumption density to
enable ANNs that are competitive over their pure electronic counterparts. The
core of ANNs is tensor multiplication, which only require special operations
(multiplication and accumulation, rather than general-purpose computing) in
large scale that are especially suited for photonic accelerators. In addition,
ANNs are robust to low dynamic range variabilities in nonlinear activation. PTA
exploits all degrees of freedom of light to accelerate tensor multiplication.
Specifically, PTA utilizes coherent beating between a signal and local
oscillator to perform multiplication, frequency/wavelength, spatial modes and
polarization for accumulation, and 2-D and 3-D parallelism of free space to
scale the processing power. The proposed approach could scale the number of
multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations by several orders of magnitude over the
state-of-the-art IC hardware accelerators, including graphical processing units
(GPUs) and ASICs such as tensor processing units (TPUs). The project will
repurpose the technique of recirculating loops to scale up the number of layers
for deep neural networks (DNNs). The proposed research is also synergistic with
artificial intelligence (AI) in that some of the new devices will be designed
using machine-learning techniques and the availability of the PTA-based ANNs
allows new paradigms of ANN training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.