* 1932605
* US-UK WORKSHOP FOR BIOSENSING-ENABLED, WELLBEING-CENTRIC SUSTAINABLE BUILT ENVIRONMENT ECOSYSTEMS
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Yong Tao, Nova Southeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop will bring together U.S. and European researchers from health,
computer/data science, architecture, engineering, construction, social science
and government policy to explore research collaboration strategies to address
the common challenges in human wellbeing in the built environment. The focus for
this workshop is data structure, data acquisition and validation, and the
prerequisite is data analytics for various wellbeing constructs. Built upon the
strengths of existing research networks, especially in development of Virtual
Information Fabric Infrastructure (VIFI), the participants will harness the data
revolution to support data sharing, interoperability, modeling, analysis, and
visualization for wellbeing-centric sustainable built environment. The workshop
targets to provide a forum to lay the foundation for future international
collaboration in the theme areas identified. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anticipated
collaboration among researchers from the U.S. and European researchers will
enrich access to rich datasets for comparability and case studies and obtain raw
materials with which to develop novel proposals on data infrastructures. By
using comparative data and case studies, the participants will begin to draw
inferences on common model features as well as divergent model features,
especially in the area of human behavior. Data derived from comparative local
environments will be instructive for building future scenarios comparing unit-
to-community level integration. Those platforms should also help to enable
various solutions to bottleneck problems that hinder wider research
collaborations and development of data- driven decision tools. Through this
workshop the engagement of U.S. researchers with similar researchers and
stakeholders (scientists, engineers, industrialists, healthcare professionals,
etc.) from Europe will begin a dialogue that enable U.S. researchers, and
ultimately U.S. industry, to develop multidisciplinary validation and
verification models to assist U.S. market and policy decisions from data derived
by comparative studies. This provides an opportunity in which strategic bridges
between U.S. and international networks would create mutual
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.