* 1932735
* Collaborative Research: Robust-by-Design Networked Dynamical Systems: Bridging the Logic/Analog Divide
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Geir Dullerud, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Fragility and resiliency of future, highly-interconnected networked control
system is a major concern for safety-critical applications such as autonomous
vehicles and the energy generation/distribution grid. Failure events of such
critical systems must be carefully studied, and systems redesigned to avoid
them. The current state of the art involves time-consuming and inherently
incomplete after-design simulations. The aim of this project is to develop
theoretical and computationally scalable techniques so that such systems can be
robust-by-design. Our methodology can help design more resilient components and
systems with a-priori safety guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will develop a
framework in which networked dynamic systems are analyzed by modeling
interactions as event-triggered and/or stochastic couplings. Such dynamical
couplings can be triggered by proximity, remote sensing or other pairwise
mechanisms resulting in a state-dependent pattern of interactions for the
overall system. Stability and robustness conditions will be given in terms of L2
and variance contractivity of systems, and algebraic properties of the state-
dependent interaction graph. In contrast to Monte Carlo based methods, such
conditions scale well with increasing system size. Synthesis methods for control
algorithms with guaranteed performance in the presence of exogenous,
adversarial, and system uncertainty will be developed using this framework. The
education plan includes capstone design demonstrations and a new graduate level
course in networked control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.